NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DIFFUSION OF NEW INSTITUTIONS:
EVIDENCE FROM RENAISSANCE VENICE'S PATENT SYSTEM
Stefano Comino
Alberto Galasso
Clara Graziano
Working Paper 24118
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24118

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017

We thank Dan Trefler, Kevin Bryan, Hugo Hopenhayn, Nicola Lacetera, Hong Luo, Eduardo
Melero, Petra Moser, Michel Serafinelli, Mark Schankerman and Pian Shu for helpful comments.
We thank seminar participants at the University of Toronto, the University of Trieste, the CESifo
in Munich, the International IO Conference in Boston, the OECD-IPSDM conference in Mexico
City, CEMFI Workshop on Innovation in Madrid, and the REER Conference at the Georgia
Institute of Technology. We are indebted to Roberto Berveglieri for numerous discussions about
the Venetian patent systems, and to Giovanni Caniato, Michael Knapton, Luca Molà, Lavinia
Parziale, Luciano Pezzolo, and Andrea Zannini for providing insightful details on the Venetian
Republic and its guild system. Tommaso Alba provided excellent research assistance. The
authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the 2016 grants for research projects of
the Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Stefano Comino, Alberto Galasso, and Clara Graziano. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Diffusion of New Institutions: Evidence from Renaissance Venice's Patent System
Stefano Comino, Alberto Galasso, and Clara Graziano
NBER Working Paper No. 24118
December 2017
JEL No. K23,N23,O33,O34
ABSTRACT
What factors affect the diffusion of new economic institutions? This paper examines this question
by exploiting the introduction of the first regularized patent system, which appeared in the
Venetian Republic in 1474. We begin by developing a model that links patenting activity of craft
guilds with provisions in their statutes. The model predicts that guild statutes that are more
effective at preventing outsiders' entry and at mitigating price competition lead to less patenting.
We test this prediction on a new dataset that combines detailed information on craft guilds and
patents in the Venetian Republic during the Renaissance. We find a negative association between
patenting activity and guild statutory norms that strongly restrict entry and price competition. We
show that guilds that originated from medieval religious confraternities were more likely to
regulate entry and competition, and that the effect on patenting is robust to instrumenting guild
statutes with their quasi-exogenous religious origin. We also find that patenting was more
widespread among guilds geographically distant from Venice, and among guilds in cities with
lower political connections, which we measure by exploiting a new database of noble families
and their marriages with members of the great council. Our analysis suggests that local economic
and political conditions may have a substantial impact on the diffusion of new economic
institutions.
Stefano Comino
Department of Economics and Statistics
University of Udine
Via Tomadini 30/A
33100 Udine
Italy
stefano.comino@uniud.it
Alberto Galasso
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
alberto.galasso@rotman.utoronto.ca

Clara Graziano
Department of Economics and Statistics
University of Udine
via Tomadini 30/a
33100 Udine
Italy
and CESifo
clara.graziano@uniud.it

1

Introduction

The social, economic, legal, and political organization of a society, its ‘institutions’, is a primary determinant of economic growth (Acemoglu and Johnson, 2005). The impact of new
economic institutions - such as novel forms of contracts or property rights — depends on the
rate at which they are adopted and displace older institutions (Acemoglu et al., 2005). The
development literature has identified a variety of factors that explain the international diﬀusion
of new institutions, such as human capital (Glaeser et al., 2004), culture (Tabellini, 2010), and
geography (Ashraf and Galor, 2011). On top of these macro variables, the rate of adoption of
novel economic institutions is also likely to be aﬀected by local conditions - such as industry
composition or the presence of elites - which vary at a much narrower geographical level, such
as a region or a city. The empirical evidence on the role of these micro-level factors is scarce.
In this paper, we aim to address this gap by studying the pattern of local diﬀusion of
one of the main economic institutions that governments use to increase innovation incentives
and spur economic growth: patent rights. Patents provide temporary monopoly rights over
a new technology that generate rents to the innovator and support private contracting. The
innovation literature has documented a large variation in the rate of patenting across industries
and in the perceived eﬀectiveness of patents across firms (Levin et al., 1987; Cohen, Nelson, and
Walsh, 2000). These findings have typically been interpreted as suggesting that the social and
economic value provided by intellectual property rights is highly heterogeneous. Understanding
the roots of this heterogeneity - i.e., why some inventors choose to heavily rely on patents and
why others do not - is essential for the design of patent policies. If, for example, a substantial
share of innovation occurs in industries in which patents do not play an important role, policies
that strengthen intellectual property rights may do little to raise the overall level of innovation
(Machlup and Penrose, 1950; Moser, 2012). Similarly, when only a few industries rely heavily
on patent rights, changes in patent policies may dramatically aﬀect the direction of technical
change (Moser, 2005). Finally, if the eﬀects of patent rights are highly heterogeneous across
firms and industries, it is likely that a one-size-fits-all patent system, like the one currently in
place, is second best (Acemoglu and Akcigit, 2012).
This paper provides new insights into the determinants of patenting activity, exploiting
the introduction of the first regularized patent system, which appeared during the Renaissance
in the Venetian Republic. In 1474 the Venetian Senate passed a patent act that regulated
the granting of patents for novelty, ingenuity, and utility. The dominant view among patent

1

law historians is that this act established an administrative-centered system, strikingly similar
to the modern Anglo-American system (Merges and Duﬀy, 2013). Therefore, the patents
awarded in the late fifteenth century in the Venetian Republic provide a unique opportunity
to study the diﬀusion of a drastically new form of property rights. This is not common in the
innovation literature, where most studies typically examine marginal changes of pre-existing
patent rights (Hall and Harhoﬀ, 2012). Moreover, the historical nature of our data is useful in
understanding whether heterogeneity in the use of patents is persistent over time, or is a more
recent phenomenon linked to modern technology trends.
We begin our analysis with a simple theoretical model that describes the patenting
decision of inventors at the time of the Venetian Republic. The theoretical framework highlights
two key diﬀerences between the modern patent regime and the Venetian system. First, Venetian
patents provided not only the negative rights to exclude through monopoly power, but also the
positive rights to enter into craft guilds for innovators that were not guild members (Mandich,
1948; Sichelman and O’Connor, 2012). Second, guilds had the power to oppose and block patent
applications (Berveglieri, 1995;1999; Trivellato, 2008). We show that the interplay of these two
features implies that the level of patenting can vary substantially across guilds, and that this is
true both for guild members and for outside inventors. More specifically, the model shows that
the level of patenting in a technology area is strongly related to the ability of guild statutes
to prevent entry of outsiders and to mitigate competition among members. Greater statutory
restrictions allow guild members to extract high rents, and this increases their incentives to
prevent patenting by other members and external innovators.
Our empirical analysis exploits a new dataset which combines information on the patents
granted by the Venetian Senate with detailed digitized data on craft guilds operating in the
cities of the Venetian Republic. Our sample comprises 340 guilds of the Venetian Republic
whose statutes have been examined and coded by a team of Italian historians as part of a
research project financed by the Italian Ministry for Education, Universities and Research.
The main findings are as follows. First, we show a strong negative association between
patenting in the technology sector of a guild and the presence of statutory rules which strongly
limit entry and competition. Results are robust to including controls for city and guild characteristics, and to using alternative econometric models. A variety of placebo tests show that
only restrictions to entry and competition are correlated to patenting and no other provisions
in guild statutes.

2

To address the concern of unobserved heterogeneity, we exploit as instrumental variable
the religious origin of some of the guilds in our sample. A number of the guilds in Northern Italy originated from medieval religious confraternities formed a couple of centuries before
the patent act. The history literature suggests that establishment of these confraternities was
driven by idiosyncratic reasons related to the local success of religious movements in the 13th
century (Mackenney, 1994). To confirm the quasi-exogenous nature of this variable, we show
that it is orthogonal to many observable guild characteristics such as industry, location and a
variety of statutory rules. At the same time, religious origin is a strong predictor for statutory
provisions restricting entry and competition. This is because religious confraternities followed
strict rules regulating members’ admission and interaction, and such rules often inspired guild
statutes (Mackenney, 1994). The instrumental variable analysis confirms the negative relationship between patenting and the strength of guilds’ statutes.
Our second finding is that patenting was more frequent for guilds located in cities geographically distant from Venice. This suggests that patents were particularly beneficial for
non-elite inventors with limited access to political power (Khan, 2005). To study this issue
in more detail, we construct a measure of political connection exploiting a unique database of
Venetian nobility and marriages between patrician families and members of the great council. We find that guilds located in cities with less political connection were more likely to
patent their technologies, supporting the idea that politically connected guilds could substitute
intellectual property rights with other forms of formal and informal protection.
Taken together, our findings suggest that local economic and political conditions may
have a substantial impact on the diﬀusion of new economic institutions.
Our analysis is connected to the economic history literature on the role of craft guilds.
A common view is that medieval craft guilds were technophobic (North, 1981). Recent studies
provide a more nuanced view, recognizing that some guilds were much more receptive to novelties and technological advances than others (Epstein, 2004). In her analysis of the Venetian silk
and glass production, Trivellato (2008) emphasizes the crucial role of intra-guild interactions
and argues that experimentation took place only when statutory norms were not too restrictive.
Our findings are consistent with Trivellato’s thesis, and highlight a link between guild statutes
and technology management.
While there is a growing theoretical literature examining the economics of guilds (inter
alia see Greif et al., 1994; de la Croix et al., 2016; Greif and Tabellini, 2017), one of the diﬃ-

3

culties in studying these institutions is the lack of comprehensive data. Our paper contributes
to this line of research and introduces a novel dataset, which may also prove useful for future
research.
Our paper is connected to the recent growing literature examining how micro-level and
regional factors aﬀect institutional change and growth. Dell (2012) shows that severe drought
aﬀecting some Mexican municipalities in early 20th century aﬀected insurgency during the
Mexican Revolution, in turn influencing long-run economic and political development. Dittmar
and Meisenzahl (2016) document how German cities implementing public policies during the
Protestant Reformation in 1500s grew to be significantly larger in the long-run. Dittmar and
Seabold, (2015) show that the competitive structure of the local media market aﬀected the
diﬀusion of Protestant ideas.
Our paper is also related to studies that investigate the eﬀects of occupational licensing.
Kleiner (2000) provides a survey of the literature. Persico (2015) develops a theory showing how
internal politics of a licensing association can lead to expansion of the licensure. Our analysis
illustrates how occupational licensing and self-regulation may interact with the diﬀusion of new
economic institutions. The role of internal rules and how they influence technology adoption
is also the focus of Bridgman (2015), who studies why unions may favor restrictive work regulations and how these regulations may induce resistance to technology adoption. Finally, our
paper adds to the literature on the relationship between competition and innovation (Aghion
et al., 2005; Cohen, 2010). Our findings suggest that market power may aﬀect not only the
level of innovation but also the propensity to rely on patent protection.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief description of the origin
and functioning of the Venetian patent system. Section 3 develops a model showing the link
between guild statutory norms and patenting. Section 4 describes the data and discusses the
econometric specification. Section 5 examines the empirical relationship between guild statutes
and patenting. Section 6 confirm the results exploiting the quasi-exogenous variation in guild
religious origins. Section 7 studies the relationship between guild locations and patenting.
Section 8 provides a discussion of the results and their implication for policy. Concluding
remarks briefly summarize our main findings.

4

2

Renaissance Venice and its patent system

This section provides a brief historical overview of the Venetian Republic between the fifteenth
and sixteenth century, and illustrates the main features of the 1474 patent act.

2.1

The Venetian Republic in the 15th and 16th centuries

During the period of our study, the ‘Serenissima’ Republic of Venice was one of the largest
regional economies of Renaissance Europe. Its center was the maritime city of Venice with
roughly 150,000 inhabitants at the end of the 16th century, about half of the population of
north-east Italy at that time (Costantini, 1987). The Venetian state included the ‘Terraferma’
dominion, a compact and densely populated area which included large cities such as Verona and
Vicenza. Figure 1 (from Knapton, 2013) illustrates the state boundaries around the period of
our study. A number of additional cities in the Greek peninsula and in South-East Europe, such
as Corfu, Andros, and Cyprus were also under the control of the Venetian Republic and were
instrumental ports for long-distance trade between Western Europe and the Levant (Borelli,
1980).
The Venetian Republic was based on a careful balance of power that originated as an
attempt to restrain the power of a single person or governing body and led to remarkable
political stability (Lane 1973). Membership in the main governing institutions was precluded
to lower classes, such as artisans and shopkeepers. Moreover, following the ‘Serrata’ (closure)
in 1297, political functions were restricted to a hereditary nobility that had the exclusive right
to sit in the great council, the legislative assembly of the Republic. Because of the large size of
the great council, most legislative functions were delegated to the senate, a smaller assembly
(about 300 senators) elected by the great council (Borelli, 1980). Some members of the senate
had the right of legislative initiative (‘metter parte’), others were only entitled to vote (‘metter
ballotta’). Among the senators entitled both to vote and to propose new laws, there were
three ‘provveditori di comun’ who also oversaw transport infrastructures and mercantile trade
(Borelli, 1980; Zaggia, 2004; Di Stefano, 2011). The doge was the personal embodiment of
the Republic, it was elected by a committee of 41 nobles chosen by the great council. In 1474
the doge was Nicolo’ Marcello, and eleven doges took oﬃce between 1474 and 1550 (Rendina,
1984).
At the time of our study, the main threat to Venice’s trade supremacy and the preservation of its economic power was the Ottoman Empire, which was expanding dramatically

5

under the leadership of sultan Selim I (Borellli, 1980). Moreover, the 1492 discovery of America started shifting the center of long-distance trade away from the Mediterranean toward the
Atlantic.
The economy of the capital was driven by the vast trading activity in spices, dying
materials, silk, cotton, slaves, and precious metals (Pezzolo, 2013). On top of this vibrant
trade, artisan production also flourished both in Venice and in Terraferma. The Arsenal was
one of the largest industrial sites in Europe, and glassmaking was among the most prestigious
urban occupations at the time (Trivellato, 2008). The mainland was marked by a lively wool
and silk production (Demo, 2013).
Merchants and craftsmen were organized in guilds, self-governed organizations that controlled various aspects of economic activity. Guild statutes prescribed technical characteristics of products and regulated entry, apprenticeship, and competition (Belfanti, 2004). The
Venetian government fostered guild membership for fiscal reasons, and about 20 percent of
the population of the city of Venice belonged to a guild.1 Guild members were excluded from
government, but the Venetian constitution guaranteed them the right of judicial appeal against
the government and guild oﬃcers (Lane, 1973).

2.2

The 1474 patent act

On March 19, 1474, the Venetian senate passed by a large majority a ‘parte’ (act) regulating
the granting of patents. While there is evidence that a small number of ad-hoc privileges for
new inventions and mineral extraction were granted by the Venetian government before this act
(only five patents according to Mandich, 1936), the parte of 1474 is the very first law regulating
the patent application and granting process, and has been recognized by numerous historians
and law scholars as the legal foundation of the modern patent system (inter alia see Mandich
1948; Duﬀy, 2007; Golden, 2013).
The process of patenting involved diﬀerent steps. Patent applications (or ‘suppliche’)
were addressed to the doge and filed at the senate (Mandich, 1948). The provveditori di comun
evaluated the proposal and collected information from interested parties, particularly from the
representatives of the relevant guilds. Sometimes, the senate involved other magistrates for the
necessary preliminary investigations and reports. These magistrates were selected based on the
content of the invention. For example, in the case of hydraulic devices the water committee
1

This share remained stable, with minor fluctuations, from the 16th century until 1797, the end of the
Venetian state (Costantini, 1987).

6

(Savi sopra le acque) was involved. Patents were granted after senatorial approval (Berveglieri,
1995, Mandich, 1948, and Molà, 2000).2
The subject matter to be patented was required to be a “new and ingenious device”
and the eﬀect of a patent was to stop “every other person in any of our territories and towns
to make any further device conforming with and similar to said one without the consent and
license of the author” (Mandich, 1948). The novelty content was evaluated on the basis of
the technical knowledge available in the Venetian dominion, implying that a patent could be
granted to products or processes already in use elsewhere (Molà, 2014). The patentee was
required to implement the invention (‘messa in opera’) within a specified period of time.3
The impact of the act on patenting was substantial. The number of patents granted by
the senate grew considerably, increasing from 5 ad hoc privileges granted before 1474 (Mandich,
1936) to 43 patents approved between 1474 and 1500, 126 patents granted in 1501-1550, and
471 patents granted in 1551-1600.
There are three main features of the Venetian patent system that are central to our
analysis. First, patents could be granted to all inventors regardless of their citizenship status
or guild membership. Thus, patents were both ‘negative’ rights to exclude but also ‘positive’
rights to practice the invention and operate in industries controlled by guilds (Mandich, 1948;
and Sichelman and O’ Connor, 2012). For example, Florentine inventor Cosmo Scatini was
granted a patent for high quality black silk dying, which permitted him to enroll in the dyers’
guild of Venice (Belfanti, 2004).
Second, guilds were often involved in the patent granting decision process, through the
evaluation of the novelty content of the application. This examination involved, most of the
time, a test of the new product or process (the ‘experienza’) to verify, before granting the patent,
whether the invention was actually working. Historians have provided anecdotal evidence of
guild opposition. For instance, Trivellato (2008) describes the opposition of the Venetian silk
spinners’ guild to the patent application of Iseppo Giovan Perin Mattiazzo for a new hydraulic
2

The Senate was the dominant route to obtain a patent and alternative routes do not appear to have played
a significant role. Sichelman and O’Connor (2012) suggest that in some cases the Provveditori di Comun could
directly award petty patents granting protection limited in duration and scope which were not a real alternative
to the Senate route (on these aspects, see Molà, 2000; and Sichelman and O’Connor, 2012). Data on these minor
rights are not available, thus our analysis only focuses on patents granted by the Senate.
3

The act established a patent length of 10 years, but it was common for applicants to request longer protection.
Mandich (1936) describes cases in which patent rights lasted 25 and even 70 years.

7

mill for spinning and throwing silk.4 It is diﬃcult to assess the success rate of guild opposition,
because senate records only provide information on patents that were eventually granted. Molà
(2000) argues that the rejection rate was significant, suggesting that there were more than a
thousand applications for the several hundred patents granted by the senate during the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries.
Third, patent holders were expected to share the technology with guild members through
the payment of an appropriate licensing fee. Such a licensing requirement is often mentioned
in the patent records, without specifying the precise amount but requesting a “discrete sum”
of money for the transfer or payment of an “adequate reward” (Berveglieri, 1995).
While a number of historians have examined the administrative details of the Venetian
patent system and collected detailed information on patent records, very few studies have
addressed the question of why the senate passed the patent act in 1474. Lane (1973) and
May (2002) suggest that the growing economic and trading power of the Ottoman empire and
Antwerp led Venetian policy makers to focus on industrial activities. Berveglieri (1995, 1999)
and Belfanti (2004) emphasize the goal of attracting foreign inventors to the Venetian Republic
to compensate for the lost supremacy of Venetian guilds in various industrial sectors.5 Mandich
(1936) suggests that successful experimentation with monopolies in mineral rights may have
led Venetian authorities to legislate on patent rights.

3

Theoretical model

In this section, we develop a simple theoretical model to describe patenting incentives in the
Venetian Republic and to examine the eﬀects of guild statutes on firms’ intellectual property
strategies.

3.1

Set-up

Consider an industry with three firms and two periods  = 1 2 Two firms belong to a guild,
while the third one is an outsider. In the absence of innovation, guild members sell a standard
product to consumers. The surplus created by the standard product is  per period. We assume
4

Similarly, Berveglieri (1995) discusses cases of guilds opposing patent applications by foreign inventors (e.g.
against Flemish inventor Pietro Comans and French inventor Francesco Antola). Molà (2000) reports a number
of additional opposition cases, such as the 1583 spinning machine patent of Urbano Bonturelli and the 1597 silk
bleaching patent of Giacomo di Bianchi and Innocente Soardo.
5

There is a growing literature which exploits historical data to study the relationship between immigration
flows, growth, and innovative activities (Akcigit et al., 2017a; Akcigit et al., 2017b).

8

that the guild can appropriate a fraction () of this surplus, with 0 ()  0 The appropriated
surplus is shared equally among guild members. The parameter  captures the strength of the
guild’s internal statute, with a larger value of  indicating larger collusive power among the
members, which allows greater profit extraction.
At  = 1 one of the firms develops an innovation that increases the surplus to  + ∆ per
period. Innovations are distributed with cumulative distribution  (∆) with support [0 ∞]. To
patent the innovation costs  and patent protection lasts for one period. The patent grants
the innovator the right to extract the full surplus for the period. The patent holder negotiates
licensing deals with the other guild members by making take-it-or-leave-it oﬀers to them. At
 = 2 once the patent has expired the technology becomes freely available to all guild members.
The outsider firm cannot enter the guild without an innovation. Entry is guaranteed if
the outsider firm obtains a patent. If it innovates but does not apply for a patent, entry occurs
with probability () with  0 ()  0, which captures the idea that the stronger guild statutes
are, the more diﬃcult it is for an outsider to enter.
Before a patent is granted, each guild member can oppose the patent application by
paying an opposition cost . If the patent is opposed, the technology is appropriated and
shared among all the guild members during both periods. If the patent of the outsider is
opposed, entry to the guild is blocked as well.
We solve the game by backward induction, starting from the opposition decision. We
distinguish two cases, depending on whether the innovation is developed by a guild member or
by the outsider firm. For simplicity, we set () =  and () = 1 −  (we relax this assumption
in section 3.4). We also assume that   3 to focus on the cases in which the cost of obtaining
a patent is not too large relative to the baseline surplus.

3.2

Innovation by a guild member

We first focus on the case in which the inventor is a guild member. Suppose that the innovator
applies for a patent and consider the incentives of the other guild member to oppose it. If opposition takes place, the technology is shared between the two firms for two periods. Therefore,
by choosing to oppose the patent, the guild member obtains ( + ∆)2 per period, net of the
opposition cost, 
If the patent is not opposed, the innovation is freely shared among guild members only
in the second period, once the patent has expired. In the first period, the patentee and the
other guild member negotiate a licensing deal and the licensee obtains 2 i.e., the status
9

quo profits in the absence of innovation.6 Therefore, opposition is profitable if
( + ∆) −  

 ( + ∆)
+
2
2

which is satisfied if

Notice that


∆()


2
b
∆  ∆()
= 


 0 which implies that guild members block patents of other guild members

more often as the strength of the internal statute increases.
Consider now the innovator’s choice of whether to apply for a patent or not. Clearly, if
b
it anticipates that there will be opposition (i.e., ∆  ∆()),
then patenting is not profitable.

Hence, applying for a patent may be beneficial only when there is no opposition (when ∆ ≤
b
∆()).
In this case the profits of the patentee are equal to
+∆−

 ( + ∆)
+
− 
2
2

Specifically, in the first period, patent protection allows the firm to extract the full surplus
 + ∆ At the same time, the licensing negotiation with the other member implies that 2
is transferred through licensing. At  = 2, once the patent has expired, the total surplus guild
members appropriate reduces to ( + ∆) and each of them obtains half of it. When choosing
not to patent, the innovator obtains ( +∆)2 in each period because the technology is shared
starting from  = 1. Therefore, patenting is more profitable than not patenting only if
+∆−

 ( + ∆)
+
−   ( + ∆)
2
2

or
e
∆  ∆()
=

2
( − (1 − ))
2−

e
Notice that ∆()
 0 only if  is large enough. Moreover,


∆()


 0 which implies that

as the strength of the internal statute increases guild members patent only their more valuable
innovations, i.e., the propensity to patent decreases in 
The above discussion implies that the likelihood of patenting goes down as the strength
of the statute increases because guild members are less likely to apply for a patent and more
6

The implicit assumption here is that in case of disagreement the innovation is not implemented for one
period until the patent is expired, so that each firm gets 2. Results are robust to considering alternative
outside options, as we discuss in section 3.4.

10

h
i
e
b
likely to block patents of other members. Formally, patenting occurs when ∆ ∈ ∆()
∆()

with a probability equal to

b
e
 () =  (∆())
−  (∆())

which decreases in 

3.3

Innovation by an external innovator

Suppose now that the inventor is the outsider firm and consider the opposition decision. By
opposing the patent, a guild member prevents entry of the outsider and shares the technology
with the other guild member from  = 1, obtaining ( +∆)2 per period net of opposition cost,
. Without opposition, a guild member receives a payoﬀ of 2 for one period (net of paid
licensing fees) and shares the technology with the other two firms (the other guild member and
the external innovator) in the second period. Therefore, opposing the patent is more profitable
than accommodating entry if
2

( + ∆)

( + ∆)
− +
2
2
3

or
³
´
b  () = 3  −   
∆∆
2
6

b  () is decreasing in  i.e., opposition is more likely with high 7
One can easily check that ∆

Similar to what happens with an internal innovator, patenting is profitable for the out-

b  ()). In this case, by patenting, the
sider only when there is no opposition (when ∆ ≤ ∆
external innovator obtains

 + ∆ −  +

( + ∆)
− 
3

In the first period, the innovator extracts the full surplus and strikes licensing deals with
the guild members, oﬀering 2 to each of them. In the second period, the innovation is
shared among the three firms. Without a patent, the external innovator enters the guild with
probability 1 −  and the technology is immediately shared with the guild members. Therefore,
patenting is more profitable than entering without patent if
7

For simplicity, our focus here is on pure strategy Nash equilibria between the guild members. Similar
predictions are obtained: (i) in a model in which guild members cooperatively decide whether or not to oppose
the outsider’s patent, (ii) in a symmetric mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium in which each guild member opposes
the oustider’s patent with probability .

11

 + ∆ −  +

( + ∆)
2( + ∆)
−   (1 − )
3
3

which occurs if
3 − 3 + 4 − 22

3 −  + 22
e  ()  0 for each  which implies that, absent
One can easily check that, when   3 ∆
e  () =
∆∆

opposition, the external innovator always patents, no matter the strength of the guild statutes.8

Intuitively, for low values of  patenting is beneficial because the innovator appropriates a
large share of the profits generated by the innovation during the first period. When  is large,
patenting is useful to overcome the diﬃculties of being admitted to the guild.
Therefore, conditional on the outsider innovating, the likelihood of patenting is

which is also decreasing in 

3.4

b  ())
 () =  (∆

Discussion

Our simple model illustrates how the propensity to patent in a technology area is aﬀected
by the strength of the statutes of the guilds operating in the field. As the strength of the
statute increases, the collusive power of a guild goes up, and the value of the monopoly rent
generated by the patent decreases. Thus, strong statutes reduce the patenting incentives of
guild members. Moreover, statute strength allows guild members to extract high rents from
the technologies that they appropriate through patent opposition. This implies that, in the
presence of strong statutes, patents by guild and non-guild members are more likely to be
opposed. Together, these two eﬀects generate the testable prediction that patenting activity is
likely to be less prominent in technology fields in which guilds have strong statutes.
The model builds on a number of assumptions that are worthy of additional discussion.
First, to obtain a closed form threshold for the patenting and opposition strategies we set the
impact that guild statutes have on rent sharing and entry equal to () =  and () = 1 − .
In the appendix, we show that the main predictions are robust to considering more general
functions () and (). Specifically, we show that our comparative statics hold under mild
assumptions on these functions and derive a suﬃcient condition that generalizes our main
8

  (0) = (3 − 3) 3  0 ∆
  (1) = (3 − ) 4∆
  ()  0 and
Assumption   3 implies that ∆

12

  ()
∆


 0.

results. Second, our baseline setting assumes that the patentee has full bargaining power during
the licensing negotiations and that it can appropriate the whole surplus of the innovation (while
the other guild members obtain the status-quo profits 2) In the appendix, we relax this
assumption and study a more general set-up in which the surplus is shared through Nash
bargaining. We show that our main results are robust, as long as the bargaining power of
the patentee is not too small. Finally, our model assumes that opposition cannot be avoided
through side payments from the patentee to guild members. In the appendix we extend our
setting and allow patentees to negotiate with incumbents to avoid opposition, and we show
that also in this case patenting is less likely for larger values of .
A feature of the Venetian patent system highlighted in our model is the opportunity for
guild members to oppose patent applications. This resembles modern administrative processes
at the European and United States patent oﬃces (Harhoﬀ and Reitzig, 2004; Hall and Harhoﬀ,
2004). Our simple model suggests that these opposition systems may have a variety of eﬀects
on entry and patenting behavior. On the one hand, opposition allows incumbent firms to
screen out ineﬃcient patenting by external innovators (i.e., technologies with ∆  ). On
the other hand, opposition allows non-innovating incumbents to protect their short- and longterm rents, which creates an incentive to block entry and oppose eﬃcient technologies. This
trade-oﬀ suggests that a well-designed opposition system needs to balance screening and rentpreservation incentives.

4

Data and methods

Our empirical analysis combines data on craft guilds active in the Venetian Republic during
the Renaissance with information on the patents granted by the Venetian senate during this
period.
Our main source of data on craft guilds is the dataset ‘Istituzioni Corporative, Gruppi
Professionali e Forme Associative del Lavoro nell’Italia Moderna e Contemporanea’ (Istituzioni
Corporative, henceforth) which is the outcome of a research project financed by the Italian
Ministry for Education, Universities and Research involving a variety of leading history departments across multiple Italian universities. The goal of the project was to release a dataset
with detailed information on the universe of Italian guilds for the period 1400-1700.9
9

The researchers start from the sample of 73 Italian cities with more than 10,000 inhabitants in 1300, and
successfully retrieve information on guilds for 50 of these cities (no data were available for smaller cities in
southern Italy, where the economy was predominantly based on agriculture). The final dataset comprises more

13

Key variables include the name of each guild, the time period of its activity, and its
geographical location. The data provide a detailed description of the manufacturing operations
and trading activities of each guild. The dataset also reports a variety of indicators related to
the internal organization of the guild, such as the presence of restrictions to market competition
or the existence of a structured apprenticeship system.
Our analysis focuses on 340 craft guilds identified in Istituzioni Corporative as active in
the Venetian Republic before 1600. Costantini (1987) estimates that at the end of the 16th
century Venetian guilds included about 34,000 members, which was roughly 20 percent of the
population and about half of the economically active labor force. The guilds in our sample
capture a large fraction of the European economic activity at that time, because Venice was
the third largest city in Europe and a leading international trading center (Pezzolo, 2013).
The books by Berveglieri (1995, 1999) are our main data sources on Venetian patents, as
they report information on the patent rights granted by the senate and retrieved from the state
Archives of Venice. Berveglieri’s work extends previous research by Mandich (1936, 1948), who
classified and translated into modern Italian 109 Venetian patents for the period 1474-1550.
For the same period, Berveglieri (1995) identifies 169 patents. Appendix Table A1 shows the
technological breakdown of these patents: mills account for roughly half of the inventions,
followed by drainage devices (11 percent), and hydraulic pumps (7 percent).
For each guild in our sample we identify the patents involving technologies related to
the guild’s activity. To manually match guilds with patents we exploit the detailed description
of each guild’s manufacturing operations provided in Istituzioni Cooperative, and the patent
technology classification provided by Berveglieri (1995).
Two things need to be noted here. First, patents can be assigned to multiple guilds.
For example, a patent covering a new type of sawmill is assigned to all guilds whose activities
involve the use of sawmills. This approach is consistent with our model and captures a crucial
feature of the Venetian patent system: a patent allowed the patentee to enter each of the guilds
that could use the technology. In fact, a sawmill patent permitted the inventor to enter all the
guilds that used sawmills and, at the same time, each of these guilds was entitled to oppose
the patent.10
than 1,000 guilds active in Italy during the period 1400-1700. Guilds for which researchers were not able to
retrieve enough information are missing from the sample -these are likely to be smaller institutions of little
economic importance. A comprehensive description (in Italian) of the data is provided in Moioli (2004).
10

Moreover, Berveglieri (1995) does not provide information on the specific location and origin of the patentee,

14

Second, our matching procedure does not imply a one-to-one mapping between the sector
in which the guild operates and the patents assigned to the guild. This is because the description
of guild activities in Istituzioni Cooperative shows that guilds belonging to the same sector
(and usually sharing the same denomination) often carried out diﬀerent sets of manufacturing
activities. Take, for example, the ‘fabbri’ (blacksmiths’) guilds scattered across the various
cities in our sample. Some of these guilds produced armours and weapons, whereas others
produced keys, locks or other metal products. To account for these diﬀerences, we impute
armour and weapons patents only to the relevant subset of blacksmiths’ guilds. Similarly, a
fraction of the ‘biavaroli’ (corn traders’) guilds owned mills to produce flour, but a number of
them were only involved in trading activities. Also in this case we assigned cereal-mills patents
only to the guilds using such technologies.11
The main variables used in the empirical analysis are described below.
Patents. This is the endogenous variable in the analysis. It captures the number of
patents granted by the Venetian senate from 1474 to 1550 in the primary technological field
of the guild. While Berveglieri (1995) reports patents for a longer period, our main analysis
focuses on patenting for the period 1474-1550 to avoid the 1575-76 plague, which had a profound
impact on the Venetian economy. Pezzolo (2013) documents the large demographic eﬀects of
the plague, with an estimated decrease in population of between 15 and 26 percent. In Section
5.2 we show that our results are robust to using patents granted up to 1600.12
Guided by the work of historians, we construct a variable capturing the strength of guild
statutes. A number of statutes in our sample include restrictions on competition, such as price
fixing, minimum distance between workshops (‘botteghe’) or a ban on serving customers of
other guild members. Granting privileges to sons and sons-in-law of members was a typical
way to restrict entry of local potential competitors (Moioli, 2004). In some cases, such as the
he only indicates whether the patentee was a foreigner or not. For the smaller sample of patents described in
Mandich (1936, 1948) we have information on geographical scope of the patent, i.e. in some cases the patentee
could only enter guilds of specific cities. We exploit this information it in a robustness exercise in section 5.3.
11

There is also large variation in patenting acorss the ‘molineri’ (millers) guilds. In fact, some of these guilds
specialized in textile production, others grinded grains into flour, others cutted wood, etc. In the construction of
this variable we restrict each guilds to a primary technology area among those provided by Berveglieri (1995), but
we confirmed that results are robust to using less restrictive mappings when guild’s activities spanned multiple
technology areas.
12

We drop patents related to inventions that cannot be easily imputed to a guild in our sample (e.g. perpetual
motion). In Section 5.2 we discuss alternative empirical approaches that exploit all the patents in Berveglieri’s
sample.

15

goldsmith guild of Venice, entry was completely precluded to those who were not descendents
of guild members. In other statutes, entry fees or exams were required for those who were not
sons of guild members. To preclude the entry of foreigners, various statutes included additional
provisions targeting all foreigners, or specific ethnic groups. This leads us to generate the
following variable.
Strong internal regulation. This dummy variable is equal to one if the guild has
internal rules that: (i) limit competition among the members, (ii) grant entry privileges to sons
of guild members, and (iii) restrict entry rights of foreigners.
It is likely that all guilds operating in the Venetian Republic adopted some formal or
informal restriction to limit competition and entry. Thus, one has to interpret Strong internal
regulation as capturing guilds for which historians have identified statutory provisions that are
more severe than those of other guilds in the sample.13
We now introduce some of the other control variables to be used in our empirical analysis.
Distance to Venice. This variable captures the distance (in kms) between the city
of the guild and Venice. We construct this measure by exploiting a variety of historical maps
describing the most important transportation routes in the Venetian Republic in the period of
our study. These include the ‘Atlantic Map’ of the state Archive of Venice and various maps
in Lanaro Sartori (1985) illustrating trade routes in the Venetian Republic.
Trade Guild. This dummy equals one for guilds that are only involved in trade (including transportation and financial services) and not in manufacturing. Roughly 46 percent
of the guilds in our sample are trade guilds.
Guild Members. This information is available only for 169 guilds. On average, guilds
in our sample have 164 members (with median equal to 48 and a standard deviation of 392).
Table 1 provides summary statistics and illustrates the geographical distribution of the
guilds in our sample across the main cities of the Venetian Republic. On average, there are 1.47
patents in the main technology field in which a guild operates, with a standard deviation of
roughly 5 patents. About 21 percent of the guilds in our data have strong internal regulation.
Roughly 50 percent of the guilds are located in Venice. Verona, Padua, and Brescia are the
cities with more guilds in the mainland (Terraferma).
13
Unfortunately, the Istituzioni Corporative dataset describes the exact statutory provision for only a small
subset of guilds. For most guilds the information is available only as a dummy (i.e., restriction to competition?
Y/N; Privileges to sons? Y/N, etc. . . ). This is the main reason why our empirical analysis exploits these binary
variables.

16

4.1

Econometric specification

Building on the theoretical analysis of Section 3, our main econometric model focuses on the
relationship between our measure of patenting,    related to guild  located in city 
and the indicator for the strength of internal regulation of the guild. We typically model the
conditional expectation of patenting activity as
(  ) = exp(Strong internal regulation +  +   )
where  is a vector of guild-specific control variables and   is a city-specific idiosyncratic
eﬀect. The log-link formulation is appropriate in our setting because of the non-negative and
highly skewed nature of our count-based dependent variable.
Following a long-standing tradition in the economics of innovation literature (Hausman
et al., 1984), we estimate this model via Poisson, with robust standard errors to account for
over-dispersion. Consistency of the Poisson estimates is guaranteed as long as the mean of the
dependent variable is correctly specified (Gourieroux et al, 1984).
The coeﬃcient  captures the relationship between statutory provisions restricting entry
and competition and patenting in the technology area of the guild. When   0 strong statutes
are associated with lower patenting, which is the prediction of our theoretical model. A finding
of  = 0 would indicate that statutory clauses generating market power are not associated
with patenting in the technology area. When   0 we would conclude that patenting is more
frequent in technology areas in which guilds have strong statutes.
In principle, the regression coeﬃcient  captures the combined eﬀect of statutory clauses
on innovation investments as well as on the propensity to use patents to protect technologies.
However, our reading of the history literature cautions us to interpret  as capturing the
relationship between innovation and statutory clauses. This is because the novelty content of
the patents was evaluated on the basis of the knowledge available in the Venetian dominion
and patents could involve technologies already available elsewhere (Molà, 2014). Moreover,
historians have documented substantial innovation activity by guilds for which we observe little
patenting. For example, Molà (2007) describes a vibrant innovation activity in the soap-boiler
guilds which developed a variety of new products during the period of our study. Yet, there are
no patents related to these technologies in our data. Similarly, Caniato (1996) and Trivellato
(2008) describe substantial innovation activity for the Arsenal and Murano’s glassblowers which
are also guilds for which we observe very little patenting. This suggests that  speaks more
to the propensity to use intellectual property rights to protect technologies (i.e., to adopt the
17

new institution) than to the propensity to innovate and develop new technologies. We leave
for future research an examination of the eﬀect of Venetian patents on innovation investments.

5

Empirical results

5.1

Baseline specification

Table 2 provides the first set of results. The regressions show a strong negative association
between the patents granted in the technology field of a guild and the strength of its internal
rules. All regressions include a control for trade guilds, which indicates substantially lower
patenting activity for this type of organization. In column 2 we control for the geographic
distance between the city in which a guild is located and Venice. The likelihood of patenting
increases with the distance from Venice, and the coeﬃcient on internal regulation remains
stable. Column 3 shows that the relationship between guild statute strength and patenting
is robust to the inclusion of city fixed eﬀects. Exponentiation of the coeﬃcient implies that
patenting is roughly 65 percent lower when guilds adopt strong internal regulation. In column
4 we show that results are similar when we control for the number of guild members, even
if this restricts the analysis to a much smaller sample. The coeﬃcient on the number of
members is positive (but statistically insignificant), suggesting that patenting is more frequent
in technology fields where guilds are larger.14
Overall, the results in Table 2 document a negative correlation between patenting and
statutory provisions limiting entry and competition, which is consistent with our theoretical
model.

5.2

Robustness and Extensions

We perform a variety of additional empirical tests to confirm the robustness of our main finding. First, we show that the estimates of the strength of internal regulation and of geographical
distance are unaﬀected once we include additional controls for city characteristics. In column
1 of appendix Table A2 we show robustness to the inclusion of controls for the size of the city
measured with population in 1300, 1400, and 1500 (data from Malanima, 1998). Interestingly,
14

In unreported regressions we capture guilds with a large number of members with a dummy variable equal
to one if the number of members is above the top quintile (180 members). In such specifications the dummy
is positive and statistically significant at the 0.1 level, supporting the idea that patenting is more likely in
fields where guilds have many members. We also examined whether there are heterogeneous eﬀects of statutory
strength between smaller and larger guilds but we do not find any supporting evidence.

18

population controls do not appear to explain much of the variance in patenting activity, suggesting that the number of patents is not simply driven by city size. In a model with city eﬀects,
column 2 of Table A2 shows that the negative correlation between strength of the statute and
patenting is robust to including a variety of additional controls for guild characteristics, such
as the age of the guild (in 1600) and a dummy for the presence of an apprenticeship system.15
The regression also includes industry eﬀects for guilds in agriculture, construction, and textile.
In column 3 of Table A2 we expand the time period considering the patenting activity up to
1600. For this longer time window the patent dataset expands substantially including now
640 patent rights. The estimates show that our findings are robust to using this alternative
dependent variable. Column 4 shows that results are robust to including a dummy for guilds
whose operations require the use of mills. While the magnitude of the coeﬃcient on Strong internal regulation drops by about one quarter, the correlation remains negative and statistically
significant, indicating that our results are not exclusively driven by patents related to mills.
There is the concern that the eﬀect of statutory norms on patenting is not driven by
specific provisions related to entry and competition, but by other statutory rules. Specifically,
the reader may worry that Strong internal regulation simply captures statutes that are very
detailed, and that some other rule in these statutes may aﬀect patenting more than those related
to entry and competition. To address this concern, we perform a number of placebo tests,
constructing variables that identify statutes containing detailed regulations of guild activities
not directly related to entry and competition. For example, in column 5 of Table A2 the variable
Placebo equals one if the statute includes: (i) a list of manufacturing activities precluded to
women, (ii) the name of the guild’s patron saint, and (iii) a description of the hierarchical
structure of the guild. The coeﬃcient on this variable is positive, statistically insignificant, and
small in magnitude. We obtain similar estimates (positive, small, and statistically insignificant)
with alternative placebo tests that exploit various combinations of the above variables and other
statutory clauses, such as the presence of an apprenticeship system, or of technical restrictions
on the quality of the products. These findings support the idea that patenting propensity is
strongly related to provisions in guild statutes restricting entry and competition, but not to
other statutory rules.
One may also be concerned about changes in statutory clauses over time. Two things
15

De la Croix et al (2016) discuss how apprenticeship was a key determinant of knowledge transfer and
economic growth in Medieval cities.

19

need to be noted here. First, Istituzioni Corporative typically relies on documents that are
contemporaneous with the patent act (Moioli, 2004). Second, historians have emphasized how
changes in guild statutes over time typically led to lower entry barriers and greater competition
(Costantini, 1987). This implies that in constructing Strong internal regulation we are more
likely to classify as strong, statutes that are not strong, and that measurement error will bias
our estimates toward zero. While the dataset provides information on whether the statute of
a guild changes over time, we do not know the exact clauses that are aﬀected by the change,
which precludes us from using the longitudinal nature of the data. Nonetheless, we exploit this
information to perform robustness tests. Specifically, we identify statutes that changed during
the period 1474-1550. In roughly 81 percent of the sample there was no statutory change
during the time period, for about 18 percent of the guilds the statute was changed once, and
for the remaining 1 percent it was changed twice. In column 6 of Table A2 we show that our
baseline estimates are robust to dropping guilds that change their statutes during our sample
period. The coeﬃcient is roughly 15 percent larger than our baseline, confirming the idea that
measurement error biases our estimates toward zero.16
Our results may be driven by diﬀerences in patenting and guild structure between Venice
and other cities in the Republic. In particular, one may worry that international competition
can lead some of the most prominent guilds of the city of Venice to reach the technology frontier,
and this may aﬀect their patenting strategies. To examine this issue, column 1 of Table A3
drops from the sample the guilds located in Venice. Addressing similar concerns, column 2 of
Table A3 drops the guilds involved in trade. For both of these exercises the sample size drops
of roughly 40 percent, but the negative relationship between statutory strength and patenting
is robust, with statistically significant coeﬃcients and stable magnitude.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table A3 examine the robustness of our findings to using two alternative approaches to measure statutory strength. Column 3 replaces the Strong internal regulation
dummy with a Statutory strength index which is set equal to 2 for statutes restricting both
entry and competition, equal to 1 for statutes restricting only entry or only competition and
equal to 0 for the other statutes. The estimated coeﬃcient confirms the negative association
between statutory strength and patenting. Building on this approach, column 4 includes two
separate dummies, one for statutes restricting both entry and competition (this is our original
16

We confirm this result in regressions: (i) that include a control for statutory changes, and (ii) consider
changes over diﬀerent time windows.

20

Strong internal regulation dummy) and one for statutes which only restrict one of the two
dimensions. The estimates confirm that only the most restrictive statutes are associated with
lower patenting.17
In our baseline analysis the unit of observation is a guild. This approach is consistent
with our theoretical framework and allows us to fully exploit the richness of the Istituzioni
Corporative dataset. As an alternative approach, in appendix Table A4 we show that our main
findings are robust to conducting the analysis at the industry level. Specifically, we assign each
of the guilds of our sample to one of 51 unique industrial sectors exploiting the description of the
guild activities in Istituzioni Corporative. We also assign each of the 169 patents in Berveglieri
(1995) to one of these sectors. These regressions confirm the negative eﬀect of strong statutes
on patenting. The larger the fraction of guilds with strong internal regulation the lower the
number of patents for the industrial sector. The implied elasticity is -0.6, a magnitude which
is in line with our baseline estimates of Table 2. This robustness test also confirms the positive
correlation between patenting in the technology field and average distance of the guilds from
Venice.18
Finally, in unreported regressions we confirm the robustness of our main findings to
estimating alternative econometric specifications, such as OLS, zero-inflated Poisson and a
linear probability model for the presence of at least one patent for the guild.

5.3

Foreign inventors and alternative patent data

We turn next to two extensions that are of independent interest.
First, we examine whether the determinants of patenting diﬀer between local and foreign
inventors. We obtain information on the origin of the inventor from Berveglieri (1995) who
classifies an inventor as foreign if he is not Italian and shows that only 6.5 percent of the patents
17

We also run a regression that separately includes dummies for each of the three components of the strong
guild variable (i.e., limits to competition, entry privileges to oﬀspring of the guild members, and entry limits
to foreign members). All coeﬃcients are insignificant and we cannot reject that they are equal to each other.
Including the strong guild indicator together with the three dummies also leads to insignificant coeﬃcients for the
three individual components, but a negative and statistically significant eﬀect for strong guild, with a magnitude
similar to the one in our baseline regression. These robustness checks confirm that it is not only one feature of
the statute that drives the eﬀect and that only guild statutes with detailed rules on all three features correlate
with lower patenting.
18

Few of the patents relate to inventions which cannot be easily imputed to only one sector (e.g. inventions
related to perpetual motion). These patents are assigned to the sectors in proportion to the each sector patenting
propensity. Similarly, patents related to mills with multiple usages are imputed to sectors in which mills are
used, proportionally to their sector-specific patents. Table A4 confirms that the results are robust to dropping
these patents from the sample. Results are also similar in Poisson regressions where observations are weighted
by the number of guilds active in the sector.

21

in the sample were granted to foreign inventors. Exploting these data, columns 1 to 4 of Table 3
show statistically significant associations between geographical distance and strength of internal
rules for patenting both of local and of foreign inventors. The magnitude of these correlations
is much smaller for foreign inventors. Nonetheless, our estimates show that the characteristics
of the city and the guild seem to aﬀect patenting propensity of inventors independently of their
origin. It is possible to reconcile the larger magnitude of the eﬀect for local inventors with our
theoretical model. In fact, under standard assumptions on the distribution of the parameter ∆
(e.g. uniform, exponential, etc.) the derivative of the probability of patenting with respect to
 has a smaller magnitude for external innovators than for guild members.19
Second, we examine the relationship between statutory clauses and patenting, exploiting a diﬀerent source of patent data. Specifically, rather than matching guilds and patents
using the data and the technology classification of Berveglieri (1995, 1999), we construct a
new dependent variable that relies on the patents collected and described by Mandich (1936).
Interestingly, this smaller sample also includes information on the geographical scope of patent
rights. Even though the wording of the 1474 act indicates that patents were enforceable in
the entire dominion, about 12 percent of the patents described in Mandich (1936) appear enforceable only in specific locations (e.g. only in Venice or other specific cities). We use this
information to construct an alternative measure of patenting that imputes patents with limited
geographical scope only to the guilds located in the relevant cities. Columns 5 and 6 show
that our results on the geographical distance and on the strength of internal rules are robust
to exploiting this alternative data source.

6

Instrumenting guild’s regulation strength

Our analysis has shown a strong negative association between the strength of a guild’s internal
rules and patenting in the technology area in which the guild operates, which is consistent with
the predictions of our theoretical framework. We have documented robustness of this finding in
a variety of specifications that include city eﬀects and control for several guild characteristics.
But still, to interpret this result causally is challenging, because unobservable variables may be
correlated both with Strong internal regulation and with patenting.
In particular, there are two alternative explanations that need to be addressed. First,
19

From Berveglieri’s classification it follows that foreign inventors are never guild members while local inventors
may or may not be.

22

guilds with strong statutes may be more likely to operate in technology areas in which secrecy
can be used more eﬀectively and there is less need for patents. Specifically, the concern is that
Strong internal regulation is spuriously correlated with low information leakages, which would
imply that our estimates do not capture the eﬀect of statutory clauses restricting market power.
Our industry controls partially address this concern, because information leakages are likely to
be similar for guilds operating within the same industry. Moreover, one would expect guilds
facing high information leakages to be more likely to adopt clauses to restrict entry, which
would generate a positive rather than a negative correlation between patenting and Strong
internal regulation.20
Second, the 1474 patent act may have been introduced as a response to technology shocks
aﬀecting guilds without strong statutes, or as a political move to curb the power of stronger
guilds. There are two reasons why we think this is unlikely. First, one would expect the Venetian
government to react to technology shocks in specific industries with targeted policies rather
than with a one-size-fits-all patent act aﬀecting all the guilds in the dominion (we describe
examples of such targeted policies in section 7). Second, senatorial records show that the act
passed with a very large majority (116 votes in favor, 10 against, and 3 abstentions), which is
inconsistent with a politically contentious act harming powerful guilds (Berveglieri, 1995).
Addressing these issues and other unobservable heterogeneity concerns more constructively requires an instrumental variable correlated with the presence of statutory norms restricting entry and competition and uncorrelated with patenting strategies. In this section, we
propose an instrument that relies on the religious origin of some of the guilds in our sample.
A number of the guilds active in the Venetian Republic during the Renaissance find their
origin in religious confraternities that arose from the spread of the Flagellant movement during
the 13th century. A confraternity (also called ‘scola’ or ‘fratalea’) was an association of lay
people driven by Christian devotion and works of charity (Gasparini, 1987). While people from
all social classes could join a confraternity, most of the members were craftsmen. Confraternity
members were required to follow rules and bylaws in exchange for help in times of hardship
and the security of a good funeral (Monticolo, 1896; Pullan, 1971).
During the 14th and 15th centuries the Venetian government promoted the formation
20

At the time of our study, knowledge circulation was closely linked with circulation of people, and enforcement
of trade secrets required restrictions to guild access and cooperation between members. Therefore, in our model
one can interpret the larger surplus appropriation from an increase in  as capturing both greater market power
and lower information leakage.

23

of craft and trade guilds as a way to collect tax revenue and to recruit soldiers, and this led
members of confraternities to set up craft guilds linked to the various confraternities (Constantini, 1987; Gasparini, 1987). For example, in Venice the guild of ironmongers was connected to
the confraternity of San Lorenzo, fishermen with that of San Nicolò, and goldsmiths with San
Mattio’s (Mackenney, 1994).21
Istituzioni Corporative shows that roughly 30 percent of the guilds in our sample originated from a religious confraternity. There is no clear pattern linking the religious origin of
guilds with their geographic location or their industry. For example, the barbers’ guild in
Verona originated from a confraternity, but none of the barber guilds in the other cities in
the sample have religious origins. Similarly, the blacksmiths’ guild of Udine is linked to a
confraternity, whereas those of Padua, Venice and Vicenza are not.
More than half of the guilds in Venice are linked to a confraternity, whereas in the other
cities the proportion is typically below 20 percent. Nonetheless, once we control for city eﬀects,
we do not find any significant correlation between the religious origin of the guild and other
observable characteristics, such as its age, the presence of an apprenticeship system, or the
industry. Table A5 in the appendix illustrates this result in a series of regressions in which
religious origin is the dependent variable. In all cases the correlations are close to zero and
statistically insignificant. These results support the idea that the religious origin of a guild
is likely to be driven by idiosyncratic reasons related to the local success of the Flagellant
movement centuries before the patent act, and thus unlikely to be correlated with shocks
aﬀecting patenting strategies after 1474.
Historians also documented how religious confraternities followed a strict set of rules which were recorded in a book called ‘Mariegola’- regulating both admission of new members
and day-to-day interactions among members (Monticolo, 1892; 1896; Gasparini, 1987; Black,
1989). Black (1989) describes how admission of new individuals involved serious scrutiny by the
confraternity’s leading oﬃcials and, in some cases, it required a vote of the whole congregation
and the payment of an entrance fee. Statutes of guilds that originated from confraternities were
often inspired by the Mariegolas of the related confraternities (Mackenney, 1994). Moreover,
entry restrictions may have been required to limit access to the public good provided by the
associated confraternity (Greif and Tabellini, 2017). This suggests that guilds with religious
21

These connections generated obligations on both sides. For example, guilds were required to make financial
contributions to the confraternity, but were also allowed to use the confraternity venues as meeting places.

24

origin were more likely to adopt internal rules restricting entry and competition.
In Table 4 we exploit the linkages between guilds and confraternities as instrumental
variable. Column 1 reports the first stage regression, which indicates a strong positive correlation between the religious origin of the guild and the strength of its internal rules. Columns 2
and 3 contrast the OLS estimates and the 2SLS estimates of similar linear regression models.
Both specifications confirm the strong negative relationship between patenting and the guild’s
internal rules. The estimates of the IV regression are larger in magnitude but not statistically
diﬀerent from those in the OLS model. The larger magnitude of the coeﬃcient is consistent
with measurement error in statutory strength biasing the estimates toward zero, as discussed
above.22
Following Galasso et al. (2013), we also instrument Strong internal regulation with the
predicted probability of a strong statute obtained from a probit model in which the endogenous
variable is regressed on the instrument and other first-stage covariates. When the endogenous
regressor is a dummy, this estimator is asymptotically eﬃcient in the class of estimators where
instruments are a function of the religious origin of the guild and other covariates (Wooldrige,
2002). The 2SLS estimate with this alternative model is essentially identical in magnitude and
of stronger statistical significance than the one presented in column 3 of Table 4.23
While the vast majority of the guilds in our sample formed in the 14th and 15th century, there is the possibility that for some of the oldest guilds in our sample confraternity
and guild developed side by side. For these observations, the exogeneity of our instrument
may be questionable because unobservable factors may have driven the joint formation of the
confraternities and the guild. To address the concern that the oldest guilds are not biasing
our estimates, in column 1 of Appendix Table A6 we show that our IV estimates are robust
to including more flexible controls for age of the guild, i.e. separate dummies for each age
quartile. To further capture idiosyncratic features of the oldest guilds, in column 2 we add an
extra dummy for guilds above 95th percentile of the age distribution. Column 3 drops these old
guilds altogether. Across the three columns we find strong, negative and statistically significant
coeﬃcients confirming the robustness of our estimates.
22

We obtain qualitatively similar results with an IV Poisson model, but our estimates are much larger in this
case. We also experience convergence issues with some specifications of the IV Poisson model, which are common
for this estimator, as described in Silva and Tenreyro (2011).
23

Following Angrist and Pischke (2009), we exploit the first stage estimates to compute the proportion of the
treated who are compliers which is 0.22. This indicates that our estimates are not specific to a small compliant
subpopulation.

25

6.1

Religious origin and innovation incentives

Our IV strategy rests on the assumption that the religious origins of guilds are not related
to anything that aﬀects patenting a few centuries in the future, save stronger admission requirements to enter these guilds. One concern is that members of guilds with a religious origin
may be more risk averse, i.e., less likely to implement changes in their statutes and business
practices, and therefore less likely to use patents internally and more likely to oppose patents
of external innovators. Using modern data on religiosity across countries and the US States,
Benabou, Ticchi, and Vindigni (2015) provide support for such a negative eﬀect of religion
on innovation, documenting a negative correlation between religiosity and patenting, which
suggests a lower propensity to adopt new ideas and embrace change. While we cannot rule out
this possibility, there are a number of reasons why we do not expect this channel to play an
important role in our setting.
First, the religious confraternities that spread throughout Northern Italy in the Middle
Ages represented a novel and more modern way of practicing the Christian faith. They placed
more emphasis on the individual role and less emphasis on the role of the church and the clergy
(Black, 1989). Their laity, openness to women, and diversity in social composition are evidence
of these modern attitudes (Gasparini, 1987). These confraternities also had an important
educational role, which led to more openness in the ideas of their members, liberating many
from superstition and profound ignorance (Black, 1989). They also improved literacy rates and
generated more debate about religious beliefs, which provided the foundation for the subsequent
Catholic reform.
Second, risk taking and individual entrepreneurship were not discouraged by confraternities. Often, confraternities provided loans to their members, on the security of pledged goods,
charging minimal interest to cover administrative costs. Moreover, confraternities benefitted
from the individual success of their members through donations of buildings, their decoration,
and other philanthropic initiatives of patrons willing to be remembered by their successors
(Black, 1989).
Third, studies examining the Mariegolas of the confraternities of Venice and the Terraferma do not report any restrictions to the adoption of new technologies, production processes
or property rights. Instead, they stress the ability of confraternities to accommodate changes
and adapt to innovation (Monticolo, 1892: Gasparini, 1987, Mackenney, 1994).
Finally, as additional supporting evidence, in column 3 of Table A5 we show that guilds

26

originating from religious confraternities were as likely to change their statutes during the
period of our study as those not linked to religious confraternities. This finding mitigates the
concern that the religious origin of a guild is simply a proxy for the risk aversion of the guild
many decades in the future.

7

Distance from Venice and patenting

Our empirical analysis has shown that patenting was more pronounced in technology fields of
guilds located in cities geographically distant from Venice. A possible interpretation of this
finding is that formal protection through patent documents was more beneficial to innovators
operating further away from the center of political activity. In other words, innovators who were
close to Venice may have had access to alternative (formal or informal) mechanisms to protect
their technologies. This interpretation is supported by historical evidence that geographical
proximity determined a special relation between the guilds and the Venetian government. For
example, Demo (2016) and Caracausi (2016) argue that when conflicts arose between Terraferma’s and Venetian guilds, often the government favored those located in Venice.
To explore in more detail this issue, we develop an additional measure capturing the
political strength of each city. To construct this variable, we collect data on the noble families
residing across the diﬀerent cities of the Venetian Republic and their marriages with members
of the great council, the legislative assembly of the Republic. After the 1297 serrata, great
council membership was patrilineal hereditary and this restricted political power to families of
‘nobili veneti’ the high nobility of the Venetian Republic. While the vast majority of these high
nobles resided in Venice, in the other cities of the dominion some families were recognized with
lower nobility statuses such as ‘nobili’, ‘conti’ or ‘nobili palatini’. Marriages between nobles
residing in a city and members of the great council could be used strategically to increase the
political influence and create stronger connection between the city and the center of political
power.24
To identify high and low nobility families residing in each city of our sample we digitize
the census of the patrician families residing in Veneto and nearby regions compiled in the
nineteenth century by Schroeder (1830). For each noble family Schroeder reports the date in
24
Other studies in economics and sociology have examined the network of marriages in Medieval Italy. Padgett
and Ansell (1993) show that the success of the Medici family in Florence was driven by strategic marriage
alliances. Puga and Trefler (2014) document the use of marriage alliances in Venice to monopolize the galley
trade.

27

which the family obtains the nobility title and the city in which it resides. This allows us to
identify the number of noble families residing in each city at the time of the patent act. On
average there are about 60 noble families for each city in our sample. More than 100 noble
families were located in Venice and smaller cities, such as Udine or Treviso, had less than 30
families.25
We combine this digitized census of patrician families with additional data to generate
our measure of political power. First, exploiting the information in Raines (2004), we identify
the names of the families with great council membership. Second, we obtain data on marriages
involving a noble husband during the period 1400-1599. Records of these marriages are available
from the ‘Avogaria di Comun’ of the Archivio di Stato di Venezia. Puga and Trefler (2014)
digitized these records, building on the work of nineteenth century archivists. Combining these
data sources, we construct the indicator variable Politically connected families, which equals
one if we identify in the city at least one family belonging to the great council or linked through
marriage to a family in the great council.26
In column 1 of Table 5 we show that there is a positive and statistically significant
correlation between the number of noble families in a city and patenting by the guilds in the
city. At the same time, the regression also shows that the number of noble families in a city
explains much more of the variance in patents than does its population. Including these controls
has no eﬀect on the estimates of the eﬀect of geographical distance and internal strength of
the guild. This finding suggests that patenting is not simply driven by the sheer size of the
city, but it is likely to be related to other regional characteristics. For example, the presence
of noble families in a city may aﬀect the quality of its human capital and the availability of
financing, and thus spur technological activity (Demo, 2016).
In column 2 we introduce the variable Politically connected families, which captures the
political strength of the city. We find a negative and statistically significant association between
the presence of politically connected families and patenting, suggesting that formal intellectual
property protection may have been a substitute for alternative forms of protection available to
guilds with stronger political connections.
25

Six observations had to be dropped from our sample because they are associated with smaller cities that
were not covered by Schroeder (1830).
26

More than half of the cities in our sample are not connected to the great council according to this measure.
We use an indicator variable because of the limited variance in this variable (apart from Venice, in all the other
cities the number of linked families ranges between 0 and 3).

28

There is the concern that the results of columns 1 and 2 are driven by Venice because
most of the noble families and members of great council resided in Venice or because of other
legal and judicial diﬀerences with other cities (Knapton, 2013). To address this issue, in column
3 we drop from our sample all the Venetian guilds. All our findings are robust to focusing on
this smaller sample of guilds located in Terraferma.
An additional concern is that more distant cities diﬀer in their human capital or growth
potential and this may be correlated with their political power and the propensity to patent.
An important determinant of growth and human capital for European cities in the 1400s was
the availability of the printing press, as documented by Dittmar (2011). To take this issue into
account, we collect data on the number of printed books available in each city of our sample
in 1500. This information is obtained from ‘ Incunabula Short Title Catalogue,’ a database of
the British Library that includes nearly all books printed in Europe before the year 1501. For
each item, the dataset provides authors, titles, language and, more importantly for our scope,
date and place of printing. In column 4 of Table 5, we introduce this control and find a positive
but statistically insignificant correlation between the number of books in a city and patenting.
At the same time, all other results on geographical distance and political power are robust.27
As a final robustness test, we examine the sensitivity of our results to our measure of
geographical distance. Appendix Table A7 compares the estimates obtained with our preferred
measure of distance - which is constructed using maps of transportation routes of the Venetian
Republic- with two alternative distance measures. In column 2 we obtain the distance data
from the “Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval Civilizations” which provides maps of the
ancient Roman road network (McCormick et al., 2013). In column 3 we use instead the modern
road network (excluding highways) as an alternative source of distance. The estimates on the
geographical distance measures and the other variables are robust and essentially identical
across the three specifications.
Many other factors may vary across cites, and it is quite likely that omitted variables
correlated with geographical and political distance are important for the propensity to patent.
Nonetheless, the correlations reported in Table 5 suggest that the diﬀusion of the very first
patent rights was shaped by geographic and political forces. From a theoretical perspective, the
relationship between patenting and political or geographical distance from Venice is ambiguous.
27

We obtain similar qualitative and quantitative estimates in regressions run on the smaller sample in which
observations are collapsed at the city level.

29

On the one hand, patents might have been easier to enforce for inventors located closer to the
capital. On the other hand, inventors and guild members with greater political connections
might have been able to obtain protection from the government through other formal or informal
channels. Our empirical evidence suggests that the second eﬀect dominated the first, and that
patents were not as widespread among guilds located in the proximity of Venice and among
those in cities with stronger political ties.
A variety of historical accounts can support this interpretation of our findings. First,
some of the guilds located in the proximity of Venice - such as those active in the Arsenal or
Murano’s glassblowers - were under close scrutiny by the Venetian government, which often
passed laws to complement their statutes and to provide additional regulation of the sector.
Some of these guild-specific regulations involved technology adoption. Caniato (1996) describes
various legislative acts related to the Arsenal guild members that protected local production
(e.g. by burning ships not built in Venice) and that rewarded selected foreign shipbuilders.
Davanzo Poli (1984) describes a senate decision in 1462 that contained provisions supporting
the tanner and shoemaker guilds of Venice. Manno (1995) describes similar forms of protection
for glassmakers, blacksmiths, and the silk guild of Venice. Second, the Giustizia Vecchia - which
was the main magistracy enforcing guild statutes and solving disputes between guild memberswas located in Venice (Monticolo, 1892; Shaw, 2002). Closer interaction with guilds located in
the vicinity of Venice may have allowed resolution of disputes on new products and processes
without the need of formal patent documents.

8

Discussion

Our empirical analysis has shown that guilds with weak statutes and located in cities geographically distant from Venice revealed immediate interest in the new form of property rights
and patented with greater intensity than other guilds. These results resonate with the modern economics of innovation literature, which has documented that patenting strategies vary
across fields (Levin et al., 1987), that the eﬀectiveness of patent protection interacts with other
government policies (Schankerman, 1998), and that patenting is less common when firms have
high market power (Aghion et al., 2005). The similarity between the IP strategies of contemporary firms and those of the pre-industrial economy suggests that the economic forces shaping
modern patenting behavior are not a unique feature of contemporary technologies.
In her analysis of the origin of modern patent rights, Khan (2005) argues that the British

30

and French patent systems were designed to support and increase the market power of elites.
Diﬀerently, she shows that the United States system was more democratic, with patents accessible to non-elite inventors. In this respect, our finding that patents were more valuable for
innovators located in frontier cities without political connections suggests that the American
patent system was closer to the Venetian experience than were the French and British laws.
A natural question that arises is “What would have happened to these frontier cities
in the absence of the Venetian patent system?” In the ideal empirical experiment, we would
compare the economic growth of a Venetian city to the economic growth of the same city had
the senate not passed the patent act. While this counterfactual is not observed, we examine
this issue by constructing an empirical proxy for the hypothetical growth in the absence of
patent rights for two of the cities in our sample, Padua and Vicenza. These two cities had
roughly similar size in 1500 (the population of Padua was 20,000, that of Vicenza was 27,000).
Nonetheless, our data show that roughly 60 percent of the craft guilds of Vicenza did not
have a strong statute, whereas in Padua the fraction was less than 50 percent. Our data also
show that in Vicenza the proportion of guilds in sectors with high patenting propensity (those
using mills and those involved in the textile industry) was larger than in Padua. In light of
our findings, these features of the local economy suggest that the availability of patents had a
stronger impact on the guilds of Vicenza than on those of Padua. Indeed, we do observe more
patenting per guild in Vicenza (4.58 patents per guild) than in Padua (1.76 patents per guild).
We use the synthetic control method (Abadie et al., 2010) to obtain a graphical representation of the eﬀect of the patent system in the two cities. In the synthetic control approach,
the control group is constructed through a data-driven procedure that aims to reproduce the
counterfactual trajectory in the absence of a patent system and not simply averaging across
cities. We use two alternative samples to conduct this exercise. First, we use the dataset
constructed by Malanima (1998), which reports the population of 543 Italian cities during the
period 1300-1600. Second, we exploit a smaller sample of 34 cities in Northern and Central
Italy for which we can complement the population data with detailed information about the
local guilds and their statutes (Moioli, 2004). In both cases, we construct the synthetic control
only from cities outside the Venetian Republic, i.e., cities not aﬀected by the Venetian patent
act.
Appendix figure A1 illustrates the findings obtained from the first sample, in which the
synthetic control is constructed by minimizing the diﬀerence in population growth before the

31

patent act. The exercise shows that the diﬀerence in population growth after 1474 between Vicenza and its synthetic counterpart is much sharper than the corresponding diﬀerence between
Padua and its synthetic counterpart. We also perform the analysis on the smaller sample of
cities for which we can construct the control group by minimizing diﬀerences in city population, number of guilds, average guild statutory strength, and industry composition. Despite
the small sample and the sparsity of the data, also in these (unreported) graphs we observe an
increase in Vicenza’s population after 1474 relative to the control group. Such an increase is
not observed for Padua where, if anything, the population appears below that of the synthetic
control group after the patent act.
These figures are only illustrative and should not be over-interpreted. Nonetheless, the
estimates suggest that the availability of patents may have had some impact on the economic
growth of frontier cities.

9

Conclusions

In this paper we study the diﬀusion of patent rights in the Venetian Republic following the
1474 senate act, which instituted the very first regularized patent system. There are two key
empirical findings in the paper. First, we find a strong negative association between the number
of patents granted in the technology sector of a guild and the presence of statutory provisions
limiting entry and competition. Second, we find that patenting was more frequent for guilds
located in cities geographically distant from Venice and in cities with lower political connection.
Overall, our findings indicate that the diﬀusion of new economic institutions may be
strongly aﬀected by features of the local economic and political environment. This has potential
implications for the design of patent policies, because it suggests that policy outcomes may vary
substantially across locations and industries, even within a region. Our estimates are also in
line with the more recent innovation literature, which has documented substantial variation in
the rate of patenting across industries and in the perceived eﬀectiveness of patents across firms
(Levin et al., 1987; Schankerman, 1998; Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh, 2000). Our data show
that even in the very first patent system, the private economic value provided by intellectual
property rights appears highly heterogeneous. Finally, our analysis underscores the importance
of considering the potential substitution between new institutions and existing alternatives.

32

References
[1] Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller (2010), “Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Eﬀect of California’s Tobacco Control
Program,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 105(490): 493—505.
[2] Akcigit, Ufuk, John Grigsby, and Tom Nicholas (2017a) “The Rise of American Ingenuity:
Innovation and Inventors of the Golden Age,” NBER Working Paper 23047
[3] Akcigit, Ufuk, John Grigsby, and Tom Nicholas (2017b) “Immigration and the Rise of
American Ingenuity,” American Economic Review 107: 327-31
[4] Acemoglu, Daron, and Ufuk Akcigit (2012) “Intellectual property rights policy, competition and innovation,” Journal of the European Economic Association 10: 1-42
[5] Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson (2005) “Unbundling Institutions,” Journal of Political Economy 113: 949-995
[6] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson (2005) “The rise of Europe: Atlantic trade, institutional change, and economic growth,” American Economic Review 95:
546-579
[7] Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griﬃth, and Peter Howitt (2005)
“Competition and Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120: 701-728
[8] Angrist, Joshua David and Jörn-Steﬀen Pischke (2009) Mostly harmless econometrics: an
empiricist’s companion, Princeton university press, Princeton
[9] Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded Galor (2011) “Cultural diversity, geographical isolation, and
the origin of the wealth of nations,” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper
17640
[10] Belfanti, Carlo (2004) “Guilds, patents, and the circulation of technical knowledge: Northern Italy during the early modern age,” Technology and culture 45: 569-589
[11] Bénabou, Roland, Davide Ticchi, and Andrea Vindigni (2015), “Religion and Innovation,”
American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 105(5): 346—351.

33

[12] Berveglieri Roberto (1995), “Inventori Stranieri a Venezia (1474-1797). Importazione di
tecnologia e circolazione di tecnici artigiani inventori,” Istituto Veneto di Scienze, Venezia.
[13] Berveglieri Roberto (1999), Le vie di Venezia. Canali lagunari e rii a Venezia: Inventori,
brevetti, tecnologia e legislazione nei secoli XIII-XVIII, Cierre, Verona
[14] Black, Christopher (1989), Italian Confraternities in the Sixteenth Century, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge UK
[15] Borelli, Giorgio (1980) Stato Economia e Societa’ nella Repubblica Veneta tra ‘400 e ‘700,
Libreria Universitaria Editrice, Verona
[16] Bridgman, Benjamin (2015) “Competition, work rules and productivity,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 32: 136-149
[17] Caniato, Giovanni (1996) “L’Arsenale: maestranze e organizzazione del lavoro,” in Tenenti
and Tucci, Storia di Venezia: dalle origini alla caduta della Serenissima, Istituto della
enciclopedia italiana, Roma
[18] Caracausi, Andrea (2016) “Textiles Manufacturing, Product Innovations and Transfer of
Technology in Padua and Venice between the the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries,” in
K. Davids and B. De Munck eds, Innovation and creativity in Late Medieval and Early
Modern European cities, Routhledge
[19] Cohen, Wesley, Richard R. Nelson, and John P. Walsh (2000), “Protecting their intellectual
assets: Appropriability conditions and why US manufacturing firms patent (or not),”
NBER working paper 7552
[20] Cohen, Wesley (2010), “Fifty years of empirical studies of innovative activity and performance,” in Brownyn Hall and Nathan Rosenberg, Handbook of The Economics of Innovation, North-Holland, Amsterdam
[21] Costantini, Massimo (1987), L’albero della libertà economica: il processo di scioglimento
delle corporazioni veneziane, Arsenale, Venezia.
[22] Davanzo Poli, Doretta (1984) “I mestieri della Moda a Venezia nei sec. XIII-XVIII ”
Edizioni del Gazzattino 1: 139-140

34

[23] De la Croix, David, Matthias Doepke, Joel Mokyr (2016), “Clans, Guilds, and Markets:
Apprenticeship Institutions and Growth in the Pre-Industrial Economy,” NBER Working
Paper No. 22131
[24] Dell, Melissa (2012) “Path dependence in development: Evidence from the Mexican Revolution,” working paper
[25] Demo, Edoardo (2013) “Industry and production in the venetian terraferma,” in Dursteler,
Eric. A Companion to Venetian History, 1400-1797, Brill, Leiden
[26] Demo, Edoardo (2016) “New Products and Technological Innovation in the Silk Industry
of Vicenza in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries,” in K. Davids and B. De Munck eds,
Innovation and creativity in Late Medieval and Early Modern European cities, Routhledge
[27] Di Stefano, Giovanni (2011) Enciclopedia Storica di Venezia, Supernova, Venezia
[28] Dittmar, Jeremiah (2011) “Information technology and economic change: the impact of
the printing press,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126: 1133-1172
[29] Dittmar, Jeremiah and Ralf Meisenzahl (2016) “State Capacity and Public Goods: Institutional Change, Human Capital, and Growth in Early Modern Germany,” working
paper
[30] Dittmar, Jeremiah and Seabold, Skipper (2015) “Media, markets and institutional change:
evidence from the Protestant Reformation,” working paper
[31] Duﬀy, John (2007) “Inventing Invention: A Case Study of Legal Innovation,” Texas Law
Review 86: 1-73
[32] Epstein, Stephan (2004) “Property rights to technical knowledge in premodern Europe,
1300-1800,” American Economic Review 94: 382-387
[33] Galasso, Alberto, Mark Schankerman, and Carlos J. Serrano (2013) “Trading and enforcing
patent rights,” RAND Journal of Economics 44: 275-312
[34] Gasparini Giuseppina (1987) “Il Movimento delle Confraternite nell’Area Veneta,” Publications de l’École française de Rome 97: 361-394
[35] Glaeser, Edward, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2004)
“Do institutions cause growth?” Journal of Economic Growth 9: 271-303
35

[36] Golden, John M. (2013) “Patent Privateers: Private Enforcement’s Historical Survivors,”
Harvard Journal of Law and Technology 26: 545-553
[37] Gourieroux, Christian, Alain Monfort, and Alain Trognon (1984) “Pseudo maximum likelihood methods: Applications to Poisson models,” Econometrica 52: 701-720
[38] Greif, Avner, Paul Milgrom, and Barry R. Weingast (1994) “Coordination, commitment,
and enforcement: The case of the merchant guild,” Journal of Political Economy 102:
745-776
[39] Greif, Avner and Guido Tabellini (2017) “The Clan and the Corporation: Sustaining
Cooperation in China and Europe,” Journal of Comparative Economics, forthcoming
[40] Hall, Bronwyn and Dietmar Harhoﬀ (2004) “Post-grant reviews in the US patent system–
design choices and expected impact,” Berkeley Technology Law Journal: 989-1015
[41] Hall, Bronwyn and Dietmar Harhoﬀ (2012) “Recent research on the economics of patents,”
Annual Review of Economics 4: 541-565
[42] Harhoﬀ, Dietmar and Markus Reitzig (2004) “Determinants of opposition against EPO
patent grants–the case of biotechnology and pharmaceuticals,” International Journal of
Industrial Organization 22: 443-480
[43] Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn Hall, and Zvi Griliches (1984) “Econometric Models for Count
Data with an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship,” Econometrica 52: 909-38
[44] Khan, B. Zorina (2005) “The Democratization of Invention: patents and copyrights in
American economic development, 1790-1920 ” Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
[45] Kleiner, Morris, (2000) “Occupational licensing,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14:
189-202
[46] Knapton Michael (2013) “The terraferma state,” in Dursteler, Eric. A Companion to
Venetian History, 1400-1797, Brill, Leiden
[47] Lane, Frederic (1973) Venice. A Maritime Republic, John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore
[48] Lanaro Sartori Paola (1985) “Venezia e le grandi arterie del commercio internazionale:
strade, flusso di merci, organizzazione dei trasporti tra ‘500 e ‘700,” in Borelli Giorgio (a
36

cura di), Mercanti e vita economica nella Repubblica Veneta (secoli XIII-XVIII), Banca
Popolare di Verona, Verona
[49] Levin, R. C., Klevorick, A. K., Nelson, R. R., Winter, S. G., Gilbert, R., & Griliches, Z.
(1987) “Appropriating the returns from industrial research and development,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 3:783-831
[50] Machlup, Fritz, and Edith Penrose (1950) “The Patent Controversy in the Nineteenth
Century,” Journal of Economic History 10:1-29
[51] Malanima, Paolo (1998), “Italian Cities 1300-1800. A quantitative approach,” Rivista di
Storia Economica 14, 91-126
[52] Mandich, Giulio (1936), “Le privative industriali veneziane : 1450-1550,” Rivista del
Diritto Commerciale 34, 101-143
[53] Mandich, Giulio (1948) “Venetian Patents (1450-1550),” Journal of the Patent and Trademark Oﬃce Society 30: 166-189
[54] Manno, Antonio (1995) I mestieri di Venezia. Storia, arte e devozione delle corporazioni
dal XIII al XVIII secolo, Biblos, Cittadella
[55] May, Christopher, (2002) “The Venetian Moment: New Technologies, legal innovation and
the institutional origins of intellectual property”, Prometheus 20: 159-177
[56] Mackenney Richard (1994) “Continuity and change in the scuole piccole of Venice, c. 1250
- c. 1600,” Reinassance Studies 8: 388-403
[57] McCormick, Michael, Guoping Huang, Giovanni Zambotti, and Jessica Lavash (2013)
Roman road network. DARMC Scholarly Data Series, Center for Geographic Analysis,
Harvard University, Cambridge MA, USA
[58] Merges, Robert P., and John F. Duﬀy (2013) Patent law and policy: Cases and materials,
Carolina Academic Press, Durham
[59] Moioli, Angelo (2004), “I Risultati di un’Indagine sulle Corporazioni nelle Città Italiane
in Età Moderna,” in Dalla Corporazione al Mutuo Soccorso. Organizzazione e Tutela del
Lavoro tra XVI e XX Secolo, Paola Massa e Angelo Moioli editori. Franco Angeli Edizioni,
Milano
37

[60] Molà, Luca (2000) The silk industry of Renaissance Venice, Johns Hopkins University
Press, Baltimore
[61] Molà, Luca (2007) “Il mercante innovatore” in Il Rinascimento Italiano e l’Europa, vol.
quarto, Commercio e cultura mercantile, F. Franceschi, R.A. Goldthwaite e R.C. Mueller,
Fondazione CassaMarca
[62] Monticolo, Giovanni (1892) L’Uﬃcio della giustizia vecchia a Venezia dalle origini sino al
1330, Volume II, A spese della Società, Venezia
[63] Monticolo, Giovanni (1896) I Capitolari delle arti veneziane, Forzani EC tipografi del
senato, Roma.
[64] Moser, Petra (2005) “How Do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from Nineteenth Century World’s Fairs,” American Economic Review 94:1214-1236
[65] Moser, Petra (2012) “Innovation without Patents — Evidence from World’s Fairs” Journal
of Law and Economics 55: 43-74
[66] North, Douglass (1981) Structure and Change in Economic History, Norton, New York
[67] Padgett, John and Christopher Ansell (1993) “Robust Action and the Rise of the Medici,
1400—1434,” American Journal of Sociology 98: 1259—1319.
[68] Persico, Nicola (2015) “The political economy of occupational licensing associations,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 31: 213-241
[69] Pezzolo, Luciano (2013) “The venetian economy” in Dursteler, Eric. A Companion to
Venetian History, 1400-1797. Brill, Leiden
[70] Puga Diego and Dan Trefler (2014), “International Trade and Institutional Change: Medieval Venice’s Response to Globalization,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129: 753-821
[71] Pullan, Brian (1971), Rich and poor in Renaissance Venice: the Social Institutions of a
Catholic State, to 1620, Harvard University Press.
[72] Raines Dorit (2004), “Cooptazione, aggregazione e presenza al Maggior Consiglio: le casate
del patriziato veneziano, 1297-1797,” Storia di Venezia 1:1-64
[73] Rendina, Claudio (1984) I dogi, Newton Compton Editori, Roma
38

[74] Schankerman, Mark (1998) ”How Valuable is Patent Protection? Estimates by Technology
Field,” RAND Journal of Economics 29, 77-107
[75] Schroeder Franz (1830) Repertorio genealogico delle famiglie confermate nobili e dei titolati
nobili esistenti nelle Provincie Venete, Vol. 1 and 2, Forni, Bologna
[76] Shaw, James (2002) “Retail, Monopoly, and Privilege: the Dissolution of the Fishmongers’
Guild of Venice, 1599,” Journal of Early Modern History 6: 396-427.
[77] Sichelman, Ted and Sean O’Connor (2012), “Patents as Promoters of Competition: The
Guild Origins of Patent Law in the Venetian Republic,” San Diego Law Review 49: 1267-82
[78] Silva, Santos and Silvana Tenreyro (2011) “Poisson: some convergence issues,” Stata Journal 11: 207-212
[79] Tabellini, Guido (2010) “Culture and institutions: economic development in the regions
of Europe,” Journal of the European Economic Association 8: 677-716
[80] Trivellato, Francesca (2008) “Guilds, Technology, and Economic Change in Early Modern
Venice,” in Guilds, Innovation and the European Economy, 1400-1800, eds. S.R. Epstein
and Maarten Prak (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008), pp. 199-231.
[81] Wooldrigde, Jeﬀrey (2002) Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, The
MIT Press Cambridge, Massachusetts London, England.
[82] Zaggia, Stefano (2014) “Far la città: Il ruolo dei Provveditori di Comun nell’evoluzione
dell’ambiente urbano di Venezia. Strade, ponti, pozzi, case,” Mélanges de l’Ecole française
de Rome Italie et Méditerranée 116: 665-681

39

Appendix: Extensions of the theoretical model
Generalized impact of guild statutes
In this Appendix we extend our baseline model generalizing the impact that guild statutes
have on rent sharing, (), and entry, () We assume that the ability to appropriate rents
increases with , 0 ()  0 while the probability of entry decreases,  0 ()  0. Finally, we
assume that (0) = (1) = 0 and (1) = (0) = 1
We analyze first the case in which a guild member is the innovator. As in Section 3, we
solve the model by backward induction considering first the opposition decision. Opposition is
profitable if
2()( + ∆)
() ()( + ∆)
− 
+
2
2
2
which is satisfied if

Notice that


∆()


b
∆  ∆()
=

2

()

 0 which combined with 0 ()  0 implies that, as the strength of the

internal statute increases, guild members block patents of other guild members more often. If
b
the innovator anticipates opposition it will not apply for a patent. If, instead, ∆ ≤ ∆()
the
guild member will patent when:
+∆−

2()( + ∆)
() ()( + ∆)
+
−
2
2
2

or
e
∆  ∆()
=

2 ( − (1 − ()))

2 − ()

e
Notice that ∆()
 0 only if () is large enough. Moreover


∆()


 0 which com-

bined with our assumption that 0 ()  0 implies that, as the strength of the internal statute
increases, guild members patent only their more valuable innovations and the propensity to
patent decreases in  This also shows that our results on opposition and patenting by guild
members presented in the text are robust to assuming a more general relationship between
rent-sharing and .
Consider now the case of an external innovator. A guild member finds opposing the
patent more profitable than accommodating it when:
2()

( + ∆)

()( + ∆)
−   () +
2
2
3
40

or
b  () =
∆∆

3
2()

µ
¶
()
−
6

b  () is decreasing in () This, combined with our assumption that
It is easy to see that ∆

b  () and the
0 ()  0 implies that the likelihood of opposition increases in . When ∆ ≤ ∆

external innovator anticipates the patent will not be opposed, patenting is more profitable than
entry without patent if

 + ∆ − () +

()( + ∆)
2()( + ∆)
−   ()
3
3

that occurs if
e  () = 3 − 3 + 2() + 2()()
∆∆
() − 2()() + 3

e  (0) = (3 − 3) 3
Given that (0) = (1) = 0 and (1) = (0) = 1, it follows that ∆

e  (1) = (3 − ) 4 which are both negative because   3 Moreover, we have that
and ∆
e  ()
∆


3 −  + 2()
0
2  ()
(() − 2()() + 3)
 + ()
 0 ()
+6()
(() − 2()() + 3)2

= 3

which is positive under the following condition:
−

2(()( + ()))
0 ()
≥
3 −  + 2()
 0 ()

The right hand side of the above inequality is bounded by (2 + 2)(3 − ) which in turn is
¯
¯
bounded by 1 because   3 This implies that |0 ()| ≥ ¯ 0 ()¯ is a suﬃcient condition for
  ()
∆


≥ 0. In other words, patenting decreases in  when changes in the statute strength have

greater impact on rent sharing than on entry.

Generalized licensing negotiations
In the baseline setting, the innovating firm has the full bargaining power during the licensing
negotiations and it appropriates the whole surplus of the innovation (while the other guild
members obtain the status-quo profits 2) In this Appendix, we generalize the analysis
assuming that the surplus is shared according to a parameter  ∈ [0 1] More specifically,
41

during the period of validity of the patent, the innovating firm obtains its status—quo profits
plus a share  of the innovation surplus,  + ∆ − ; the remaining (1 − ) share is appropriated
by the other guild member(s). Parameter  represents the bargaining power of the inventor
during the licensing negotiations. Note that  = 1 corresponds to the baseline setting.
Below, we show that the comparative static results of the baseline setting are still valid
in this more general framework provided  is large enough. Consider first the case of innovation
by a guild member. The other guild member opposes the patent if
2( + ∆)

( + ∆)
−
+ (1 − )( + ∆ − ) +

2
2
2
When choosing not to oppose the patent, in the first period, the guild member obtains 2 +
(1 − )( + ∆ − ) the status-quo profits plus a share (1 − ) of the innovation surplus. Hence,
opposition is optimal if
ˆ
∆  ∆()
=
ˆ
A simple inspection of ∆()
reveals that

2 + 2(1 − )(1 − )

( − 2(1 − ))

ˆ
∆()


 0 : the larger is  the more likely that guild

members oppose patents by other guild members.
ˆ
Consider now the patenting decision. When ∆ ≤ ∆()
patenting generates an overall
profit
( + ∆)

+ ( + ∆ − ) +
− 
2
2
In the first period, the firm obtains the status-quo profits, 2 plus the share  of the
innovation surplus ( + ∆ − ) Hence, patenting is more profitable than non-patenting only
if

( + ∆)
2( + ∆)
+ ( + ∆ − ) +
−
2
2
2
or
2 ( − (1 − ))
˜
∆  ∆()
=

(2 − )
˜
Notice that ∆()
 0 when  and  are large enough; moreover,

˜
∆()


 0 which implies that

the propensity to patent reduces with the strength of the statutes.
Let us focus now on the case of innovation by a non-guild member. In this case, patent
opposition is profitable for a guild member when
42

2( + ∆)
 (1 − )
( + ∆)
−
+
( + ∆ − ) +
2
2
2
3
By accommodating the patent, in the first period, a guild member obtains its status-quo profits
plus half of (1 − )( + ∆ − ) Therefore, a guild member chooses to oppose a patent by an
external if

¡
¢
2
3
−

3(1
−
)
−

+
2
ˆ  () =
∆∆

(3 −  + 22 )

It can be easily verified that

ˆ  ()
∆


 0 which implies that the larger  the more likely is guild

members opposition to patents of external innovators.
ˆ  () patenting is optimal for the external innovator if
In turn, for ∆ ≤ ∆
( + ∆ − ) +

( + ∆)
2( + ∆)
−   (1 − )

3
3

or
¡
¢
3 −  3(1 − ) −  + 22
˜

∆  ∆ () =
(3 −  + 22 )

˜  ()  0 if  
From the above expression it follows that ∆

3+(1−2)
3(1−) ;

hence, the external

innovator always prefers to patent provided that  is large enough.

Settling patent opposition
The patent opposition process described in Section 3 leads to an important ineﬃciency: patents
with large ∆ are opposed and, therefore, inventors refrain from patenting their innovations.
This fact reduces the overall surplus generated by the innovation at  = 1 from  + ∆ to
( + ∆) Since we are considering a game of complete information, one may wonder whether
our results are still valid when we allow for eﬃcient negotiations about the opposition decision.
To address this issue, in this Appendix we assume that, once the patent is granted, the innovator
and the guild member/s negotiate over the opposition decision. Specifically, we assume that the
innovator makes a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer about how to share the two-period overall surplus. If
the proposal is accepted, then the patent is not opposed; otherwise, opposition takes place.28
Suppose that the innovator is a guild member. In this case, during the negotiations the
innovator oﬀers to the other guild member an overall payoﬀ equal to (+∆)2+(+∆)2−
28

In the analysis, we assume that, in case of rejection, patent opposition is profitable. If this is not the case,

then the analysis of the patenting decision coincides with that presented in the baseline model when ∆ ≤ ∆()
  () (external innovator).
(internal innovator) or ∆ ≤ ∆

43

i.e. the payoﬀ that the latter would obtain in the case of opposition; clearly, such a proposal
is accepted. Hence, by choosing to patent the invention, the innovator obtains  + ∆ + ( +
∆) −  − ( + ∆)2 − ( + ∆)2 +  =  + ∆ −  +  a payoﬀ which does not depend on 
By contrast, by not patenting, the innovator obtains ( + ∆)2 + ( + ∆)2 a payoﬀ which
increases with  Comparing the two payoﬀs, patenting is optimal when

(1 − )( + ∆) −  +   0
which decreases in . Therefore, also if we allow for negotiations over patent opposition, when
the innovator is a guild member patenting becomes less likely as  gets larger.
Suppose now that the innovator is an outsider. During the negotiations the innovator
oﬀers the two guild members an overall payoﬀ equal to 2(( + ∆)2 + ( + ∆)2) −  i.e.
the payoﬀ they would obtain jointly if one of them were to oppose the patent. By patenting
the innovator obtains a payoﬀ  + ∆ + ( + ∆) −  − 2(( + ∆)2 + ( + ∆)2) +  that
is ( + ∆) (1 − ) +  − . By contrast, when choosing not to patent, the innovator obtains
(1 − ) 2(+∆)
 Comparing the two payoﬀs, patenting is optimal when
3
(1 − )

( + ∆)(3 − 2)
−+0
3

a condition which is less likely to hold as  grows larger. Therefore, also in the case of external
innovator, patenting is decreasing in .

44

Figure 1. Venetian State Boundary

(Source: Knapton, 2013)

Table 1. Summary statistics
Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Patents
Strong internal regulation
Distance

340
340
340

1.47
0.21
59.90

5.10
0.40
77.67

0
0
0

42
1
422.10

Trade guild
Guild members

340
169

0.46
164.06

0.49
392.27

0
2

1
3390

Number of guilds in the main cities

Venice
Verona
Padua
Brescia
Treviso
Udine
Others

161
54
39
31
16
13
26

NOTES: Unit of observation is a guild i located in city j. Patents is the total number of patents
granted from 1474 to 1550 in the technology sector of the guild. Distance= distance from Venice in
Km. Strong internal regulation =1 if guild has internal rules which restrict competition, grant
privileges to sons of members, and restrict rights of foreign members. Trade guild =1 if the guild is
not involved in manufacturing. Guild members = number of registered members as reported in the
"Istituzioni Cooperative" data.

Table 2 . Guild internal regulation and patenting
Dependent Variable

Strong internal regulation

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Patents

Patents

Patents

Patents

-0.750***
(0.151)

-0.995***
(0.103)

-1.133***
(0.439)

-1.717***
(0.610)

log(Distance)

0.224***
(0.026)

log (Guild members)

0.256
(0.191)

Trade guild

-4.535***
(0.710)

-4.357***
(0.708)

-4.355***
(0.848)

-5.268***
(1.042)

City Effects

No

No

Yes

Yes

Observations

340

340

340

169

NOTES: Poisson estimation with robust standard errors. * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5
percent and *** significant at 1 percent. Strong internal regulation =1 if guild has internal rules which
restrict competition, grant privileges to sons of members, and restrict rights of foreign members. Distance=
distance from Venice in Km. Guild members = number of registered members as reported in the "Istituzioni
Cooperative" data. Trade guild =1 if the guild is not involved in manufacturing.

Table 3. Inventors' origin and alternative patent data
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Patents
Local

Patents
Local

Patents
Foreigners

Patents
Foreigners

Patents
Mandich

Patents
Mandich

Strong internal regulation

-0.960***
(0.098)

-1.098**
(0.429)

-0.029**
(0.012)

-0.034*
(0.020)

-1.372***
(0.317)

-1.266**
(0.616)

log(Distance)

0.218***
(0.025)

Dependent Variable

0.006***
(0.001)

0.168***
(0.037)

City Effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Observations

340

340

340

340

340

340

NOTES: Poisson estimation with robust standard errors. * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent and ***
significant at 1 percent. All regressions include a dummy for Trade guilds. Strong internal regulation =1 if guild has internal
rules which restrict competition, grant privileges to sons of members, and restrict rights of foreign members. Distance=
distance from Venice in Km. Patents local= patents granted to Italian inventors. Patents foreigners= patents granted to nonItalian inventors. Columns 1-4 exploit patent data from Berveglieri (1995, 1999) columns 5-6 exploit patent data from
Mandich (1936).

Table 4. Religious confraternities and guild internal strength
Dependent Variable
Estimation

Religious confraternity

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Strong guild
OLS

Patents
OLS

Patents
2SLS

Patents
2SLS

-1.958**
(0.861)

-4.183*
(2.720)

-4.387**
(2.191)

Yes
340

Yes
340

Yes
340

7.85

13.21

Religious
confraternity

Probit
regression

0.150***
(0.045)

Strong internal regulation

City Effects
Observations
First stage F-test

Instrument

Yes
340

NOTES: OLS estimation with robust standard errors. * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5
percent and *** significant at 1 percent. All regressions include a dummy for Trade guilds. Religious
confraternity =1 if guild is linked to a religious institution. Strong internal regulation =1 if guild has
internal rules which restrict competition, grant privileges to sons of members, and restrict rights of
foreign members. In column 4 IV is predicted value from probit regression as in Wooldrige (2002).

Table 5. Noble families and patenting
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Patents

Patents

Patents

Patents

Strong internal regulation

-1.123***
(0.121)

-1.199***
(0.124)

-1.280***
(0.128)

-1.111***
(0.116)

log(Distance)

0.299***
(0.034)

0.318***
(0.020)

0.255**
(0.115)

0.393***
(0.061)

log(Noble Families)

0.092***
(0.031)

0.470***
(0.094)

0.495***
(0.097)

0.639***
(0.219)

log(Population1500)

0.102
(0.126)

-0.066
(0.070)

0.001
(0.139)

-0.353
(0.295)

-1.595***

-1.700***

-2.168***

(0.361)

(0.375)

(0.822)

Dependent Variable

Politically Connected
Families

log(Books)

0.146
(0.102)

City Effects
Drop Venice

No
No

No
No

No
Yes

No
No

Observations

334

334

173

334

NOTES: Poisson estimation with robust standard errors. * significant at 10 percent, **
significant at 5 percent and *** significant at 1 percent. All regressions include a
dummy for Trade guilds. Strong internal regulation =1 if guild has internal rules which
restrict competition, grant privileges to sons of members, and restrict rights of foreign
members. Distance= distance from Venice in Km. Noble families = number of noble
families in the city as registered by Schroeder (1830). Population= inhabitants in 1500
as estimated by Malanima (1998). Politically connected families=1 if there is at least
one family in the city which belongs to the Great Council or is linked through marriages
to a family in the Great Council. Books= number of printed books in the city in 1500,
information from "Incunabula Short Title Catalogue".

5

10

15

population
20 25 30

35

40

45

Figure A1. Population growth in Vicenza and Padua

1300

1500

1400

1600

year
Synthetic Vicenza

5

10

15

population
20 25 30

35

40

45

Vicenza

1300

1400

1500
year

Padua

Synthetic Padua

1600

Table A1. Patents by technology sector
1474-1550
Mills
cereals
metals
textiles
wood saws
multiple usage

42
6
9
6
22

Fabrics
Paint
Bread and food
Pottery and Porcelain Vases
Agricultural machines
Drainage, mud removal
Hydraulic pumps
Armour and weapons
Arsenal
Mining
Perpetual Motion
Miscellaneous

8
4
1
1
4
20
11
7
3
3
3
19

Total

169

Source: Berveglieri (1995)

Table A2. Robustness I

Dependent Variable

Strong internal regulation

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Patents

Patents

Patents
1474-1600

Patents

Patents

Patents

-1.010***
(0.098)

-0.948**
(0.431)

-0.728**
(0.318)

-0.837**
(0.359)

Placebo

log(Distance)

-1.307***
(0.486)
0.282
(0.394)

0.259***
(0.068)

log (Population1500)

-0.013
(0.476)

log (Population1400)

0.176
(0.769)

log(Population 1300)

-0.054
(0.383)

Apprenticeship

0.120
(0.307)

log(Age)

0.047
(0.164)

Mills

2.044***
(0.325)

City effects
Industry effects
Drop guilds with change in
statute

No
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

Observations

340

340

340

340

340

275

NOTES: Poisson estimation with robust standard errors. * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent and ***
significant at 1 percent. Regressions include dummy for Trade guilds. Strong internal regulation =1 if guild has
internal rules which restrict competition, grant privileges to sons of members, and restrict rights of foreign members.
Placebo=1 if the statute includes: (i) a list of manufacturing activities precluded to women, (ii) the name of the guild's
patron saint and (iii) a description of the hierarchical structure of the guild. Distance= distance from Venice in Km.
Population data are from Malanima (1998). Apprenticeship=1 if the "Istituzioni Corporative" database documents an
apprenticeship requirement. Age= age of the guild in 1600. Mills=1 if guild activities involve the use of mills. Industry
effects are dummies for guilds in agricolture, textile and construction. Column (6) drops guilds with changes in
statutes in the period 1474-1550.

Table A3. Robustness II
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Dependent Variable

Patents

Patents

Patents

Patents

Strong internal regulation

-1.211**
(0.482)

-1.189***
(0.451)

Statutory strength index

-1.182***
(0.454)
-0.549**
(0.221)

Only limits entry or competition
City effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

-0.317
(0.466)
Yes

Drop guilds of Venice

Yes

No

No

No

Drop trade guilds

No

Yes

No

No

Observations

179

182

340

340

NOTES: Poisson estimation with robust standard errors. * significant at 10 percent, **
significant at 5 percent and *** significant at 1 percent. Regressions include dummy for
Trade guilds. Strong internal regulation =1 if guild has internal rules which restrict
competition, grant privileges to sons of members, and restrict rights of foreign members.
Statutory strength index =0 if no restrictions, =1 if restrictions only to entry or to
competition, =2 if restrictions both to entry and competition.

Table A4. Sector-level regressions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Patents

Patents

Patents

Patents

all

drop multisector patents

all

drop multisector patents

Average Strong internal regulation

-4.808***
(1.483)

-4.459***
(1.486)

-2.820**
(1.219)

-2.345**
(1.214)

Average log(Distance)

0.757***
(0.271)

0.767***
(0.271)

0.944**
(0.458)

0.954**
(0.452)

log (Number of guilds)

-1.800***
(0.595)

-1.685***
(0.617)

-1.867***
(0.604)

-1.848***
(0.631)

-4.048***
(1.414)

-4.326***
(1.552)

0.344
(1.261)

0.260
(1.237)

51
3.31

51
2.17

Dependent Variable
Sample

Non-manufacturing sector

Average log(City Population)

Observations
Mean depentent variable

51
3.31

51
2.17

NOTES: Poisson estimation with robust standard errors. * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent and
*** significant at 1 percent. Unit of observation is an industry sector. The dependent variable is the number of
patents for the industry sector. In columns 1 and 3 each of the 169 patents from Berveglieri (1995) is assigned to one
sector, a restricted sample of 111 patents is used in columns 2 and 4. Average strong internal regulation = fraction
of guilds in the sector with strong internal statute. Number of guilds = number of guilds active in the industrial
sector.

Table A5. Exogeneity of religious origin
(1)
Dependent Variable

(2)

(3)

Religious
Religious
Religious
confraternity confraternity confraternity

(4)
Religious
confraternity

Age

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

Age 2

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

Apprenticeship

Number of statutory changes 1474-1550

0.046
(0.042)

0.055
(0.042)
0.022
(0.044)

0.041
(0.045)

Textiles

-0.062
(0.045)

Construction

-0.096
(0.120)

Agriculture

0.032
(0.055)

NOTES: OLS regression with robust standard errors. * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent and ***
significant at 1 percent. The dependent variable is filtered with city effects and a dummy for trade guilds.
Apprenticeship=1 if the "Istituzioni Corporative" database documents an apprenticeship requirement. Age= age of the
guild in 1600. Number of statutory changes 1474-1550 = number of times the statute of the guild changed during the
period 1474-1550, as reported in the "Istituzioni Cooperative" data. Textile, Construction and Agriculture are
industry dummies.

Table A6. IV Robustness: old guilds
(1)

(2)

(3)

Dependent Variable
Estimation

Patents
2SLS

Patents
2SLS

Patents
2SLS

Strong internal regulation

-4.746**
(2.279)

-4.848**
(2.309)

-4.788**
(2.379)

Old guild

City Effects
Age quartile dummies
Drop oldest guilds
Observations
First stage F-test

Instrument

1.777
(2.240)
Yes
Yes
No
340

Yes
Yes
No
340

Yes
Yes
Yes
323

15.13

15.43

13.98

Probit
regression

Probit
regression

Probit
regression

NOTES: OLS estimation with robust standard errors. * significant at 10 percent, **
significant at 5 percent and *** significant at 1 percent. All regressions include a dummy
for Trade guilds. Religious confraternity =1 if guild is linked to a religious institution.
Strong internal regulation =1 if guild has internal rules which restrict competition, grant
privileges to sons of members, and restrict rights of foreign members. IV is predicted
value from probit regression as in Wooldrige (2002). Old guilds =1 for guilds above 95th
percentile of age distribution.

Table A7. Alternative distance measures
(1)

(2)

(3)

Patents

Patents

Patents

Strong internal regulation

-1.199***
(0.124)

-1.178***
(0.119)

-1.203***
(0.125)

log(Distance)

0.318***
(0.020)

Dependent Variable

log(Distance) - Roman roads

0.322***
(0.018)

log(Distance) - Modern roads

0.340***
(0.022)

log(Noble Families)

0.470***
(0.094)

0.338***
(0.092)

0.419***
(0.093)

log(Population1500)

-0.066
(0.070)

0.045
(0.071)

0.027
(0.072)

-1.595***
(0.361)

-1.011***
(0.377)

-1.333***
(0.351)

No
334

No
334

No
334

Politically Connected
Families

City Effects
Observations

NOTES: Poisson estimation with robust standard errors. * significant at 10
percent, ** significant at 5 percent and *** significant at 1 percent. All
regressions include a dummy for Trade guilds. Strong internal regulation
=1 if guild has internal rules which restrict competition, grant privileges to
sons of members, and restrict rights of foreign members. Distance=
distance from Venice in Km. Noble families = number of noble families in
the city as registered by Schroeder (1830). Population= inhabitants in 1500
as estimated by Malanima (1998). Politically connected families=1 if there
is at least one family in the city which belongs to the Great Council or is
linked through marriages to a family in the Great Council. Books= number
of printed books in the city in 1500, information from "Incunabula Short
Title Catalogue". Roman road distance from McCormick et al (2013).
Modern road distance from Google Maps.

