                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF THE EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT ON WOMEN’S
                              EARNINGS

                                       David Neumark
                                        Peter Shirley

                                     Working Paper 24114
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24114


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 2017, Revised April 2020




We are grateful to the Laura and John Arnold Foundation and the Smith-Richardson Foundation
for support for this research, through grants to the Economic Self-Sufficiency Policy Research
Institute (ESSPRI) at UCI. We are grateful for helpful comments from anonymous referees, the
editor, and seminar participants at Beijing Normal University, CESifo, Claremont Graduate
University, Colorado University, DIW-Berlin, San Diego State University, SUNY-Buffalo, the
Swedish Institute for Social Research, UCI, Syracuse University, the University of Illinois-
Chicago, and the University of Luxembourg. Any opinions or conclusions expressed are the
authors’ own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Laura and John Arnold Foundation, the
Smith-Richardson Foundation, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by David Neumark and Peter Shirley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Long-Run Effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Women’s Earnings
David Neumark and Peter Shirley
NBER Working Paper No. 24114
December 2017, Revised April 2020
JEL No. H24,H71,J18,J22,J24

                                        ABSTRACT

Using longitudinal data on marriage and children from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics from
1967 to 2016, we characterize women’s exposure to the federal and state Earned Income Tax
Credit (EITC) during their first two decades of adulthood. We use measures of this exposure to
estimate the long-run effects of the EITC on women’s labor market outcomes as mature adults,
specifically at age 40. Our results suggest that exposure to a more generous EITC when women
were unmarried and had older (school-age) children leads to higher earnings in the longer-run,
and we find corresponding evidence suggesting that longer-run exposure of unmarried mothers to
a more generous EITC increases cumulative labor market experience. Additionally, we find
evidence to suggest that exposure to a more generous EITC when women had children while
married leads to lower earnings and hours in the longer-run. For both groups, adjustments in
hours worked along the intensive margin appear to drive these results. These longer-run effects
are consistent with what we would expect from the short-run effects of the EITC on employment
and hours predicted by theory and documented in other work.


David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

Peter Shirley
3151 Social Science Plaza
University of California at Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
pshirley@uci.edu
 I. Introduction

        The extensive literature on the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) in the United States – a program that

substantially subsidizes earnings in low-income families with children – has focused nearly exclusively on

short-term effects. This literature establishes that a more generous EITC increases employment for less-

educated, single mothers (e.g., Meyer, 2010), who are important target recipients of the program. Other

research shows that these work incentives lead to poverty reductions even without taking account of the

income from the credit (Neumark and Wascher, 2011). Both types of effects are important and establish a

strong case for the EITC as a pro-work, anti-poverty policy. 1

        The presence of such short-run labor market effects suggests the EITC could also affect outcomes in

the longer run. Specifically, the positive employment effects for low-skill, single mothers could increase labor

market experience in the longer-run, boosting earnings via greater human capital accumulation; other types of

investment, including more intensive search for better paying jobs with stronger prospects for earnings growth,

could also be spurred by a more generous EITC that has positive short-term effects on employment. Such

long-run increases in earnings would provide an additional policy rationale for the EITC: early expenditures

raise short-term employment, and higher earnings in the long-run increase economic self-sufficiency, likely

coupled with higher income tax receipts and reduced dependence on the EITC or other government assistance,

helping to offset the earlier expenditures.

        The predicted short-run effects of the EITC on married (or higher-earning) women are in the opposite

direction. 2 The evidence ranges from no or modest negative labor supply effects to more sizable labor supply

reductions (e.g., Eissa and Liebman, 1996; Hoffman and Seidman, 2003). Of course, even small short-run

effects could potentially accumulate into larger effects over the longer run.

        We test for evidence of longer-run effects of the EITC, adopting a very long-run perspective. Given




 1
   Some less direct evidence points to beneficial effects of the EITC on infant health (Hoynes et al., 2015) and mothers’
 health (Evans and Garthwaite, 2014), which presumably lead to better longer-run outcomes. For a review of related
 work, see Neumark (2016).
 2
   Standard theory would predict labor supply disincentives in both the flat “plateau” region of the EITC as well as the
 phase-out region where women face larger effective marginal tax rates. These effects are likely stronger in the phase-
 out range (assuming that substitution effects dominate).


                                                            1
that EITC payments depend on number of children (directly) and marital status (indirectly, via the spouse’s

income), we must be able to observe a woman’s childbearing and marital history in order to capture the long-

run effects of the EITC. The need to capture this history, combined with the requirement to capture state

variation in the EITC based on state of residence, dictates our use of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics

(PSID). Specifically, we use longitudinal data on marriage and children from the PSID to characterize

women’s exposure to the federal and state Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) from ages 22-39 – corresponding

roughly to their first two decades of adulthood when women bear children as well as a large share of the period

when they raise children. We then use measures of this exposure to estimate the long-run effects of the EITC

on women’s earnings and related labor market outcomes as mature adults, defined here as age 40.

        We find evidence suggesting that exposure to a more generous EITC when women were unmarried

and had older (school-age) children leads to higher earnings in the longer-run. We also find corresponding

evidence suggesting that longer-run exposure of unmarried mothers to a more generous EITC increases

cumulative labor market experience using a subset of our primary sample for which we can measure this.

Finally, we find evidence to suggest that exposure to a more generous EITC when women had children while

married leads to lower earnings and hours in the longer-run. 3

        We base our analyses on a difference-in-difference-in-differences specification measuring the

presence of children and marital status across ages 22-39 and exposure to the EITC. From this simple

specification, we add two elements: one better captures the labor market incentives of the EITC (age of a

woman’s youngest child); and the second may more cleanly identify policy effects (separate federal and state

maximum credits). We subject this preferred specification to a number of checks meant to account for

endogenous behavior or policy, a placebo test, and a number of robustness/sensitivity analyses. Among these

checks, we include alternative parameterizations of EITC generosity and checking whether the results reflect



3
  The only study of which we are aware that looks beyond contemporaneous effects of the EITC on labor market
outcomes is Dahl et al. (2009), who look at one-, three-, and five-year growth rates in earnings for single women most
strongly affected by the expansion of the federal EITC in the mid-1990s. They do a difference-in-differences analysis
focusing on women affected relatively more by changes in the generosity of the federal EITC in the mid-1990s, and find
evidence of positive effects on earnings growth. Our analysis studies the effects of exposure to the EITC over much
longer periods. Card and Hyslop (2005) study longer-term effects (up to a bit over six years) of a similar program in
Canada (the Self-Sufficiency Project, or SSP). They find that the SSP program in Canada created short-term positive
work incentives, but no long-run impact on wages or welfare participation.


                                                           2
changes in other anti-poverty policies. These analyses show that the findings are robust, and bolster a causal

interpretation of the evidence, although there are some limitations to how rigorously we can establish causal

effects that could be addressed in future research.

II. The EITC: Background, Predictions, and Prior Evidence

The EITC

         The federal government enacted the EITC in the 1970s and expanded its scope and generosity under

major reforms in the mid-1980s and early 1990s. Today, in addition to the generous federal program, around

half of states provide their own supplements. In the federal program, the phase-in credit rate – which

determines the amount a family receives as earnings rise above zero – is based on the number of children, with

subsidy rates of 34, 40, and 45 percent for families with one, two, or three or more children, respectively.

Figure 1 shows the evolution of these credits for a single taxpayer as earned income increases, for tax year

2016 (the last year in our sample). Following the phase-in region over which the subsidy rises, there is a flat

“plateau” region – a range of income over which a family receives the maximum EITC based on number of

children. In 2016, the maximum credits for families with one, two, and three or more children were $3,373,

$5,572, and $6,269, respectively. After the plateau, the credit phases-out at around half the rate at which it

phased-in until a family is no longer eligible. 4 Figure 1 also shows a meager credit for families with no

qualifying children, with a 7.65 percent credit rate and a $506 maximum credit; the phase-out rate for the

childless credit is also 7.65 percent.

         The standard labor supply model predicts that the subsidy to earnings along the phase-in range has

positive extensive-margin effects, because there is a positive substitution effect but no income effect; the

intensive-margin effects are more complicated. Along the phase-in range, the effective wage increases relative

to no EITC, generating a positive intensive-margin effect as long as the substitution effect dominates the

income effect. Along the plateau, there is only an income effect, which generates negative intensive-margin

effects (and could potentially generate negative extensive-margin effects for one earner in a two-earner

household). Along the phase-out range, women face a higher effective marginal tax rate, which adds an


4
  For jointly-filing married taxpayers, the phase-in rate, phase-out rate, and maximum credits are the same but the plateau
region lasts for an additional $5,550 in earned income.


                                                             3
additional intensive-margin disincentive to work from the substitution effect (assuming it dominates). These

predicted effects are static or short-run effects, which inform most empirical work on the EITC.

         When estimating the short-run effects of the EITC in empirical work, researchers typically use a single

parameter to capture EITC generosity; the two most common parameters used in the literature are the phase-in

rate and the maximum credit. A higher phase-in rate generates unambiguous positive extensive-margin work

incentives for those least likely to be working absent the EITC, which is why most work on the employment

effects of the EITC focuses on single mothers. Of course, the maximum credit is closely related to the phase-in

rate, because there are limits to how high the EITC is likely to extend into the income distribution before

reaching the plateau and then phasing out. The phase-out rate and maximum credit are similarly related. In

principle, one could have a high phase-in rate but a low maximum credit, which is a possible argument for

preferring to focus on the maximum credit. As the major federal EITC expansions of the 1980s and 1990s

increased both the phase-in rate and maximum credit simultaneously, using a single parameter is a

parsimonious way of capturing EITC generosity. Neumark and Wascher (2011) use the phase-in rate. Grogger

(2003) uses the maximum credit instead, but notes that the results are very similar to using the phase-in rate;

Leigh (2010) also use the maximum credit. We follow the more common approach in the literature and use the

maximum credit, although we show that the results are insensitive to using the two-child phase-in rate

instead. 5,6

Potential Long-Run Effects

         Our focus, in contrast to most prior work, is on the potential long-run effects of the EITC, which could

arise from the cumulative impact of short-run effects. Specifically, the positive employment effects for low-

skill, single mothers could lead to greater labor market experience in the longer-run, boosting earnings via

greater human capital accumulation. Other types of investment, including more intensive search for better

paying jobs with stronger prospects for earnings growth, could also be spurred by a more generous EITC that


5
  Some studies of the EITC study a single event, and hence do not have to parameterize the EITC (e.g., Eissa and
Liebman, 1996; Cancian and Levinson, 2005). Others (e.g., Eissa and Hoynes, 2004) try to parameterize the tax effects of
the EITC more fully.
6
  The robustness to using the two-child phase-in rate is shown in Appendix Table B5. We also show that our results are
not sensitive to using the one-child or three-child maximum credits rather than the two-child maximum credit (Appendix
Tables B6 and B7). As the three maximum credits are closely related over time, this robustness is not surprising. Most of
the robustness analyses we discuss use Table 5 as a baseline, which we discuss below.


                                                            4
has positive short-term effects on employment. It is also possible that persistently higher employment from

long-run exposure to a more generous EITC generates a negative wealth effect on labor supply eventually,

although we strongly suspect that this channel is not relevant for the population affected by the EITC.

Conversely, for women exposed to a more generous EITC when married, the negative predicted labor supply

effects (especially intensive-margin effects) could accumulate into adverse longer-run effects.

Estimating Short-Run Effects of the EITC

           To motivate our strategy for estimating longer-run effects, it is instructive to first consider the simpler

problem of estimating the effect of the EITC on contemporaneous outcomes. We review some of that evidence

very briefly, and then explain our approach in the next section and how it builds on the short-run literature.

           The short-run literature establishes that – as predicted – a more generous EITC increases employment

for less-educated, single mothers, who are important target recipients of the program. (Here, we review two

key studies, which we discuss in more detail, and replicate using our data set, in Appendix B.) Eissa and

Liebman (1996) study federal EITC changes in 1986, which increased EITC phase-in rates, although not

sharply. 7 They study only unmarried women, and report several difference-in-differences (DD) estimators

using treatment groups defined based on having children and, in some cases, lower education, and using

control groups of either women without children or women with children but higher education. They find

statistically significant evidence that relative employment rates of affected women increased, for a number of

different treatment and control groups. Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) focus on the much larger changes in the

EITC in the mid-1990s. They estimate year-by-year differences in the employment rate of women with and

without children, controlling for other characteristics, also considering only unmarried women. They find clear

evidence that the employment shortfall for women with children prior to the policy change shrinks

considerably beginning with the changes in the EITC.

           The predicted short-run effects of the EITC on married (or higher-earning) women are in the opposite

direction, and mainly regard intensive-margin effects. Some work finds modest negative labor supply effects

(e.g., Eissa and Hoynes, 2004) or no effect at all (Eissa and Liebman, 1996). In contrast, Hoffman and



7
    There were also increases in the maximum credit, and reductions in the phase-out rate.


                                                              5
Seidman (2003) suggest that there are sizable disemployment effects for married women in the phase-out

range and some decrease in hours for married women and married men. Additionally, Jones (2013) finds

evidence of hours reductions among those near the budget constraint kink where the phase-out rate sets in

(where the implicit marginal tax rate from the EITC increases).

III. Empirical Approach to Estimating Long-Run Effects of the EITC

Empirical Framework for Estimating Short-Run Effects

         Our approach parallels the analysis of short-term employment effects in other papers (e.g., Eissa and

Liebman, 1996; Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001). We explain this approach in some detail, to show how we

build on these past studies in an intuitive fashion to develop our longer-run estimation strategy.

         Define Yijt as log earnings (one of the outcomes we consider) for person i in state j at period t, 8 Kijt as

an indicator for whether a woman has children, and Dj and Dt as state and year fixed effects. Our policy

parameter, CRjt, is the EITC maximum credit for state j in period t. We treat the maximum credit for childless

women as effectively zero. The specification ignores variation across number of children, conditioning only on

whether a woman has any children and using the two-child maximum credit; this ensures that the policy

parameter is exogenous to the number of children and exploits the single largest source of variation in EITC

generosity (children vs. no children). 9 Finally, in the simplest approach, the sample is restricted to only low-

skilled unmarried women to avoid the issues of eligibility for high-skilled women and the potentially

differential effects across marital status. 10 Thus, equation (1) below is a difference-in-difference-in-differences


8
  We consider other outcomes as well (cumulative employment, employment, log hourly wages, annual hours, and
conditional annual hours).
9
  Variation in the maximum credit based on number of children cannot be readily incorporated. Making the EITC
variation dependent on the number of children confounds the two separate effects of policy variation and childbearing.
Another way to put this is that we need to include the controls for kids in the specification to capture the effects of kids on
labor supply, earnings, etc., independent of the EITC. If we leave in the kids control (K) but define CR as the maximum
credit based on number of children, rather than the maximum two-child credit, then we can get extreme multicollinearity
between the variables involving K and the variables involved K∙CR, because for the most part the maximum credit based
on number of children is a multiple of the number of children. (To see this in the simple case of equation (1), if CR = a
constant c for women with children and zero for women without children, then K and CR∙K are perfectly collinear; the
same would be true if, for example, K represented dummy variables for different numbers of kids and CR took on a
different value for each K.) This same issue carries over to our specification estimating effects of long-run exposure to the
EITC; making the EITC variation dependent on the number of children again confounds the two separate effects of policy
variation and childbearing history, and if we tie the maximum credit to the number of children there is extreme
multicollinearity between the control variables involving number of children and the treatment variation that involves
both number of children and the maximum EITC credit.
10
   We relax these restrictions later, but for ease of exposition we start simply and gradually add complexity.




                                                              6
(DDD) specification for estimating the effect of the EITC on Y:

     (1) Yijt = α + βCRjt + γKijt + δCRjt∙Kijt + Djθ + Dtλ + εijt . 11

         In equation (1), δ captures the effect of the EITC on Y for low-skilled, unmarried women with

children. K and CR serve as controls, with γ capturing the effect of children independent of the EITC, and β

capturing shocks or other unobservables that vary by state and year that are correlated with variation in both

the EITC and Y, for all women including those not affected by the EITC. A more flexible way to capture the

latter variation is to include a full set of interactions between the state and year dummy variables Dj and Dt, but

simply including CRjt is a more parsimonious version of this, as CRjt will capture the variation in shocks or

unobservables across states and years that are correlated with the relevant policy variation – the most

important factor that could otherwise lead to bias in the estimate of δ. 12,13

         We cannot distinguish between a true effect of the EITC on women with children and unmeasured

shocks that vary by state and year and children. The identifying assumption is that the shocks are the same for

women with or without children. Thus, the estimate of δ in equation (1) is typically interpreted as a DDD

estimator – identified from the difference between the change in employment associated with a more generous

EITC for women with children, and for women without children (the difference between two DD estimators).

         We can expand equation (1) to introduce married women, allowing separate effects for married (M)

and unmarried (U) women. The expanded equation embeds two DDD estimators – one for unmarried women,

and one for married women:

     (2) Yijt = α + βUCRjt∙Uijt + γUKijt∙Uijt + δUCRjt∙Kijt∙Uijt

                 + βMCRjt∙Mijt + γMKijt∙Mijt + δMCRjt∙Kijt∙Mijt + ηMijt + Djθ + Dtλ + εijt . 14



11
   Note that a standard generalized DDD specification would also include Kijt∙Dj and Kijt∙Dt. However, we omit these here
because, for reasons explained in the context of our model for estimating the long-run effects of exposure to the EITC, the
corresponding terms are not included (see footnote 19).
12
   This greater parsimony becomes valuable given that the PSID does not yield a large sample with long-term longitudinal
data.
13
   Strictly speaking, δ captures the effect of the EITC only if there is no EITC for childless women (i.e., women without
qualifying children). We follow this strategy here, assuming that β captures only common shocks, and that δ captures the
effect of the EITC.
14
   Note that in equation (2) we introduce separate interactions with U and M, and the associated coefficients have the
corresponding superscripts. We would obtain the same model fit by retaining the CR and K variables as in equation (1)
and introducing interactions only with U (or only with M). But specifying the model this way lets us most easily “read
off” the effects for unmarried and married women directly from the regression estimates.


                                                              7
         The prior discussion of parameters, identification, etc., carries over fully to equation (2), but now in

reference to βU and δU for unmarried women, and βM and δM for married women.

Adapting the Analysis to Estimate Long-Run Effects of the EITC

         We expand equation (2) in a straightforward manner to estimate the long-run effects of the EITC.

Instead of using a value at a particular point in time for CR or indicator variables for K, U, and M, we measure

these variables at each age over a period of time (ages 22-39). Then, we calculate the interactions of these

values at each age and use as our regressors the averages of these interactions over ages 22-39, with outcomes

for each woman at age 40 as regressands. For example, consider the term δUCRjt∙Kijt∙Uijt from equation (2).

Extending this term to the long run for a woman aged 40 in period t yields:

           𝑈𝑈        t-1
     (3) 𝛿𝛿22−39 ·{ ∑a=t-18 (CRja ·Kija ·Uija )/18} .

         For a woman who never has children while unmarried from 22-39, this term will equal zero. A woman

who is always unmarried with children will have this term collapse to the average EITC she faced from ages

22-39. We can construct similar averages for the other terms corresponding to equation (2). We compute

averages of the interactions, rather than interactions of averages, to more accurately capture the EITC to which

a woman was exposed when she was married or unmarried, had children, etc. For example, imagine two

women who each spend nine years married from ages 22-39; however, one woman spends the first nine years

married while the other spends the second nine years married. Further, imagine these women always live in the

same state as one another and reach age 40 in the same year, meaning their EITC exposure, conditional on

children and marital status, would be the same. Using the interactions of averages would give these women the

same value for the measure in equation (3), whereas the average of interactions would be able to capture

variation in exposure across these two women, assuming any EITC policy change over these 18 years. 15




15
  One implication of this this parameterization is that we are unable to differentiate between a more-generous EITC for
relatively fewer years versus a less-generous EITC over a longer period of time. However, we do not think this is
empirically very important, because there are few “spikes” in the EITC, but rather a gradual evolution to a more generous
EITC (see Figures 2 and 3). Arguably the federal increases in the early 1990s could expose a woman in her late 30s to a
much more generous EITC than when she was younger, for a short period. However, we now show in a few different
ways discussed later in the paper that we get similar (and sometimes stronger) results when we identify the effects of the
EITC from state variation. Moreover, we also use specifications distinguishing the effects of exposure with young vs.
older children, adding more richness to the marital and childbearing histories.




                                                            8
         We then substitute the corresponding expressions into equation (2) to estimate the effects of these

longer-run exposure variables on outcomes at age 40. 16 We also include as controls the corresponding

variables for marital status, children, EITC, etc., at age 40. 17 We do this to ensure we do not confound the

effects of past marriage, childbearing, and the EITC with effects of contemporaneous variables.18

         Following this strategy, our estimating equation takes the form:

                         a=t-18 (CRja ·Uija )/18}+ γ { ∑a=t-18 (Kija ·Uija )/18}+ δ { ∑a=t-18 (CRja ·Kija ·Uija )/18}
     (4) Yijt = α + βU{ ∑t-1                        U   t-1                        U   t-1



                        a=t-18 (CRja ·Mija )/18}+ γ { ∑a=t-18 (Kija ·Mija )/18}+ δ { ∑a=t-18 (CRja ·Kija ·Mija )/18}
                 + βM{ ∑t-1                        M   t-1                        M   t-1



                 + η{ ∑t-1
                       a=t-18 Mija /18}+ β
                                           U,40
                                               CRijt∙Uijt + γU,40Kijt∙Uijt + δU,40CRijt∙Kijt∙Uijt

                 + βM,40CRijt∙Mijt + γM, 40Kijt∙Mijt + δM,40CRijt∙Kijt∙Mijt + η40Mijt +Djθ + Dtλ + εijt .

         Equation (4) looks complicated, but the parallel to equation (2) is clear, and we have retained the same

notation for the key parameters, and highlighted in boldface the triple-interaction terms that identify the key

coefficients – δU and δM. These now have a different interpretation, of course, as the effects on outcomes at age

40 of the cumulative history of EITC, kids, and marital status interactions. The state fixed effects are now

fixed effects for the state the woman is observed living in at age 40, and the year fixed effects are now cohort

effects, shared across all women who are age 40 in a particular year.

         In light of this more complex, long-run specification, it is useful to consider how we identify the

effects of the EITC. Paralleling our earlier discussion of δU and δM in reference to equation (2), we focus on δU

and δM in equation (4) as the triple-difference estimators. In contrast to equation (2), we now measure marital

status as a proportion of years from zero to one rather than an indicator variable for marital status at a

particular point in time, and similarly for K. To explain what δU and δM capture, consider δU, for unmarried

women; the discussion will carry over completely to δM. The term multiplying γU in equation (4),

   t-1
{ ∑a=t-18 (Kija ·Uija )/18}, captures the average number of years the woman was unmarried with children, and

                           t-1
the term multiplying βU, {∑a=t-18 (CRja ·Uija )/18}, captures the joint history of the EITC and marital status.




16
   We vary this age in analyses reported below.
17
   We show that the results are robust to controlling for completed fertility in Appendix Table B8.
18
   In this case, the marital status and children variables are dummy variables. These age-40 control variables are not
included in our analysis of cumulative experience (discussed below), as we measure that outcome over ages 22-39.


                                                               9
Thus, the term multiplying δU, { ∑t-1
                                  a=t-18 (CRja ·Kija ·Uija )/18}, captures the independent variation in the history


of exposure to the EITC for unmarried women with children. As a result, δU can be interpreted in the same

way as in equation (2) – but in a longer-run context. That is, it captures the relative effect of the history of

exposure to the EITC for unmarried women with children, relative to unmarried women without children.

Correspondingly, δM in equation (4) captures the relative effect of the history of exposure to the EITC for

married women with children, relative to married women without children. 19

         To interpret the coefficient magnitudes, consider, for example, the unmarried women. The

independent variation in the variable corresponding to δU, given the inclusion of the control

  t-1
{∑a=t-18 (Kija ·Uija )/18}, comes from the variation in CR. We measure the maximum credit in $1,000 units

(2016 dollars, based on the CPI-U). Thus, a one-unit increase in the variable corresponding to δU,

{ ∑t-1
   a=t-18 (CRja ·Kija ·Uija )/18}, corresponds to $1,000 real increase in the maximum credit over the entire age


range considered, for a woman who is unmarried and has children over that entire age range. That is a sizable

but within-sample policy change to consider. For example, the maximum credit with two children in 1996 was

$3,556 ($5,440 in 2016 dollars), compared to a nominal maximum credit of $550 ($1,204 in 2016 dollars) a

decade earlier, or a real increase of more than $4,000. However, because this implied effect is for a woman

who is unmarried and has children over the entire age range we use (22-39), we scale the reported coefficients

to reflect the effect of a $1,000 one-year increase in the maximum credit when unmarried and with children; in

practice this requires multiplying the estimate of the appropriate δ by 18. 20

         We also discussed, in reference to equation (1), how to interpret the estimates of β – which we now




19
   One other identification issue to clarify is that we do not fully saturate the model so as to estimate the effects of the
EITC only from state variation. If we look back to the short-run model – equation (1) – the standard DDD specification
would also include interactions between K and the state dummy variables and K and the year dummy variables. The latter
would fully absorb the federal variation in the EITC. However, in the models we estimate we have summed terms that
capture the history of the EITC, marriage, and childbearing, and it is impossible to define and include in the model all the
state-year interactions with all the values that the marriage and childbearing variables take on in the sample. The
implication is that federal EITC variation continues to play a role in identifying the long-term effects of the EITC that we
study. Of course, the key papers in the EITC literature – establishing positive employment effects of low-skilled mothers
– also use federal variation (Eissa and Liebman, 1996; and Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001) – as does the longer-term
analysis in Dahl et al. (2009). However, we present other analyses below that isolate the effects of state EITC variation
and find qualitatively similar and if anything stronger effects.
20
   Note that this does not change the precision of the estimate in any way, since it is a linear transformation; we are simply
scaling the effects for interpretation.


                                                             10
extend to the coefficients βU and βM in equations (2) and (4). The analogous interpretation to that of equations

(1) or (2) is that the terms multiplying βU and βM capture variation in the marital history and the EITC, and the

coefficients of these variables capture shocks correlated with the EITC and marital status. Hence, as in the

short-run implementation, we focus on the estimates of δU and δM .

        The spirit of our approach is to apply the quasi-experimental framework commonly used for policy

evaluation – including for short-run effects of the EITC – to estimate the long-run effects of the EITC. In

principle, one could estimate a structural life cycle model and then simulate the long-run effects of alternative

policies. We have adopted a non-structural approach in this paper because a structural model would have to

embody labor supply as well as marriage and fertility decisions, and we are skeptical of the ability to

accurately model all these decisions. Moreover, we think the parallels between our approach and existing

short-run analyses of the effects of the EITC facilitates comparison between the shorter-term and longer-term

results. Furthermore, the intuition is relatively straightforward, building naturally on the types of differencing

estimators based on marital status and children used in, for example, Eissa and Liebman (1996) and Eissa and

Hoynes (2004), although adapted to our longer-term framework. Nonetheless, the usual potential limitations of

reduced-form, quasi-experimental approaches apply, and ultimately we think both types of evidence could

provide valuable and complementary information.

IV. Data

PSID Data

        Our data come from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), using data through the 2017 survey

(covering 2016). We need to observe long longitudinal records on women, because their “exposure” to the

EITC, as explained in Section III, depends on their marital and childbearing history, as well as their (state)

residential history. 21 We also use the longitudinal data to construct cumulative measures of years of

experience. The PSID began in 1968 with a nationally representative sample of 18,000 individuals belonging

to 5,000 families. Since 1968, the PSID has followed these individuals and their descendants, interviewing



21
  Combining SIPP panels, for example, can provide data over a long period but would not provide long-term marital,
childbearing, or residential histories.




                                                         11
them on an annual basis (biennial since 1997), and collecting detailed economic and demographic information,

including employment, wages, earnings, hours, education, marriage, and fertility. This rich information allows

us to create full year-by-year histories for women in the PSID. 22

         We limit the sample to women observed at age 40 for whom we also observe their whole history

beginning at age 22. To assign histories by age for each woman, we take the year that the woman is observed

at age 40, assign age 39 to the data one year prior, age 38 to the data two years prior, and so on. 23 We assign

full 19-year histories for all the necessary variables: marital status, number of children, age of children, and

employment. 24,25 We begin our analysis at age 22 to avoid capturing women when they were more likely to

still be in school or living with their parents, when EITC incentives may be much weaker. We arrived at using

age 40 to estimate long-run effects as a balance between using a later age when women have completed the

vast majority of their childbearing and the sample size shrinkage from increasing this age owing to the length

of the histories we must observe. 26

         A particular strength of the PSID is that, because it spans 1967 to the present day, we are able to

observe women exposed to a wide range of EITC variation. For example, the earliest cohort of women in our

sample, who are 22 years old in 1967, reach age 40 in 1985. Hence, these women only receive the EITC from

1975 to 1984 when the credit was not very generous; their overall exposure was rather small. On the other

hand, the latest cohort in our sample (age 22 in 1998 and age 40 in 2016) are only exposed to the EITC after

the large expansion in the 1990s. These women always face a strong federal EITC alongside significant state-

level variation. And the intermediate cohorts experience a broad range of EITCs between these extremes.

         We assign marital status based on the Marriage History File. This file contains a series of questions


22
   To deal with the biennial nature of the data from the 1997 survey onwards, we use the previous year’s state and
outcome data to fill in the “missing” year. For information on children and marital status, this is not necessary given how
we create those variables (described below).
23
   These ages may not align perfectly with reported age, due to differences in the timing of PSID interviews. However,
there is no other clear way to use the data, and the errors introduced should be inconsequential for our longer-run
measures of EITC exposure.
24
   The question about earnings refers to the past year. (For example, the data in the PSID 1968 refer to calendar year
1967.) To align age with earnings, we assign women’s ages as the age they report in a year minus one. We follow the
same algorithm in filling in non-survey years once the PSID data become biennial.
25
   Because we need to observe women for 19 years, we do not use the Immigrant Sample added in 1997/1999, as only a
handful of women would meet our age criteria (exactly 22 in the 1997 sample).
26
   We show later that our results are robust across nearby ages.




                                                            12
about the timing and status of the respondents’ first/only and most recent marriages. Using this information,

we assign marital status by age for all women. This gives us a complete marital history for all women who

have not been married more than twice. To assign number of children by age, we use birth history information.

Women report birth timing of up to five children, allowing us to assign a detailed child history over a woman’s

primary childbearing years. 27 If a woman gains a child in a manner other than childbirth, primarily via

marriage or adoption, then our measure will miss them; this is relevant to the EITC because stepchildren, for

example, could still affect EITC benefits. 28 To assign whether the woman has younger/older children

conditional on having children, we use the age of the youngest child assigned to the woman.

         Earnings and hours data are available for heads of household and wives. For women who fit either of

these relationship categories, we assign earnings and hours; we convert earnings into 2016 dollars. We count a

woman as employed if she had positive earnings in the past year.

         Additionally, we need information on two measures not tied to a 19-year history: race and education.

Due to several changes in the PSID’s coding of race over the survey’s history, only an indicator representing

whether a woman identifies as black or not can be coded consistently across time. 29 We assign educational

attainment based on the woman’s education level at age 40. Our primary sample restricts our analysis to low-

educated women, defined as having at most a high school degree.

         Finally, our analysis focuses on the cumulative effects of exposure to a more generous EITC on labor

market outcomes at age 40. We also want to examine evidence on the mechanism underlying these cumulative

effects, and the most obvious mechanism – especially in light of the evidence on short-run labor supply effects

of the EITC – is the accumulation of labor market experience during the years of exposure. The data with

which to measure cumulative experience pose some limitations. Although the first year of the PSID is 1967,



27
   A woman’s birth history includes her number of live births and the birth year and month for up to five children. We
therefore exclude a very small number of women (21 from our low-ed sample, 13 from our high-ed sample) who have
more than five live births, but otherwise fit our sample criteria, because we cannot assign ages to each child. We are
confident this number is small enough that it does not materially affect our findings. Note also that these observations are
omitted, rather than including them with a mismeasured childbearing history.
28
   We constructed an alternative measure using all members of the family unit and their relations to the head, but these
measures turn out to be very highly correlated, and the results using this alternative measure were qualitatively similar.
Also, as eligibility requirements for the EITC are based on actual care of the child, we are implicitly assuming that all
women in our sample care for each of their birth children more than half the year.
29
   For example, we cannot consistently code Hispanic ethnicity.


                                                             13
1978 is the first year in which employment status for all individuals of working age (16 years and older) is

captured. Because we need the longest possible panel to pin down long-term effects of the EITC, we use the

full panel, defining employment status at each age based on whether there are positive earnings, keeping in

mind that this measure is only available for heads of household and spouses. As a result, our cumulative

experience measures will not capture, for example, employment for a woman who lives with her parents at age

22, implying smaller sample sizes when estimating cumulative experience effects. In part, this motivates our

selection of age 22 (as opposed to, say, 18) as our first year of exposure, ensuring women have a reasonable

opportunity to establish their own households, either alone or with a partner. Of course, this concern only

affects our cumulative experience measures, as our outcomes measured at age 40 only require the woman to be

a head or spouse at age 40.

         Table 1 shows how the sample restrictions we impose based on the need for long-term longitudinal

data restrict the number of available observations. Offspring of original sample members (and some additional

families) are added over time, and the last available survey is in 2017. Thus, only a subset of cohorts can be

observed as young as 22 and as old as 40, have low education, and have a full history of state of residence,30

which is why the available observations drop sharply from row A to row E. 31 The seven rows after row E

document the relatively small number of observations we lose because of other data requirements (e.g., having

a full marital history). Our final low-education primary sample includes 1,505 women.

Policy Variation

         Information on the EITC comes from a database of historical parameters maintained by the Tax Policy

Center. 32 Figure 2 shows the federal EITC maximum credit depending on number of children. As noted earlier,

the zero-child maximum credit is miniscule. The one-, two-, and three-child maximum credits differ, but there

is little independent variation (and in earlier years no independent variation), which is why we simply use one



30
   State of residence is the only variable where we fill in missing data across time. If a woman is missing state of
residence in a particular year, but is observed in the previous and proceeding year living in the same state, we fill in the
missing year with that state.
31
   To be sure, there is attrition in the PSID, as documented, for example, in Lemay (2009). This is reflected in the drop in
the number of observations between rows D and E of Table 1.
32
   See http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/sites/default/files/legacy/taxfacts/content/PDF/historical_eitc_parameters.pdf
(viewed August 16, 2018).




                                                             14
measure – the two-child maximum credit; the simple correlation between the federal one-child and two-

children maximum credits from 1967 to 2016 is 0.97. Figure 3 depicts information on supplemental state

EITCs, which calculate their supplements as a fixed percentage of the family’s federal credit. 33,34 The squares

show the number of states with such supplements, rising from zero in 1983 to 25 states (including the District

of Columbia) by 2016. We also show the average, minimum, and maximum state supplement rates over time.

The average state supplement featured rather dramatic growth from the mid-1980s to early 1990s. However, as

the EITC expanded in the mid-1990s, the credit settled down to an average of about a 20 percent supplement

to the federal EITC. This has remained consistent since around 2000, although the number of states offering

supplements to the federal credit increased sharply. 35

V. Results

Descriptive Statistics

         Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for our core PSID analysis sample of less-educated women. The

first column shows averages across ages 22-39, and the second column at age 40 – the age at which we

measure long-run outcomes. The second, third, and fourth rows report descriptive statistics on the policy

variation. The next rows report on the childbearing and marriage histories, as well as the interactions between

the two. Unsurprisingly, the women in our sample spend more years married than unmarried and tend to spend

more years married with children than unmarried with children. Married women spend similar amounts of time

with young vs. older children, whereas unmarried women spend more years with older children, presumably

because they have children earlier on average. Further, by age 40, women are unlikely to still have young

children, regardless of marital status. The share black is quite high, reflecting oversampling of low-income

families in the PSID. For most of our analyses, we do not weight our estimates, because the variation provided

by oversampling of a population that is underrepresented in the target population increases variation in the


33
   While we classify the EITC based on state of residence, technically the EITC may depend on the state of work and not
just the state of residence if a person commutes across a state border and the bordering states do not have a tax reciprocity
agreement.
34
   Wisconsin, the lone exception, also uses fixed percentages of the federal EITC, but these rates vary by number of
children.
35
   Appendix Figures B1 and B2 show the information corresponding to Figures 2 and 3, but for phase-in rates. Comparing
the figures, it is clear that these alternative policy measures are highly correlated, which explains why our results are
robust to alternative parameterizations of the EITC.




                                                             15
independent variables, which can increase precision of the estimates; 36 but we show that the results are not

sensitive to weighting. Finally, the last rows report descriptive statistics for the outcomes measured at age 40.

The low-ed women in our primary sample accumulate, on average, around 13 years of experience over ages

22-39. Recall that we define a year of experience as reporting positive earnings for that year. Thus, these

women have positive earnings in around 72 percent of years and that number is marginally higher at age 40,

when 78 percent of our sample has positive earnings.

Results from Simple Specification 37

         Table 3 presents estimates from the regression models used in the simplest version of our specification

for estimating the effects of long-run exposure to the EITC – equation (4). The table reports the estimates and

standard errors of the two coefficients of interest in this specification – δU and δM – the coefficients on the

averages of the triple interactions between the EITC maximum credit and the kids and marital status variables

from ages 22-39. 38 We show results for employment, log hourly wages (conditional on employment), log

earnings (conditional on employment), annual hours, and annual hours conditional on employment – all at age

40. We focus on the results for earnings and hours – which we regard as the key outcomes. Recall that the

coefficients in Panel A are scaled to be interpreted as effects of a one-year, $1,000 (in 2016 dollars) increase in

the maximum EITC. 39

         As shown in the first row of column (3), the estimated effect of the EITC on earnings (conditional on


36
   This follows from the expression for the variance of OLS regression estimates. The issue receives a fuller treatment in
Solon et al. (2015), who note that if the oversampling or undersampling is exogenous with respect to the dependent
variable, then a correctly specified model should be consistently estimated with or without weighting, but the unweighted
estimates can be more precise. Nonetheless, they advocate reporting both unweighted and weighted estimates, which we
do below. (Solon et al. also point out that if the oversampling is endogenous with respect to the dependent variable, then
weighting by the inverse probability of selection is needed to recover consistent estimates of a regression. In our case, we
are generally studying outcomes for offspring of PSID families, at age 40, so the oversampling – which is based on the
prior generation’s income – seems far less likely to be endogenous.)
37
   We have explored using the PSID data to see how well we replicate the findings of two of the best-known papers
showing that the federal EITC boosted employment of low-skilled women with children (Eissa and Liebman, 1996;
Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001). The PSID provides a far smaller sample than the Current Population Survey (CPS) data
used in these papers (even before we impose the sample restrictions needed for our longer-term analysis). Thus, prior to
trying to answer our more empirically demanding question with the PSID, we would like to know whether we could
replicate the simpler contemporaneous results from the earlier literature. If not, then our analysis might not have a chance
to be very informative. We present and discuss the results in Appendix B. In short, we show that we generally can
replicate the results from these papers with the PSID data.
38
   The full model estimates are available upon request, as are any other estimates we discuss but do not report in the paper
or the appendix.
39
   Later, we also report the implied effects of long-run exposure to a higher maximum EITC – effects that may better
capture the effects of meaningful policy differences.


                                                            16
employment) for women exposed to a more generous EITC when unmarried with children is positive (0.005).

A positive effect is consistent with the short-run positive extensive labor market effects of the EITC for

unmarried women with children translating into higher earnings in the longer run, likely in part through the

accumulation of experience. While positive, the estimated effect is not statistically different from zero. In the

second row, we find a negative estimate for married women exposed to a more generous EITC when they have

children. The estimated absolute magnitude is larger (0.014) and is statistically significant at the 5-percent

level.

         We report the effects on annual hours (without conditioning on employment) in column (4). The

notable result here is the lower hours at age 40 worked by women exposed to a more generous EITC when

they were married with children – a significant hours differential of 7.73 hours. Column (5) also estimates the

effects of long-run exposure to the EITC on annual hours, restricting the sample to women with positive hours

at age 40. Relative to column (4), both estimates become larger and more precise. In particular, the effect of an

additional year of exposure to a $1,000 higher EITC for married women with children yields 9.08 fewer

annual hours (1-percent significance), implying that earnings effect captured in column (3) is driven mainly by

an intensive-margin hours difference at age 40.

         For employment, in column (1) neither of the estimated coefficients reported are statistically

significant, and the sign pattern – unlike for earnings and hours – does not suggest that exposure to a more

generous EITC when unmarried with children is associated with higher employment at age 40, nor that such

exposure when married with children is associated with lower employment at age 40. The negligible

contemporaneous employment effects reinforce the conclusion that the hours effect for married women is

mainly an intensive-margin effect, in line with what the short-run literature finds for married women when a

labor supply effect is detected. The results for wages, reported in column (2), are consistent with the results for

conditional earnings (column (3)) that we previously discussed, although statistically insignificant. Women

exposed to a more generous EITC when unmarried with children tend to have slightly higher wages at age 40.

The estimated effect is for unmarried women is about 0.1 percent per year of exposure, while the estimated

effect is more negative for women exposed to a more generous EITC when they were married with children

(−0.6 percent per year).


                                                        17
Distinguishing Effects by Age of Children

          Next, we refine our specification to more fully capture the incentive effects of the EITC for women

with children, separating the indicator for having children into two separate indicators based on whether the

youngest child is at least six years old (again defined at each age from 22-39). The short-run labor supply

effects of the EITC could differ depending on whether a woman has young children at home. The most

obvious difference we would expect is that the positive extensive-margin effects for unmarried women would

be stronger once children reach school age, because of how much young children increase the reservation

wage. 40 There is an additional rationale for this. The summed terms in equation (4) can take on the same

values for different histories of marriage, childbearing, and the EITC. We average because it is infeasible to

estimate separate effects for all (or a large number of) different histories. But breaking these terms into those

associated with younger vs. older children allows more richness in the histories.

          This difference is straightforward to incorporate into our framework. First, we split the terms

involving K in equation (4) into two separate terms for having older kids only (OK) or having younger kids

(YK). We define the dummy variable YK for each year to equal one if a women has any children age 5 or

younger, and define OK to equal one if all children are age 6 or over; we use superscripts Y and O on the δ

parameters to denote this difference. With this change, each term involving K in equation (4) becomes two

terms. Most importantly, the two triple-difference terms become:

                t-1                                     t-1
      (5) δUY{ ∑a=t-18 (CRja ·YKija ·Uija )/18} + δUO{ ∑a=t-18 (CRja ·OKija ·Uija )/18}

and

                 t-1                                     t-1
      (5’) δMY{ ∑a=t-18 (CRja ·YKija ·Mija )/18} + δMO{ ∑a=t-18 (CRja ·OKija ·Mija )/18} . 41

          The δ coefficients, of which there are now four – δUY, δUO, δMY, and δMO – capture the effects of

exposure to the EITC when women are unmarried or married and have children in a particular age range


40
   There is ample evidence younger children affect labor supply of mothers differently, a small portion of which pertains
directly to the EITC. As examples, Blau and Tekin (2007) shows that child-care subsidies increase women’s employment.
Bainbridge et al. (2003) show this explicitly in relation to single mothers with young children – most closely related to the
EITC. Less directly, Heinrich (2014) reviews evidence on the effects on young children of mothers’ employment,
motivated by increased reliance on the EITC. And Gelbach (2002) shows that availability of public schooling for young
children increased mothers’ labor supply.
41
   More details on the full estimating equation are provided below, after we discuss another extension of our analysis to
identify separate effects of state and federal EITC variation.


                                                             18
(either at least one young child or all school-age).

        The estimates are reported in Table 4. Focusing first on the results for earnings (conditional on

employment), in column (3), the estimates demonstrate the importance of including this distinction. A one-

year, $1,000 increase in the maximum EITC a woman faces is associated with only a 0.1 percent increase in

conditional earnings when she is unmarried with young children, but a 1.4 percent increase in earnings

(significant at the 5-percent level) when she is unmarried and all of her children are school-age. The difference

is less stark for married women, with the same EITC increase associated with a 1.0 or 1.3 percent (significant

at the 10-percent level in the latter case) decline in earnings for women with young or older (only) children,

respectively. In column (4), for annual hours, the negative effect for married women with young children is

quite strongly negative (−15.58 annual hours) and highly significant (1-percent level). The conditional hours

effects in column (5) also indicated negative effects for exposure when married, although in this case stronger

for married women with older children, and a positive (albeit insignificant) effect (5.58) for exposure of

unmarried women with older children. These estimates explain the effects we find on earnings but not on

wages. Namely, exposure to a more generous EITC is associated with more hours worked at age 40 when

unmarried and fewer hours when married. Based on these results, going forward most of our analyses

distinguish the effects of EITC exposure by age of children.

Results from Preferred Specification using State and Federal EITC Variation

        We next define our EITC exposure variables to estimate the separate effects of federal and state policy

variation. One potential critique of the short-run EITC literature is that much of the federal variation in the

EITC came during a very short window in the mid-1990s, making it hard to distinguish the effects of federal

EITC changes in this period from other policy changes in the same period that could have affected women

differently based on marital status of number (and ages) of children, such as welfare reform (e.g., Kleven,

2019). We think this criticism is less relevant to our findings, because we also exploit state EITC variation, as

well as rich variation across women with different childbearing and marital histories. We also benefit from the

panel nature of the PSID itself and its long history, which allows us to follow women’s childbearing and

marital decisions over a significant period before, during, and after this expansion.




                                                        19
        We can explore this question more directly, however. As shown in Figure 3, most state credits were

enacted post-1996, so the effects identified using state credits come from a period with a stable federal EITC.

If we can establish that the effects estimated in Table 4 are as strong or stronger when we focus on the state

variation, then it is more likely that we are identifying a causal effect of the EITC.

        To do this, we expand our specification to distinguish the effects of federal and state EITC variation.

In our estimating equation, each CRjt term in equation (5) now has two versions – CRFedjt and CRStatejt. The

key two terms in boldface from equation (4) now expand to eight terms, reflecting the distinction by age of

kids (already discussed) and by federal and state EITC variation, to become:

(6)      δUYF{ ∑t-1
                a=t-18 (CRFedja ·YKija ·Uija )/18} + δ
                                                       UOF
                                                          { ∑t-1
                                                             a=t-18 (CRFedja ·OKija ·Uija )/18}


       + δMYF{ ∑t-1
                a=t-18 (CRFedja ·YKija ·Mija )/18} + δ
                                                       MOF
                                                          { ∑t-1
                                                             a=t-18 (CRFedja ·OKija ·Mija )/18}


       + δUYS{ ∑t-1
                a=t-18 (CRStateja ·YKija ·Uija )/18} + δ
                                                         UOS
                                                             { ∑t-1
                                                                a=t-18 (CRStateja ·OKija ·Uija )/18}


       + δMYS{ ∑t-1
                a=t-18 (CRStateja ·YKija ·Mija )/18} + δ
                                                         MOS
                                                            { ∑t-1
                                                               a=t-18 (CRStateja ·OKija ·Mija )/18} .
                                                                                                      42



        The results, reported in Table 5, indicate that the effects of state EITC variation tend to be, dollar for

dollar, both larger in magnitude and stronger in terms of statistical significance. This leads us to conclude that

our estimated effects are not driven by federal variation in the EITC, and certainly not by any particular

expansion of the federal credit.

        The estimated coefficients in Panel A measure the effects of a one-year, $1,000 increase in the

appropriate maximum credit. This is useful for comparing the effects of an additional maximum credit amount

coming from one of the two sources (although below we consider different ways to interpret the estimates).

Viewed this way, the estimated coefficients indicate two things. First, the overall story is that, for unmarried

women, effects tend to be more positive when their children are old enough to attend school and, for married

women, having younger children enhances the negative effects of exposure to a more generous EITC. Three of

the unmarried coefficients and five of the married coefficients in Panel A of columns (3), (4), and (5) are

statistically significant (at the 10-percent level or better).


42
  The full estimating equation is provided in Appendix A. The specification corresponding to equations (5) and (5’) and
Table 4 would collapse the state and federal credit terms (CRState and CRFed) to a single credit variable (CR in equations
(5) and (5’)).


                                                           20
         Second, the point estimates of the impacts of the state maximum credits are generally larger and/or in

the direction predicted by theory tying short-run effects of the EITC to longer-run effects. For the estimates for

earnings and hours, this is true in every case. For example, the estimated hours effect of exposure when

unmarried with older children is much larger for the state variation, and significant only for the latter; and the

negative effect on earnings (conditional on employment) of exposure when married with young children is

much larger for the state variation. It may appear inappropriate to directly compare a $1,000 increase in the

federal EITC and a $1,000 increase in the state EITC, as they represent different degrees of policy change.

Looking back to Figures 2 and 3, the federal EITC has expanded from nothing in the earliest years of our

sample to well over $5,000 in 2016; multiple $1,000 increases in the federal maximum credit have occurred

across our sample period. On the other hand, the average state supplement since the mid-1990s has been worth

around $1,000, so one could think about a $1,000 increase in the state supplement as a state implementing an

EITC at an average level of generosity. Within our sample, we have numerous instances of such policy

changes – occurring in about half of states.

         The federal credit coefficients in Table 5 can be interpreted the effects of a federal EITC expansion in

a state without a supplement, whereas the state coefficients capture an expansion of the state maximum credit

holding the federal credit fixed (since states supplement the federal EITC by a fixed percentage). The state

credit can also increase, however, because of a federal expansion. Given this interaction between the state and

federal credits, it is also useful to interpret the implied combined effects in Table 5 in a manner that facilitates

comparisons with the estimates in Tables 3 and 4. To do this, in Panel B we translate our estimates into the

implied effects of a one-year increase of $1,000 in the federal maximum credit coupled with an additional

$200 from the state supplement. This assumes an increase in a state where the supplement is 20 percent of the

federal credit; we chose this level because the average supplement across 1967 to 2016, conditional on one

existing, is 18.6 percent. 43

         As in Tables 3 and 4, we do not find any significant effects in Panel B from exposure to a more

generous EITC on employment or log wages in columns (1) and (2), but we do find effects on earnings and


43
   Visually, one can see this as the ratio between the heights of the two-child state supplement maximum credit (~$1,000
from 1996 onwards) in Figure 3 to the height of the federal two-child EITC (~$5,500 from 1996 onwards) in Figure 2.


                                                           21
hours. Moreover, the effects are larger and more strongly statistically significant. In particular, eight of

estimated coefficients in columns (3), (4), and (5) – for conditional log earnings and our two annual hours

measures – are significant (five at the 1-percent level and all at the 5-percent level). The differences for

unmarried women are most striking. For unmarried women with older (only) children, a one-year increase in

the maximum credit is associated with a 2.2 percent increase in earnings and 15.16 more annual hours worked

(15.65 conditioning on positive annual hours); this positive intensive-margin effect for unmarried women

differs from what the short-run literature usually studies and reports – which is a positive extensive-margin

effect of the EITC. We also find larger earnings and hours effects for married women (negative, as before). 44

         We view these estimates as largely consistent with expectations: theory predicts, and existing evidence

establishes, that the contemporaneous effect of the EITC is to boost employment of women with children who

are unmarried (as they are likely to have lower family income). Additionally, the EITC is more likely to reduce

hours among married women with children (although this evidence in the existing literature is much weaker).

The evidence in Table 5 suggests that these short-run effects are reflected in long-run, cumulative effects on

earnings and hours.

Mechanism

         The estimates to this point suggest that, for unmarried mothers, exposure to a more generous EITC

over ages 22-39 (when kids are older) leads to higher hours and earnings at age 40. This presumably reflects

longer-run human capital effects from exposure to a more generous EITC that encourages work in the short

term, which should lead to the accumulation of more work experience. 45 These estimated effects are consistent

with the accumulation of the effects predicted by the static model and confirmed by short-run evidence.

Similarly, the estimates indicate longer-run negative effects on married mothers exposed to a more generous


44
   Appendix Table B9 breaks the EITC variation into federal and state without estimating separate effects by age of kids
(and hence more closely parallels Table 3 than Table 4). We find positive hours effects (unconditional and conditional)
for unmarried women, which are somewhat smaller than those for unmarried women with older children in Table 5
(reflecting the averaging across women with young and with older children). Similarly, Appendix Table B9 finds negative
effects on employment and both hours measures for married women, somewhat smaller than the effects for those with
young children in Table 5.
45
   In addition, greater labor force attachment spurred by a more generous EITC might boost other human capital
investments or increase effort to find better jobs with prospects for more wage growth, although, admittedly, although our
wage results, while consistent with this theory in sign, are not statistically significant. Human capital effects could also
include more investment in education, although examining this would require a different identification strategy than the
one we use, which stratifies on education.


                                                            22
EITC, presumably because of similar effects in the opposite direction from the EITC discouraging work.

         Before testing the robustness of our results to potential identification threats, we first provide evidence

for the mechanism we believe underlies our long-run findings. Specifically, Table 6 examines evidence on the

effects of EITC exposure on cumulative experience between ages 22 and 39. We estimate the same

specification used in Table 5, but now for two different cumulative experience measures: the number of years

with positive earnings from age 22-39; and the cumulative hours worked over these ages (divided by 2,000 to

obtain a measure in units of full-time years of work). 46

         The results for less-educated women – paralleling our analyses thus far – are reported in columns (1)

and (2). 47 Looking at the federal variation, for the cumulative years of work measure we find significant

positive effects of exposure of unmarried mothers to a more generous EITC. The cumulative hours estimates

in column (2) are of the same sign for unmarried mothers, but are less precise, which is unsurprising given the

hours variation. However, for the state variation the estimates are very similar, statistically significant, and

larger. For married mothers there is not evidence of effects on cumulative experience. Looking at the

combined effect for unmarried mothers, in Panel B, for example, we find that exposure over ages 22-39 to a

$1,000 higher maximum federal and $200 higher state credit for one year boosts years of employment by

0.081 years while unmarried with older (only) children. 48 Overall, then, Table 6 suggests that our longer-run

evidence for unmarried mothers stems in part from cumulative responses on the extensive margin of

employment.

VI. Robustness Analyses

         We now turn to analyses intended to probe the robustness of the results along some key dimensions. It

is useful to provide the punchline first: The qualitative results are robust, and the statistical strength of the

evidence generally varies little. In addition to the analyses described here, in Appendix B we discuss results



46
   Recall that these are measured for heads and spouses only.
47
   We discuss columns (3) and (4) later, in the context of a different alteration to our specification.
48
   We can compare these estimated cumulative experience effects for unmarried mothers with the estimated wage effects
from Table 5. For example, for the corresponding estimate, the higher maximum credit was estimated to increase hourly
wages by about 0.6 percent. If the return to experience is about 3 percent, then the implied impact on wages of 0.081
more years of experience is 0.24 percent. The smaller impact could indicate other types of investment, including more
intensive search for better paying jobs with stronger prospects for earnings growth, are spurred by the short-term positive
extensive-margin employment effects of the EITC for unmarried mothers.


                                                            23
and report estimates for two additional robustness analyses (in addition to some of the more minor robustness

results we have reported in the footnotes). We show that the results are robust to weighting (Appendix Table

B3); and related to the weighting, we show results that are generally quite similar for black and non-black

women (Appendix Table B4), with the one exception discussed in Appendix B.

Alternative Ages

         We first explore the robustness of the results to altering the age at which we measure longer-run

outcomes – using ages 38, 39, 41, and 42 (in addition to age 40). We do not extend far beyond this range

because we suspect at younger ages the longer-run effects are less likely to be evident, and using much older

ages would sharply reduce the sample. We create a sample for each age, assigning everything as we describe

for the age 40 sample, albeit over slightly different age ranges. Next, we estimate the long-run effects of the

EITC for each age group on each of our outcomes using the same specification as in Table 5.

         Figure 4 summarizes the results, reporting the results in terms of the effects of a one-year, $1,000 real

increase in the federal and a $200 increase in the state maximum credits (like in Panel B of Table 5). Our

strongest and most consistent results were for earnings (conditional on employment) and hours. For these

outcomes, the results are often consistent regardless of which age we use, and in some cases the results are

quite consistent, especially for earnings for unmarried women with older children, for hours of unmarried

women regardless of children’s age, and for both earnings and hours (conditional and unconditional) for

married women regardless of children’s age. 49 Moreover, the evidence sometimes indicates a pattern of rising

effects with age, suggesting that these longer-run effects become more apparent at the older ages we consider

(e.g., for annual hours for married women with older kids, and for earnings for unmarried mothers with older

kids). Most importantly, the figure indicates there is nothing unique about the age of 40 for which we have

presented most of our analyses.

Alternative State Supplement Parameterization

         Next, we show an alternative parameterization of state EITC supplements that more cleanly separates

their variation from the federal policy. As previously discussed, changes in the federal policy mechanically


49
   The employment and especially the wage results are noisy and likely as a result somewhat inconsistent, but this is not
surprising given that we did not find significant results for these outcomes.


                                                            24
alter state credits that are a fixed percentage of the federal credit. We eliminate this channel while keeping the

state credits comparable in Table 7, where the state supplements are now calculated as percentages of the

federal EITC rather than in dollars. The interpretation of the federal credit coefficients stays the same as in the

previous tables, and the state coefficients in Panel A are scaled to be interpreted as the effect of a one-year, 10-

percentage point increase in the state supplement. As columns (3), (4), and (5) show, most of the unmarried

coefficients are positive (with three statistically significant) and all of the married coefficients are negative

(with two statistically significant). Panel B keeps the $1,000 federal maximum credit increase but adjusts the

state portion to be a one-year, 20-percentage point increase, as this would generate the same $200 state

increase as in Table 5. Each unmarried estimate for log earnings and annual hours is more positive than its

Table 5 counterpart and each married estimate is more negative, although the estimates in Table 7 tend to be

slightly less precise. 50

Endogenous Behavior

         One type of endogenous behavior that could affect our results is endogeneity of marriage or

childbearing. As discussed in several papers, including a recent review by Nichols and Rothstein (2016), in

principle the EITC creates incentives to have children, and to remain unmarried if one has children. In terms of

our specifications, this implies that a higher EITC can increase the proportion of years spent unmarried, or

with young children. Given that our results suggest that women who face a more generous EITC when they

have children and are unmarried have higher earnings (conditional on employment) at age 40, the concern is

that women who would have had higher earnings at age 40 are more likely to choose to have children, or to

spend more years unmarried if they have children, when the EITC is more generous. This would generate a

non-causal relationship between later earnings and our measure of exposure to a more generous EITC when

unmarried with children.



50
  In Appendix Table B10, we show a potential alternative to isolating the effects of the state variation, where we project
the 1992 federal EITC parameters forward to 2016, only adjusting for inflation, while maintaining the actual state credit
percentages. One might be concerned that the state supplements are themselves endogenous to the federal policy. But
Appendix Table B10 would represent the lower bound on what state credits would be in the absence of the true federal
parameters. The results reported in Appendix Table B10 do not change our conclusions; indeed, consistent with our main
analysis showing stronger effects of state EITC variation, we find somewhat stronger results when we “turn off” the
federal variation. Thus, we are confident that state credits provide valuable identifying variation independently of the
variation driven by federal policy changes.


                                                            25
        With respect to marriage, the mechanics of the EITC might also generate endogenous selection. A

woman who earns enough to put her on the phase-out range would lose at least part of her EITC payment if

she marries, as long as the spouse has positive earnings. Similarly, a low-earning woman who earns enough to

obtain the maximum EITC credit (i.e., is on the plateau) also may face a marriage disincentive, since marriage

could push her onto the phase-out range where the EITC payment is lower. In contrast, a very low-earning

woman whose EITC payment is well below the maximum credit could receive a higher EITC payment as a

result of marriage (as long as combined earnings do not put her far enough on the phase-out range to reduce

her EITC payment to what it would be while single). Finally, a more generous EITC can make marriage more

attractive to a non-working woman, because her potential spouse will have higher income (earnings plus

EITC). Of course, it is hard to make firm predictions, since they depend on potential spouse earnings.

        The mechanics with respect to childbearing are simpler. Having children (up to two, or up to three

beginning in 2009) always increases the value of the EITC (conditional on being eligible). However, there is

no clear connection between this incentive and a woman’s earnings, and hence no clear reason to expect bias

in our estimates one way or the other from endogenous childbearing.

        What does the evidence suggest? First, based on existing research, Nichols and Rothstein conclude

that there is no clear evidence that the EITC reduces marriage or increases childbearing, although some recent

simulation evidence points in this direction for marriage (Michelmore, 2018). Recent evidence on childbearing

points to negligible overall effects, with increased first births among married women and lower first births

among unmarried women, although these differences could be confounded by effects on marriage (Baughman

and Dickert-Conlin, 2009). Baughman and Dickert-Conlin (2003) suggest that the endogenous fertility

response to the EITC may occur mainly for non-white women.

        To assess this issue in our data, we first consider the question of the potential endogeneity of

childbearing. To do so, we estimate models like those reported in Table 5, but defining as dependent variables

the fraction of years from ages 22-39 that a woman spent with any kids, with young kids, and with older kids

(only), as well as completed fertility. Our independent variables become simpler: we include the exposure to

EITC variables, but without any interactions with children. Thus, our estimating equation becomes:

                     t-1                                t-1
(7) Yijt = α + βUF{ ∑a=t-18 (CRFedja ·Uija )/18}+ βUS{ ∑a=t-18 (CRStateja ·Uija )/18}


                                                         26
                    t-1                                 t-1                                 t-1
            + βMF{ ∑a=t-18 (CRFedja ·Mija )/18} + βMS{ ∑a=t-18 (CRStateja ·Mija )/18} + η{ ∑a=t-18 Mija /18}

            + βUF,40CRFedijt∙Uijt + βUS,40CRStateijt∙Uijt + βMF,40CRFedijt∙Mijt + βMS,40CRStateijt∙Mijt + η40Mijt +Djθ

            + Dtλ + εijt .

       We report the estimates from these models in Part I of Table 8. We do not find exposure to a more

generous EITC increased childbearing – measured as completed fertility. The federal credits are positively

associated with higher completed fertility while the state credits have an opposite-signed relationship, but the

estimates are insignificant. Translating these effects in Panel B, again, there is not a consistent sign pattern and

neither estimate is statistically different from zero. While completed fertility shows no clear pattern between

EITCs, columns (1)-(3) suggest there may be small effects on timing. Specifically, unmarried women exposed

to more generous EITCs tend to have children slightly earlier (increasing the proportion of years with children

and with older children), while married women may slightly delay childbirth.

       However, a back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests this evidence has minimal implications for our

estimates. Using the estimated coefficients in column (1) of Panel B in Part I of the table, along with the

observed proportions of years unmarried and married from Table 2, we can calculate that 18 years of exposure

to a $1,000 higher federal and $200 higher state maximum credits would lead to 0.019 fewer years with

children. 51 The fact that this number is so small in magnitude and is opposite the predicted sign helps reassure

that our results are not driven by endogenous fertility responses to the EITC.

       It may seem more plausible that marriage responds. After all, being married or not may have trivial

economic consequences since one can cohabit, so the incentive effects of the EITC may be stronger for

marriage than for childbearing. Estimating these effects in a similar fashion, we modify equation (7),

estimating it for the fraction of years married, but re-introducing the interactions between the EITC and the

childbearing variables (fractions of years with children) in place of the interactions with marital status. Part II

of Table 8 reports the estimates. Panel B translates them into implied effects of a one-year $1,000 federal

maximum and $200 state maximum credit increase. The estimates are negative for women with both young


51
  The full calculation is [0.003×(0.32) + (−0.003) ×(0.68)]×18 = −0.019. Inside the square brackets we multiply the
coefficients from Table 8, Part I, Panel B by the average proportion of years the low-ed women in our sample are
unmarried or married (Table 2, rows 8 and 9). This gives the effect of one year of exposure to a $1,000 higher federal and
$200 higher state EITC. We then multiply this by 18 years to get exposure across all ages from 22-39.


                                                           27
and older (only) children, consistent with delayed marriage when the EITC is more generous. But interpreted

this way, the estimated effects of the EITC on marriage are also very small and statistically insignificant.

         Thus, our evidence does not point to any substantive evidence of endogeneity bias that could generate

spurious support for what we regard as our key finding – that unmarried women with children exposed to a

higher EITC have higher conditional earnings and hours (conditional and unconditional) in the longer run, and

the opposite for married women with children. Nonetheless, this evidence should best be viewed as suggestive

and indirect, and does fall short of a strategy which fully endogenizes marital and fertility behavior, as in the

kind of structural model we alluded to earlier, but do not pursue in this paper.

         Next, we explore the possibility that endogenous migration could influence our findings. In principle,

lower-skilled women eligible for the EITC who are more interested in working, who – as suggested by our

evidence thus far – work more and eventually have higher earnings and hours, could migrate to states with

more generous EITCs, generating spurious evidence of the positive effects of exposure to a more generous

EITC. Our first check, in Part I of Table 9, is simply to apply the EITC policy from a woman’s state of

residence at age 22 for all the years for which we accumulate effects, rather than letting women’s EITC

exposure be determined by the states to which they migrate. The estimates from this analysis are very similar

to the estimates in Table 5. A second check is to use only federal EITC variation, which is unaffected by

interstate migration. These estimates, reported in Part II of Table 9, are also very similar. Thus, we conclude

that migration does not bias our estimated effects. 52

Endogenous Policy Variation

        Next, we incorporate data on more highly-educated women, assume they are not affected by the EITC,

and use them to provide an additional level of differencing. This estimator allows for the possibility that there

are unmeasured shocks that vary by state and year and across women with different marital status and

childbearing histories, as long as we are willing to assume that these shocks are similar across women of

different education levels. For this analysis, we pool the less-educated women we have studied thus far and



52
  The analysis using only federal variation is also potentially useful to address concerns that state variation in EITC
policy responds endogenously to labor market behavior of the women who are affected (or the controls). However, given
that we are looking at long-term cumulative effects of EITC policy, we doubt this is much of a concern – consistent with
the similarity of the estimates.


                                                           28
women with higher education, create a dummy variable for the less-educated women, and include all the

variables in the preferred model on their own as well as interacted with the dummy variable for low education;

the main effect of low education is also included. Note that we interact our low-education indicator with the

year dummy variables, to allow for changes over time in differences in the outcomes we study between lower-

and higher-education women, which could be correlated with changes in the generosity of the EITC over

time. 53 In this case, the estimated coefficient on the latter interactions are the effects of longer-term exposure

to the EITC, but they are now identified relative to more-educated women (a DDDD estimator), with the

interactions between the EITC, marriage, and fertility variables for more-educated women potentially serving

as control variables for other types of shocks correlated with EITC changes not picked up in the other controls.

        The results, reported in Table 10, are qualitatively very similar to those in Table 5. We find positive

effects on earnings (conditional on employment) for unmarried mothers exposed to a more generous EITC

over the longer run, and negative effects for married mothers. The fact that the estimated EITC effects do not

change when they are identified relative to more-educated women suggests that these effects do not reflect

other shocks to longer-term labor market outcomes for women distinguished by marital status and children that

happen to be correlated with EITC variation. Put differently, the estimates for more-educated women serve as

a placebo test; given that the EITC should have little or no impact on more-educated women, we should find

little or no evidence of effects on these women if our EITC effects reflect causal effects on less-educated

women. The estimates for more-educated women, reported in Appendix Table B11, confirm that this is the

case. Finally, going back to Table 6, for cumulative experience, columns (3) and (4) show that when we add

data on more-educated women as additional controls, and estimate effects relative to them, the estimates are

again qualitatively similar, with the results we for unmarried women becoming if anything a bit stronger. 54

        The previous analysis can be viewed as controlling for a source of non-exogenous variation in the

EITC that threatens the interpretation of our estimates in Table 5 as causal – specifically, the possibility that



53
   To be symmetric, we might want interactions between the low-education indicator and the state dummy variables as
well. We omit these for parsimony, and because the potential correlation over time between changes in outcomes for
lower- and higher-education women seems more potentially problematic. Nonetheless, results are robust to including
these interactions.
54
   Implicit in the similar estimates for less-educated women is that the estimates for more-educated women are small and
insignificant, which is indeed the case for cumulative experience, as well.


                                                           29
EITC variation is correlated with other shocks or factors affecting longer-run outcomes for different kinds of

women differentiated by their childbearing or marriage histories. As an alternative approach, we allow more

explicitly for a relationship between EITC variation and trends in these longer-run outcomes, but reverting to

using only the less-educated women and introducing state-specific linear time trends. Recent work (e.g., Meer

and West, 2016) has highlighted potential limitations to identifying policy effects using this common

augmentation of panel data estimators with state policy variation. However, given that we have a long period

prior to the major EITC expansions in the 1990s, the problems Meer and West identify are much less likely to

apply. The results are reported in Table 11. They are often a bit less precise than the preferred estimates in

Table 5, but the point estimates and the qualitative conclusions are very similar.

Potentially Confounding Changes in Other Policies

        There may also be longer-run effects of other policies that affect work or work incentives, perhaps

most notably the minimum wage and welfare, given the timing of welfare reform and that many states

increased both minimum wages and their EITC in the 2000s. 55 To assess whether the effects of these other

policies could be confounded with longer-run effects of the EITC, in Table 12 we add controls for the longer-

run effects of minimum wages and welfare policies. The concern is perhaps most salient for the welfare

reforms that occurred in roughly the same period (the 1990s) as large expansions in the EITC.

        It is infeasible to code up numerous features of welfare – in particular, how they changed when the

1996 welfare reform transformed Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) into Temporary

Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) – and incorporate all of these variables in the kinds of long-term

cumulative exposure variables we construct. Fang and Keane (2004) discuss a large array of possible measures

of welfare reform that one might use; including many measures would be problematic because of

multicollinearity. We include two measures of welfare generosity or reform that we believe capture key

variation in a parsimonious way. Our first measure is the maximum payment for a family of three, usually held




55
  For example, Neumark and Nizalova (2007) estimate the effect of exposure to a higher minimum wage as a teenager on
earnings of people in their late 20s and find some adverse effects. And Neumark et al. (forthcoming) estimate the longer-
run effects of minimum wages, the EITC, and welfare reform – albeit with a focus on initially disadvantaged areas, rather
than individuals.




                                                           30
to be one adult and two dependent children. 56 Second, for the post-welfare reform period, we include a dummy

variable for whether a state imposed tight time limits. Time limits seem like a good choice to capture the

effects of welfare reform, as a small but consistent literature has shown that welfare time limits were a

significant element of welfare reform distinguishing TANF from AFDC (Moffitt, 2007), and that they were

responsible for decreasing welfare caseloads (e.g., Grogger, 2009). There were no time limits until welfare

reform in 1996, after which 10 states adopted limits of less than 60 months (in 2000 these limits ranged from

21-48 months, but were generally around two years), and most of the remaining states adopted time limits of

60 months. We use a time limit dummy variable that is equal to zero for all states before welfare reform and,

after welfare reform, switches to one for states that imposed tight time limits (less than 60 months), to capture

states that more substantially tightened eligibility for welfare. We enter these variables in the same way as the

EITC, with the average of interactions with kids (by age) and marital status across ages 22-39.

         The estimates incorporating these two explicit welfare and welfare reform measures are reported in

Part I of Table 12. The estimates are quite similar to their Table 5 counterparts, and in some cases are even

stronger, indicating that changes in welfare, including a key element of welfare reform (and changes correlated

with it), do not underlie our estimated effects of the EITC. 57

         In Part II, we instead add controls for the minimum wage. We enter the minimum wage in the same


56
   We are typically able to measure benefits this way, but in some cases, we can only determine the level of benefits for a
family of two. We always use the former when possible.
57
   We also experimented with a much less parametric approach using dummy variables that vary by state over time,
intended to capture broad policy changes associated with welfare reform. One was for the granting of welfare waivers in
the period between 1992 and the TANF rollout (in the states that received waivers), and the other was for the rollout of
TANF in the state. We identified the month in which either of these occurred, using information from the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (see https://aspe.hhs.gov/system/files/pdf/180711/Table_A.PDF, viewed
August 13, 2018). Given that our data are annual, we define the variables in the years prior to a change to equal zero, and
to equal one in the year after the change; for the year of the change, we define the variable as the proportion of months the
change was in effect. In states with waivers, the waivers remained in effect until TANF rollout, so for these states the
waiver “dummy” variable turns on, and then simultaneous with the TANF variable turning on, the waiver variable turns
off. For states without waivers, the TANF variable simply turns on in the month of rollout. Because the value of welfare
and the effects of welfare reform depend on marital status and number of children, we used these welfare reform variables
in the same was as we do the EITC policy variable – i.e., interacted with the dummy variables for children and
married/unmarried. The estimated effect of federal variation were much less precise, which is not surprising given that the
timing of welfare reform beginning in 1996 (and the waivers a few years earlier) coincides with sharp increases in the
EITC, making it difficult to separately identify the separate federal policy effects. However, the estimated effects of the
state variation were very similar to those in Table 12 (Part I), and the estimated effects of the combined variation
(corresponding to Panel B) were also generally qualitatively similar, with statistically significant positive effects on hours
for exposure of unmarried mothers, and statistically significant negative effects on earnings and hours for exposure of
married mothers.




                                                             31
way as the EITC, with the average of interactions with kids (by age) and marital status across ages 22-39; in

each year, we use the real minimum wage (using the higher of the state or federal minimum). A comparison of

the estimates in Panel B with those in Table 5 shows that adding the minimum wage controls has virtually no

impact on the estimates. 58,59

         Of course, we cannot decisively rule out the concern about confounding policies, as other policies that

changed simultaneously with the EITC could exist. However, the relevant policy changes would have to

differentially affect women based on income (proxied by marital status) and presence of children. 60

Translating Our Estimates into Implied Effects of Longer-Run Policy Change

         Finally, we turn our attention to using our results to estimate the long-run effects of persistent changes

in the EITC that prevail across the entire 22-39 age range, rather than the one-year effects reported in the

preceding tables. The simplest method to translate our effects to the long run might appear to be to multiply

each estimated δ by 18, turning a one-year increase into the same increase in each year from ages 22-39. This

would not be quite right, however, as most women will not spend all 18 years with young or older (only)

children. To deal with this concern in a parsimonious fashion, we create two “scenarios” in which women have

two children, at ages 22 and 24, and are always unmarried or married. Thus, the hypothetical woman in each

scenario will have children in every year from age 22 to age 39, with young children for 8 of 18 years and

older (only) children for the remaining 10 years. At the same time, holding marital status constant will avoid

conflating the generally positive unmarried and generally negative married effects or having to assume when

women are married. That is, these scenarios let us measure the long-run estimates of strong, yet plausible,

exposure to a more generous EITC over a long period.

         The results are shown in Table 13, for each of our previous analyses, although for the hours estimates

we report only the conditional results; the unconditional estimates were similar. Every estimate in each column


58
   Although this finding contrasts with the results in Neumark and Nizalova (2007), that paper focused on exposure to a
higher minimum wage at very young ages.
59
   We generally do not find significant longer-run effects of welfare reform or the minimum wage on outcomes at age 40.
60
   Other potential policies that might be of concern include changes in tax class (i.e., adding a dependent or a switch from
single to head of household for a single mother having her first child) and the Child Tax Credit. However, because these
policies are not refundable in the same way as the federal EITC (and many state EITC supplements), we believe they can
be safely ignored. The Child Tax Credit did become partially refundable (up to $1,400) under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
of 2017, but that change occurs occurred after our sample period. Moreover, some recent surveys do not emphasize or
point to employment effects of the CTC (Hungerford and Thiess, 2013; Marr et al., 2015).


                                                             32
and panel has the same sign, and many of the estimates are statistically significant. Looking at the estimates

for Table 5 as our preferred specification, the estimates imply that, for unmarried women, a permanent $1,000

increase in the federal maximum credit, and $200 increase in the state maximum credit, boosts earnings at age

40 by approximately 24.4 percent, and hours at age 40 by 190. For married women, the corresponding implied

effects are approximately 36.1 percent lower earnings, and 277 fewer hours.

VII. Conclusions

        We use longitudinal data on marriage and children from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to

characterize women’s exposure to the federal and state Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) during

approximately their first two decades of adulthood. We then estimate the long-run effects of this exposure to

the EITC on women’s employment, wages, earnings, and hours as mature adults.

        We find evidence suggesting that exposure to a more generous EITC when women were unmarried

and had older (school-age) children leads to higher earnings (conditional on employment) in the longer-run.

We also find corresponding evidence suggesting that longer-run exposure of unmarried mothers to a more

generous EITC increases cumulative labor market experience, using data with somewhat more limitations.

Finally, we find evidence to suggest that exposure to a more generous EITC when women had children but

were married leads to lower earnings and hours in the longer-run. The longer-run effects are to some extent

consistent with what we would expect if the short-run effects of the EITC on employment that are documented

in other work, and predicted by theory, are reflected in cumulative labor market experience, which influences

earnings. We present many supplemental analyses that show that the findings are robust, and these bolster a

causal interpretation of the evidence. However, some of the evidence in support of a causal interpretation is

supportive, but not definitive, and further research could perhaps fruitfully explore treating childbearing,

marriage, and/or policy variation as endogenous.

        Overall, the results provide support for concluding that a more generous EITC does more than simply

boost employment of low-skilled, generally single, mothers in the short term – a result established in the

existing literature on the labor supply effects of the EITC. Indeed, longer-term exposure to a more generous

EITC also appears to boost earnings of this group in the longer run, implying that pro-work incentives can

have beneficial longer-run effects that can increase economic self-sufficiency. At the same time, the long-run


                                                        33
evidence also points to lower earnings and hours for women exposed to a more generous EITC when married

with children.




                                                   34
                                              References


Bainbridge, Jay, Marcia K, Meyers, and Jane Waldfogel. 2003. “Child Care Policy Reform and
Employment of Single Mothers.” Social Science Quarterly 84: 771-791.
Bastian, Jacob, and Katherine Michelmore. 2018. “The Long-Term Impact of the Earned Income Tax
Credit on Children’s Education and Employment Outcomes.” Journal of Labor Economics 36(4): 1127-63.
Baughman, Reagan, and Stacy Dickert-Conlin. 2009. “The Earned Income Tax Credit and Fertility.”
Journal of Population Economics 22(3): 537-63.
Baughman, Reagan, and Stacy Dickert-Conlin. 2003. “Did Expanding the EITC Promote Motherhood?”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 93(2): 247-51.
Blau, David, and Erdal Tekin. 2007. “The Determinants and Consequences of Child Care Subsidies for
Single Mothers in the USA.” Journal of Population Economics 20: 719-741.
Cancian, Maria, and Arik Levinson. 2005. “Labor Supply Effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit:
Evidence from Wisconsin Supplemental Benefit for Families with Three Children.” NBER Working Paper
No. 11454.
Card, David, and Dean R. Hyslop. 2005. “Estimating the Effects of a Time-Limited Earnings Subsidy for
Welfare-Leavers.” Econometrica 73(6): 1723-70.
Dahl, Molly, Thomas DeLeire, and Jonathan Schwabish. 2009. “Stepping Stone or Dead End? The Effect of
the EITC on Earnings Growth.” National Tax Journal 62(2): 329-46.
Eissa, Nada, and Hilary Williamson Hoynes. 2004. “Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married
Couples: The Earned Income Tax Credit.” Journal of Public Economics 88(9-10): 1931-58.
Eissa, Nada, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1996. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 605-37.
Evans, William N., and Craig L. Garthwaite. 2014. “Giving Mom a Break: The Impact of Higher EITC
Payments on Maternal Health.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(2): 258-290.
Fang, Hanming, and Michael P. Keane. 2004. “Assessing the Impact of Welfare Reform on Single
Mothers.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1-95.
Gelbach, Jonah B. 2002. “Public Schooling for Young Children and Maternal Labor Supply.” American
Economic Review 92: 307-322.
Grogger, Jeffrey. 2003 “The Effects of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy Changes on Welfare Use,
Work, and Income among Female-Headed Families." Review of Economics and Statistics 85(2): 394-408.
Grogger, Jeffrey. 2009. “Welfare Reform, Returns to Experience, and Wages: Using Reservation Wages to
Account for Sample Selection Bias.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(3): 490-502.
Heinrich, Carolyn j. 2014. “Parents’ Employment and Childrens’ Wellbeing.” The Future of Children 24:
121-146.
Hoffman, Saul D., and Laurence S. Seidman. 2003. Helping Working Families: The Earned Income Tax
Credit. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute.
Hoynes, Hilary, Doug Miller, and David Simon. 2015. “Income, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and Infant
Health.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 79(1): 172-211.
Hungerford, Thomas L., and Rebecca Thiess. 2013. “The Earned Income Tax Credit and the Child Tax
Credit.” Economic Policy Institute Issue Brief #370.
Jones, Maggie R. 2013. “The EITC and Labor Supply: Evidence from a Regression Kink Design.” U.S.
Census Bureau, Center for Administrative Records Research and Applications, Washington, DC.
Kleven, Henrik. 2019. “The EITC and the Extensive Margin: A Reappraisal.” NBER Working Paper No.
26405.
Leigh, Andrew. 2010. “Who Benefits from the Earned Income Tax Credit? Incidence Among Recipients,
Coworkers, and Firms.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy (Advances) 10(1): Article 45
(on-line).
Lemay, Michael. 2009. “Understanding the Mechanism of Panel Attrition.” Ph.D. Dissertation, University
of Maryland, College Park, MD.
Marr, Chuck, Chye-Ching Huang, Arloc Sherman, and Brandon DeBot. 2015. “EITC and Child Tax Credit
Promote Work, Reduce Poverty, and Support Children’s Development, Research Finds.” Center on Budget
and Policy Priorities, Oct. 1, https://www.cbpp.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/6-26-12tax.pdf (viewed
September 12, 2019).
Meer, Jonathan, and Jeremy West. 2016 “Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment Dynamics.”
Journal of Human Resources 51(2): 500-22.
Meyer, Bruce D. 2010. “The Effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Recent Reforms.” In J. R.
Brown (Ed.) Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 24. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 153-80.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Labor
Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(3): 1063-114.
Michelmore, Katherine. 2018. “The Earned Income Tax Credit and Union Formation: The Impact of
Expected Spouse Earnings.” Review of Economics of the Household 16(2): 377-406.
Moffit, Robert. 2007. “Welfare Reform: The US Experience.” Working Paper 2008:13, Institute for Labour
Market Policy Evaluation, available at https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/45781/1/573610746.pdf
(viewed November 30, 2017).
Neumark, David. 2016. Inventory of Research on Economic Self-Sufficiency. Economic Self-Sufficiency
Policy Research Institute, UCI. https://www.esspri.uci.edu/researchinventory.php (viewed August 16,
2018).
Neumark, David, Brian Asquith, and Brittany Bass. “Longer-Run Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on
Disadvantaged Neighborhoods.” Forthcoming in Contemporary Economic Policy.
Neumark, David, and Olena Nizalova. 2007. “Minimum Wage Effects in the Longer Run.” Journal of
Human Resources 42(2): 435-52.
Neumark, David, and William L. Wascher. 2011. “Does a Higher Minimum Wage Enhance the
Effectiveness of the Earned Income Tax Credit?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 64(4): 712-46.
Nichols, Austin, and Jesse Rothstein. 2016. “The Earned Income Tax Credit.” In R.A. Moffitt (Ed.)
Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume 1. Chicago: University of
Chicago Pres, pp. 137-218.
Solon, Gary, Steven J. Haider, and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. 2015. “What Are We Weighting For?” Journal
of Human Resources 50(2): 301-16.
Figure 1: Federal EITC (2016)
   Figure 2: Federal EITC Maximum Credit




Figure 3: State EITC Supplements (2016 Dollars)
                                 Figure 4: Estimated Effects of Long-Run Exposure to the EITC, by Ages 38-42




Estimates at age 40 correspond to Table 5, Panel B, using different ages at which to measure longer-run outcomes. For ages 38, 39, 41, and 42 we create a separate
sample at each age using the same approach described in the data section for the age 40 sample. The 90-percent confidence intervals are shown.
                                        Table 1: Sample Construction Description
                                                                                                                    Number of
                                                                                                                   observations
A. All PSID respondents                                                                                              80,666
B. Number of female PSID respondents                                                                                 40,681
C. Number of female PSID respondents potentially observed from ages 22-40 from 1985 to 2016                           5,652
D. Number of low-educ. (LTHS or HS) women in Row C                                                                    2,548
E. Keep only women with a full 19-year state history back to age 22                                                   1,795
   Number of women in E with full 19-year marital history                                                             1,613
   Number of women in E with full 19-year child history                                                               1,795
   Number of women in E with full 19-year age of child history                                                        1,725
   Number of women in E with a consistent race categorization                                                         1,772
   Number of women in E with non-missing earnings data (including $0 for non-working) at age 40                       1,795
   Number of women in E with non-missing current employment status at age 40                                          1,724
   Number of women in E with non-missing births data and five or fewer births                                         1,745
F. Number of women in E who fit all the above criteria simultaneously (final sample)                                  1,505
Row C reports the number of observations we have for women who were actually observed in the PSID at age 40, and could have
been observed back to age 22, between 1967 (the 1968 survey) and 2016 (the last year covered in our data). Explanations for the
differences between rows D and F are attrition, missing data, or entering the sample after age 22 (e.g., by marrying into a PSID
household).



                           Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for Long-Run Analysis (Means)
                    Ages                                                      22-39        40
                    Calendar year at age 40                                    N/A       1998
                    Federal EITC two-child maximum credit                      2.61      4.03
                    State EITC two-child maximum credit                        0.08      0.18
                    Combined EITC two-child maximum credit                     2.68      4.20
                    Prop. years with any children                              0.83      0.71
                    Prop. years with young children                            0.39      0.06
                    Prop. years with older children (only)                     0.45      0.65
                    Prop. years unmarried                                      0.32      0.30
                    Prop. years married                                        0.68      0.70
                    Prop. years with any children and unmarried                0.23      0.19
                    Prop. years with young children and unmarried              0.09      0.01
                    Prop. years with older (only) children and unmarried       0.14      0.18
                    Prop. years with any children and married                  0.60      0.52
                    Prop. years with young children and married                0.29      0.04
                    Prop. years with older (only) children and married         0.31      0.48
                    Black                                                      N/A       0.41
                    Experience (cumulative years employed, ages 22-39)        13.16       N/A
                    Employed at age 40                                         N/A       0.78
                    Annual hours at age 40                                     N/A       1,368
                    Log wage (employed) at age 40                              N/A       2.56
                    Log earnings (employed) at age 40                          N/A       9.86
                    Descriptive statistics are for the low-education sample (Row F, Table 1). The maximum
                    credit is measured in $1,000s (indexed to 2016). We show the combined credit as well as
                    the individual federal and state portions. (Sample sizes appear in the tables that follow.)
  Table 3: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and Hours at Age
                        40, Using Combined Federal and State EITC Two-Child Maximum Credit
                                                                                                 Annual
                                                        Log hourly wage  Log earnings  Annual     hours
                                         Employment        (employed)     (employed)    hours  (employed)
                                              (1)               (2)            (3)        (4)       (5)
  Coefficient estimates (δU, δM)
    Avg. (two-child maximum credit ×       -0.0004            0.001          0.005       0.52      1.97
     children × unmarried, 22-39)           (0.002)          (0.003)        (0.005)    (5.45)     (3.53)
    Avg. (two-child maximum credit ×         0.001           -0.006         -0.014**   -7.73*    -9.08***
     children × married, 22-39)             (0.002)          (0.004)        (0.007)    (3.91)     (3.20)
  R2                                         0.08              0.14           0.14       0.08      0.09
  N                                          1,505            1,176          1,177      1,505     1,197
 See notes to Table 2. These results are based on equation (4). The coefficients can be interpreted as the effect of a one-year, $1,000
 increase in the EITC maximum credit. Other independent variables include: (1) averages of two-way interactions between the EITC
 variable, dummy variables for marital status, and a dummy variable for children, calculated over ages 22-39; and corresponding main
 effects; (2) two-way and three-way interactions between the EITC variable, a dummy for married, and a dummy variable for children, at
 age 40, and corresponding main effects; (3) dummy variable for black; (4) state and year fixed effects. ***/**/* Significantly different
 from zero at 1/5/10-percent level. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




 Table 4: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and Hours at Age 40,
                Using Combined Federal and State EITC Two-Child Maximum Credit and Age of Children
                                                            Log hourly
                                                                wage    Log earnings     Annual    Annual hours
                                               Employment   (employed)   (employed)       hours     (employed)
                                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
 Coefficient estimates (δUY, δUO, δMY, δMO)
   Avg. (two-child maximum credit ×               -0.001        0.002        0.001        -1.94         0.80
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.003)     (0.007)      (0.011)       (8.98)       (5.88)
   Avg. (two-child maximum credit ×               0.0002        0.005      0.014**         3.77         5.58
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)     (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.006)       (5.41)       (4.08)
   Avg. (two-child maximum credit ×               -0.004       -0.003       -0.010      -15.58***      -7.48
    young children × married, 22-39)              (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.007)       (5.71)       (4.52)
   Avg. (two-child maximum credit ×                0.003*      -0.005      -0.013*        -3.41       -8.42**
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)       (0.002)     (0.004)      (0.007)       (4.37)       (3.72)
  2
 R                                                  0.09         0.16         0.16         0.09         0.10
 N                                                 1,505        1,176        1,177        1,505        1,197
See notes to Table 2. These results are based on equations (4), (5), and (5’). The coefficients can be interpreted as the effect of a one-year,
$1,000 increase in the EITC maximum credit. Other independent variables include: (1) averages of two-way interactions between the EITC
variable, dummy variables for marital status, and dummy variables for having either younger or older (only) children, calculated over ages
22-39; and corresponding main effects; (2) two-way and three-way interactions between each EITC variable, a dummy for married, and a
dummy variables for having either younger or older (only) children, at age 40, and corresponding main effects; (3) dummy variable for black;
(4) state and year fixed effects.
*** ** *
   / / Significantly different from zero at 1/5/10-percent level. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
 Table 5: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and Hours at Age
            40, Using Separate Federal and State EITC Two-Child Maximum Credits and Age of Children
                                                                     Log hourly                                  Annual
                                                                        wage        Log earnings   Annual          hours
                                                     Employment (employed)           (employed)     hours      (employed)
                                                           (1)           (2)               (3)         (4)           (5)
 A. Coefficient estimates (δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ )
                            UYF   UOF  MYF  MOF    UYS  UOS    MYS MOS

   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×             -0.002          0.001          -0.0003       -4.28         -0.54
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                 (0.004)         (0.008)         (0.012)     (11.67)        (7.56)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×             0.0002          0.009           0.015**       0.82          2.40
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)          (0.003)         (0.006)         (0.007)      (5.63)        (4.61)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×             -0.004         -0.003           -0.009     -12.27*         -3.01
    young children × married, 22-39)                   (0.003)         (0.007)         (0.010)      (6.88)        (5.23)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×              0.003         -0.006           -0.015       -1.66         -8.25
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)            (0.002)         (0.005)         (0.010)      (5.01)        (4.97)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                0.004          0.006            0.016      36.59          23.63
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                 (0.017)         (0.029)         (0.041)     (39.88)        (3.44)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                0.007         -0.012            0.034     71.71***      66.24***
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)          (0.012)         (0.017)         (0.026)     (25.07)       (18.25)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×               -0.008         -0.004           -0.067*    -70.01*      -80.16***
    young children × married, 22-39)                   (0.016)         (0.020)         (0.035)     (35.49)       (21.87)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×               -0.002         0.0002           -0.018     -31.14*        -21.00
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)            (0.008)         (0.011)         (0.022)     (16.95)       (19.01)
 B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
   Unmarried (young children)                           -0.001          0.002            0.003        3.04          4.19
                                                       (0.004)         (0.007)         (0.012)      (9.24)        (6.20)
   Unmarried (older children)                            0.002          0.006          0.022***    15.16***      15.65***
                                                       (0.004)         (0.007)         (0.008)      (5.57)        (5.52)
                                                                                               **          ***
   Married (young children)                             -0.006         -0.005          -0.022     -26.28        -19.05***
                                                       (0.004)         (0.006)         (0.009)      (7.71)        (5.52)
   Married (older children)                              0.003         -0.006          -0.018**      -7.89       -12.45**
                                                       (0.002)         (0.004)         (0.008)      (4.95)        (4.68)
 R2                                                       0.09          0.16              0.17        0.09          0.11
 N                                                       1,505          1,176            1,177      1,505          1,197
See notes to Table 2. These results are based on equation (6) (and the full equation in Appendix A). The coefficients can be interpreted
as the effect of a one-year, $1,000 increase in the relevant EITC maximum credit. The calculations in Panel B, from top to bottom in
each column, are equal to δUYF+ (0.2)×δUYS, δUOF+ (0.2)×δUOS, δMYF+ (0.2)×δMYS, and δMOF+ (0.2)×δMOS. Other independent variables
include: (1) averages of two-way interactions between each EITC variable, dummy variables for marital status, and dummy variables for
having either younger or older (only) children, calculated over ages 22-39; and corresponding main effects; (2) two-way and three-way
interactions between each EITC variable, a dummy for married, and the dummy variables for having either younger or older (only)
children, at age 40, and corresponding main effects; (3) dummy variable for black; (4) state and year fixed effects. ***/**/* Significantly
different from zero at 1/5/10-percent level. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
       Table 6: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Cumulative Experience at Age 40
                                                     Total number           Cumulative    Total number          Cumulative
                                                      of years with            hours      of years with             hours
                                                         positive         transformed to     positive         transformed to
                                                    earnings, 22-39         FTE, 22-39   earnings, 22-39        FTE, 22-39
                                                                                         Including high-education women
                                                           Preferred specification            as an additional level of
                                                                    (Table 5)                         differencing
                                                             (1)                 (2)             (3)                  (4)
A. Coefficient estimates (δUYF, δUOF, δMYF, δMOF, δUYS, δUOS, δMYS, δMOS)
 Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                0.094**               0.073           0.057                0.040
   young children × unmarried, 22-39)                    (0.042)              (0.051)        (0.045)              (0.067)
 Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                0.070**               0.022         0.090**                0.059
   older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)             (0.032)              (0.046)        (0.035)              (0.054)
 Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                 -0.005              -0.019          -0.023               -0.037
   young children × married, 22-39)                      (0.038)              (0.045)        (0.046)              (0.057)
 Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                0.0002               -0.017           0.016                0.010
   older (only) children × married, 22-39)               (0.031)              (0.039)        (0.040)              (0.058)
 Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                    0.075               0.373           0.398                0.482
   young children × unmarried, 22-39)                    (0.275)              (0.347)        (0.369)              (0.449)
 Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                    0.055               0.234           0.223               0.610*
   older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)             (0.226)              (0.607)        (0.245)              (0.330)
                                                                 **                  **              **
 Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                  0.263                0.262          0.460                 0.595*
   young children × married, 22-39)                      (0.109)              (0.126)        (0.196)              (0.345)
 Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                    0.016              -0.098           0.082                0.082
   older (only) children × married, 22-39)               (0.069)              (0.094)        (0.125)              (0.311)
B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
  Unmarried (young children)                               0.109              0.148**         0.136*                0.136
                                                         (0.067)              (0.069)        (0.080)              (0.088)
  Unmarried (older children)                              0.081*               0.069         0.134***             0.181***
                                                         (0.041)              (0.055)        (0.047)              (0.064)
  Married (young children)                                 0.048               0.034           0.069                0.082
                                                         (0.040)              (0.043)        (0.047)              (0.072)
  Married (older children)                                 0.003              -0.037           0.032                0.026
                                                         (0.028)              (0.034)        (0.038)              (0.064)
C. Implied effect of $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits, 22-39 (%)
  Always unmarried with children at                      1.680**               1.870*        2.433**              2.899**
   ages 22 and 24                                        (0.823)              (1.001)        (0.938)              (1.094)
  Always married with children at                          0.416              -0.097           0.876                0.917
   ages 22 and 24                                        (0.554)              (0.611)        (0.685)              (1.121)
R2                                                          0.17                0.21            0.19                 0.26
N, low-ed                                                  1,047               1,047           1,047                1,047
N, high-ed                                                  N/A                 N/A             975                  975
See notes to Tables 2 and 5.
 Table 7: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and Hours at Age 40,
         Using Separate Federal Maximum Credit and State EITC Supplement Percentage and Age of Children
                                                                       Log hourly
                                                                          wage      Log earnings      Annual Annual hours
                                                       Employment (employed)         (employed)         hours    (employed)
                                                             (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)
 A. Coefficient estimates (δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ )
                            UYF   UOF  MYF  MOF    UYS  UOS    MYS MOS

   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               -0.002          0.001        0.0001           -3.42        -0.28
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.004)        (0.008)        (0.012)        (11.32)        (7.49)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               0.0002          0.008        0.015**           1.94         3.47
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.003)        (0.006)        (0.007)         (5.56)        (4.44)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               -0.004         -0.003         -0.009        -14.13**       -4.62
    young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.003)        (0.007)        (0.010)         (6.63)        (5.17)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               0.003*         -0.006         -0.015          -2.52        -8.85*
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.002)        (0.005)        (0.010)         (4.94)        (4.82)
   Avg. (two-child state supplement percentage ×           0.003         -0.002          0.010          17.72        15.08
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.005)        (0.012)        (0.016)        (12.14)      (15.08)
   Avg. (two-child state supplement percentage ×           0.003         -0.006          0.009        24.22***     23.90***
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.003)        (0.006)        (0.007)         (6.74)        (6.09)
   Avg. (two-child state supplement percentage ×          0.0001         -0.003         -0.016         -13.86      -22.08**
    young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.005)        (0.007)        (0.014)        (13.85)      (10.56)
   Avg. (two-child state supplement percentage ×          -0.001        0.0005          -0.007         -10.66        -6.65
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.003)        (0.005)        (0.010)         (7.62)        (6.66)
 B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal maximum credit and 20pp increase in state supplement (%)
   Unmarried (young children)                              0.004         -0.002          0.020          32.01        29.88
                                                         (0.010)        (0.022)        (0.032)        (20.12)      (26.79)
   Unmarried (older children)                              0.006         -0.005        0.034**        50.39***     51.28***
                                                         (0.007)        (0.014)        (0.016)        (13.76)      (12.69)
   Married (young children)                               -0.004         -0.009         -0.042         -41.84      -48.78**
                                                         (0.010)        (0.013)        (0.026)        (26.08)      (19.59)
   Married (older children)                                0.001         -0.005        -0.029*         -23.84       -22.15*
                                                         (0.006)        (0.008)        (0.017)        (14.48)      (12.18)
 R2                                                         0.09          0.16            0.17           0.09         0.11
 N                                                         1,505          1,176          1,177          1,505        1,197
See notes to Table 2. In contrast to Table 5, the state supplements are now calculated as percentages of the federal EITC rather than in
dollars. The coefficients can be interpreted as the effect of a one-year, $1,000 increase in the federal EITC maximum credit or a one-year, 10-
percentage point increase in the state EITC supplement. The calculations in Panel B are equal to δUYF+ (2)×δUYS, δMYF+ (2)×δMYS, δUOF+
(2)×δUOS, and δMOF+ (2)×δMOS, respectively. Other independent variables include: (1) averages of two-way interactions between each EITC
variable, dummy variables for marital status, and dummy variables for having either younger or older (only) children, calculated over ages
22-39; and corresponding main effects; (2) two-way and three-way interactions between each EITC variable, a dummy for married, and the
dummy variables for having either younger or older (only) children, at age 40, and corresponding main effects; (3) dummy variable for
black; (4) state and year fixed effects. ***/**/* Significantly different from zero at 1/5/10-percent level. Standard errors are clustered at the
state level.
     Table 8: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Women’s Fertility and Marital Status from Ages 22 to 40, Examining Endogenous
                                             Fertility and Marriage Decisions
                                                     Fraction of      Fraction of      Fraction of years
                                                   years with any      years with      with older (only)  Completed     Fraction of
                                                         kids         young kids              kids         fertility   years married
                                                          (1)              (2)                 (3)            (4)           (5)
 I. Treating Childbearing as Potentially Endogenous, Conditional on Marital Status
 A. Coefficient estimates
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×            0.003**           0.0001             0.002**          0.007          …
     unmarried), 22-39                                 (0.001)          (0.0001)            (0.001)        (0.007)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×              0.0003             0.001             -0.001          -0.011          …
     unmarried), 22-39                                 (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.002)        (0.010)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×            0.0005           -0.0001              0.001           0.003          …
     married), 22-39                                   (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.001)        (0.006)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×             -0.017***         -0.005**           -0.011***        -0.046          …
     married), 22-39                                   (0.005)           (0.003)            (0.003)        (0.017)
 B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
   Unmarried                                           0.003***           0.001             0.002**          0.005          …
                                                       (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.001)        (0.007)
   Married                                              -0.003           -0.001             -0.002          -0.006          …
                                                       (0.002)           (0.001)            (0.001)        (0.007)
 II. Treating Marital Status as Potentially Endogenous, Conditional on Childbearing
 A. Coefficient estimates
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               …                …                   …              …          -0.005**
     young children), 22-39                                                                                              (0.002)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                 …                …                   …              …          0.013***
     young children), 22-39                                                                                              (0.004)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               …                …                   …              …          -0.0003
     older children), 22-39                                                                                              (0.002)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                 …                …                   …              …           -0.006*
     older children), 22-39                                                                                              (0.003)
 B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
   With young children                                    …                …                   …              …           -0.002
                                                                                                                          (0.002)
   With older children                                        …                   …               …          …            -0.001
                                                                                                                          (0.002)
 R2                                                           0.18                0.13            0.17      0.14            0.36
 N, low-education                                            1,505               1,505           1,505     1,505           1,505
See notes to Tables 2 and 5, and equation (7) (along with modifications described in the text.
   Table 9: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and Hours at Age
                       40, Alternative Specifications for Eliminating Endogenous Migration or Policy
                                                                         Log hourly                               Annual
                                                                            wage     Log earnings     Annual        hours
                                                      Employment         (employed)   (employed)        hours  (employed)
                                                             (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)
 I. Fixing State at Age 22
 A. Coefficient estimates (δUYF, δUOF, δMYF, δMOF, δUYS, δUOS, δMYS, δMOS)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×             -0.0005           -0.002        -0.003         -1.18        0.22
     young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.005)          (0.009)      (0.014)       (13.89)      (8.74)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×             -0.0004            0.011*       0.019**        -0.44        2.86
     older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.003)          (0.006)      (0.008)        (6.19)      (4.90)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×              -0.002           -0.002        -0.007         -8.87       -0.91
     young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.004)          (0.008)      (0.010)        (8.81)      (6.49)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               0.003           -0.006        -0.016         -1.87      -9.00*
     older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.002)          (0.006)      (0.012)        (5.69)      (5.32)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                -0.002           -0.007        -0.017         18.52        1.67
     young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.032)          (0.061)      (0.010)       (56.25)     (52.87)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                 0.014           -0.052        0.0001      104.36**     85.03***
     older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.018)          (0.040)      (0.057)       (41.40)     (30.00)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                -0.036           -0.006        -0.078     -131.41***  -121.28***
     young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.022)          (0.037)      (0.063)       (44.64)     (39.65)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                -0.014            0.010        -0.024       -60.54**     -31.32
     older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.011)          (0.018)      (0.033)       (27.77)     (22.97)
 B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
    Unmarried (young children)                            -0.001           -0.004        -0.006          2.53        0.55
                                                          (0.007)          (0.012)      (0.019)       (13.74)     (10.47)
    Unmarried (older children)                             0.002            0.001        0.019*        20.43**    19.86***
                                                          (0.005)          (0.010)      (0.011)        (8.74)      (6.25)
    Married (young children)                              -0.010*          -0.003        -0.023      -35.15***   -25.17***
                                                          (0.005)          (0.010)      (0.016)       (11.12)      (9.16)
    Married (older children)                              0.0005           -0.004       -0.020**       -13.98    -15.27***
                                                          (0.003)          (0.005)      (0.009)        (6.46)      (5.05)
 R2                                                         0.09             0.17          0.17          0.09        0.11
 II. Using Only Federal EITC Variation
 A. Coefficient estimates (δUYF, δUOF, δMYF, δMOF)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×              -0.002            0.001        0.0002         -2.36        0.63
     young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.004)          (0.007)      (0.012)       (10.66)      (7.00)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×              0.0002            0.006        0.015**         2.89        4.57
     older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.003)          (0.006)      (0.006)        (5.60)      (4.42)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×              -0.004           -0.003        -0.009       -14.21**      -5.69
     young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.003)          (0.006)      (0.008)        (6.05)      (4.60)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               0.004           -0.006        -0.014         -2.65      -8.55*
     older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.002)          (0.005)      (0.009)        (4.79)      (4.33)
   2
 R                                                          0.09             0.16          0.16          0.08        0.10
 N                                                         1,505            1,176         1,177         1,505       1,197
See notes to Tables 2 and 5. The only differences compared to Table 5 are in the definitions of the EITC variables, as explained in the
headings of Parts I and II.
  Table 10: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and Hours at Age
                   40, Including High-Education Women as an Additional Level of Differencing
                                                                                     Log hourly         Log                      Annual
                                                                                        wage          earnings      Annual        hours
                                                                        Employment   (employed)     (employed)      hours      (employed)
                                                                               (1)       (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)
  A. Coefficient estimates (δUYF, δUOF, δMYF, δMOF, δUYS, δUOS, δMYS, δMOS)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                                 0.004        0.001          0.003        9.35         2.80
      young children × unmarried, 22-39) × low-ed                          (0.004)       (0.008)        (0.011)    (13.72)       (9.24)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                                 0.001        0.005          0.012        7.84         4.72
      older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39) × low-ed                   (0.003)       (0.006)        (0.009)     (6.99)       (6.13)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                               0.0002         -0.007         -0.018      -9.13        -3.76
      young children × married, 22-39) × low-ed                            (0.003)       (0.008)        (0.013)     (7.96)       (7.61)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                               0.006**        -0.007        -0.021*       1.97        -6.58
      older (only) children × married, 22-39) × low-ed                     (0.003)       (0.006)        (0.011)     (5.61)       (5.60)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                                  -0.017        0.057          0.094*     32.50        73.69*
      young children × unmarried, 22-39) × low-ed                          (0.021)       (0.044)        (0.055)    (56.57)      (40.63)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                                 0.022**        -0.033         0.016     90.30***      42.85
      older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39) × low-ed                   (0.010)       (0.029)        (0.040)    (33.68)      (48.04)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                                  -0.007        0.017          -0.038    -65.90*     -77.87***
      young children × married, 22-39) × low-ed                            (0.014)       (0.047)        (0.046)    (35.85)      (28.54)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                                  -0.002        0.028          0.003      -46.31       -40.52
      older (only) children × married, 22-39) × low-ed                     (0.013)       (0.051)        (0.074)    (29.73)      (24.57)
  B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
    Unmarried (young children)                                             0.0004         0.012          0.022*     15.85        17.54*
                                                                           (0.005)       (0.010)        (0.013)    (13.20)       (8.80)
    Unmarried (older children)                                               0.006        -0.002         0.015     25.90***      13.29
                                                                           (0.004)       (0.009)        (0.012)     (8.12)      (12.16)
    Married (young children)                                                -0.001        -0.003       -0.026**    -22.31**     -19.33**
                                                                           (0.004)       (0.008)        (0.011)     (8.88)       (7.97)
    Married (older children)                                                 0.006        -0.002         -0.020      -7.29     -14.68***
                                                                           (0.003)       (0.009)        (0.014)     (5.93)       (5.31)
  R2                                                                          0.09         0.23           0.17        0.12         0.12
  N                                                                          3,358        2,757          2,760      3,358        2,804
See notes to Tables 2 and 5. The difference compared to Table 5 is that high-education women are added to the sample, and all variables in
the model are entered on their own, and interacted with a low-education dummy variables. The estimates in the table are based on the latter
interactions. (The main effect of low education is also included.)
  Table 11: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and Hours at
                                      Age 40, Including State-Specific Linear Trends
                                                                    Log hourly                                  Annual
                                                                        wage       Log earnings   Annual          hours
                                                     Employment (employed)          (employed)      hours     (employed)
                                                           (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)
 A. Coefficient estimates (δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ )
                            UYF   UOF  MYF  MOF    UYS   UOS   MYS MOS

   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×             -0.003          0.001           0.004       -4.46          1.81
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                 (0.004)         (0.009)        (0.013)     (12.01)        (8.15)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×            -0.0002          0.008          0.014*       -0.26          2.35
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)          (0.003)         (0.006)        (0.007)       (5.71)       (4.72)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×             -0.005         -0.002          -0.006      -14.07         -1.44
    young children × married, 22-39)                   (0.004)         (0.008)        (0.010)       (7.06)       (5.16)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×              0.003         -0.004          -0.013       -1.83         -6.88
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)            (0.002)         (0.006)        (0.010)       (5.32)       (4.93)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×               -0.003         -0.015          -0.019       22.11         24.69
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                 (0.018)         (0.037)        (0.054)     (39.43)       (28.77)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                0.013         -0.033          -0.003     75.94***      58.18***
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)          (0.009)         (0.026)        (0.039)     (24.87)       (17.33)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×               -0.007         0.0001         -0.0488      -64.15*     -75.50***
    young children × married, 22-39)                   (0.016)         (0.023)        (0.040)     (37.07)       (21.74)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×               -0.004         -0.002          -0.030     -37.58**       -27.82
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)            (0.008)         (0.013)        (0.024)     (17.74)       (21.27)
 B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
   Unmarried (young children)                           -0.004         -0.002         -0.0002       -0.04          6.75
                                                       (0.004)         (0.009)        (0.013)       (9.60)       (6.68)
   Unmarried (older children)                            0.002          0.002           0.013      14.92**      13.99***
                                                       (0.004)         (0.009)        (0.010)       (6.18)       (4.65)
                                                                                                          ***
   Married (young children)                             -0.006         -0.002          -0.015    -26.90        -16.54***
                                                       (0.004)         (0.006)        (0.009)       (8.14)       (5.63)
   Married (older children)                              0.003         -0.004         -0.019**      -9.35*      -12.44**
                                                       (0.002)         (0.004)        (0.008)       (5.36)       (5.07)
 R2                                                       0.11           0.19            0.21        0.12          0.15
 N                                                       1,505          1,176           1,177       1,505         1,197
See notes to Tables 2 and 5. In contrast to Table 5, the models include state-specific linear trends.
 Table 12: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and Hours
        at Age 40, Alternative Specifications with Controls for Welfare Reform and Minimum Wages
                                                                              Log hourly                                      Annual
                                                                                 wage            Log earnings   Annual         hours
                                                            Employment        (employed)          (employed)     hours      (employed)
                                                               (1)                (2)                (3)          (4)           (5)
I. Including Parametric Welfare Reform Control
A. Coefficient estimates (δUYF, δUOF, δMYF, δMOF, δUYS, δUOS, δMYS, δMOS)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                        -0.006         0.0004            -0.006       -12.67        -4.68
     young children × unmarried, 22-39)                           (0.004)         (0.011)           (0.016)     (12.41)        (8.41)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                         0.001          0.011            0.020**       5.40          6.19
     older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)                    (0.003)         (0.007)           (0.009)      (6.51)        (5.27)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                        -0.004          -0.005           -0.010      -12.12*        -2.57
     young children × married, 22-39)                             (0.003)         (0.008)           (0.011)      (6.86)        (4.91)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                         0.004          -0.008           -0.016*       -0.55        -8.06*
     older (only) children × married, 22-39)                      (0.002)         (0.005)           (0.009)      (4.53)        (4.76)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                           0.008          0.006             0.019       42.28         25.14
     young children × unmarried, 22-39)                           (0.018)         (0.029)           (0.041)     (41.11)       (33.30)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                           0.008          -0.017            0.024      70.07***     62.05***
     older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)                    (0.011)         (0.017)           (0.027)     (25.72)       (19.04)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                          -0.008          -0.001           -0.064*     -71.04**     -81.50***
     young children × married, 22-39)                             (0.016)         (0.020)           (0.034)     (35.21)       (21.43)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                          -0.002          0.003            -0.016      -31.46*       -20.86
     older (only) children × married, 22-39)                      (0.008)         (0.011)           (0.021)     (16.29)       (18.87)
B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
  Unmarried (young children)                                       -0.004          0.002            -0.002         -4.22       0.35
                                                                  (0.004)         (0.009)           (0.014)       (9.75)      (6.52)
  Unmarried (older children)                                        0.003          0.007           0.025***      19.41***    18.60***
                                                                  (0.004)         (0.008)           (0.009)       (6.13)      (5.76)
  Married (young children)                                         -0.005          -0.005          -0.023**     -26.33***    -18.87***
                                                                  (0.004)         (0.006)           (0.010)       (7.80)      (5.77)
  Married (older children)                                          0.003         -0.007*          -0.019***       -6.85     -12.23**
                                                                  (0.002)         (0.004)           (0.007)       (4.99)      (4.71)
R2                                                                  0.09            0.17              0.18         0.10        0.12
II. Including Real Minimum Wage Control
A. Coefficient estimates (δUYF, δUOF, δMYF, δMOF, δUYS, δUOS, δMYS, δMOS)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                        -0.003          0.008             0.003       -11.34        -5.69
     young children × unmarried, 22-39)                           (0.004)         (0.008)           (0.012)     (11.21)        (8.53)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                      -0.00005          0.013*           0.015*        -2.67        -2.26
     older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)                    (0.003)         (0.007)           (0.008)      (6.18)        (4.64)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                        -0.004          -0.004           -0.010      -12.63*        -4.41
     young children × married, 22-39)                             (0.003)         (0.007)           (0.011)      (6.34)        (5.62)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                         0.004          -0.008           -0.018        -2.07       -10.01
     older (only) children × married, 22-39)                      (0.003)         (0.006)           (0.013)      (6.72)        (6.94)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                         -0.0004          0.006             0.012       26.39         22.17
     young children × unmarried, 22-39)                           (0.015)         (0.033)           (0.043)     (37.66)       (29.55)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                           0.006          -0.015            0.029      69.35***     67.01***
     older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)                    (0.012)         (0.020)           (0.028)     (25.19)       (19.35)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                          -0.008          -0.002          -0.068**     -70.93*      -81.07***
     young children × married, 22-39)                             (0.016)         (0.019)           (0.032)     (35.63)       (20.68)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                          -0.002          -0.001           -0.019      -30.68*       -19.89
     older (only) children × married, 22-39)                      (0.008)         (0.011)           (0.022)     (16.63)       (18.54)
B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
  Unmarried (young children)                                       -0.003          0.009             0.005        -6.06        -1.25
                                                                  (0.004)         (0.008)           (0.014)      (9.04)       (6.60)
  Unmarried (older children)                                        0.001          0.010            0.021**       11.20       11.14*
                                                                  (0.004)         (0.009)           (0.010)      (7.42)       (6.18)
  Married (young children)                                         -0.005          -0.004          -0.024**     -26.81***    -20.63***
                                                                  (0.004)         (0.006)           (0.010)      (7.89)       (6.01)
  Married (older children)                                          0.004          -0.008          -0.022**       -8.21      -13.99**
                                                                  (0.003)         (0.005)           (0.011)      (6.87)       (6.45)
R2                                                                  0.10            0.17              0.17        0.10          0.12
N                                                                   1,505          1,176             1,177        1,505        1,197
See notes to Tables 2 and 5. The modifications to the equations estimated are explained in the text.
Table 13: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Earnings and Hours
 at Age 40, Implied Effect of $1,00 Increase in Federal and $200 in State Maximum
                              Credits from Ages 22-39
                                                       Always unmarried with              Always married with
                                                      children at ages 22 and 24        children at ages 22 and 24
                                                                  (1)                               (2)
A. Log Earnings Estimates From:
Table 3: Simple specification                                     0.089                            -0.260**
                                                                 (0.099)                           (0.122)
Table 4: Adding age of kids                                       0.145                             -0.175*
                                                                 (0.115)                           (0.098)
Table 5: With age of kids and separate                            0.244*                           -0.361**
 state and federal EITC                                          (0.137)                           (0.139)
Table 7: Using state supplement percentage                        0.498                            -0.629**
                                                                 (0.349)                           (0.239)
Table 9, Part I: Fixing state at age 22                           0.141                             -0.388*
                                                                 (0.241)                           (0.196)
Table 9, Part II: Using only federal EITC                         0.147                             -0.212
 variation                                                       (0.120)                           (0.148)
Table 10: Including high-education women                          0.328*                            -0.410*
 as an additional difference                                     (0.164)                           (0.210)
Table 11: Including state-specific linear                         0.130                            -0.307**
 trends                                                          (0.169)                           (0.143)
Table 12, Part I: Including parametric                            0.234                           -0.372***
 welfare reform control                                          (0.166)                           (0.132)
Table 12, Part II: Including real minimum                         0.251                            -0.406**
 wage control                                                    (0.155)                           (0.169)
B. Annual Hours (Employed) Estimates From:
Table 3: Simple specification                                     35.52                          -163.50***
                                                                 (63.47)                           (57.59)
Table 4: Adding age of kids                                       62.24                          -114.12**
                                                                 (69.46)                           (46.42)
Table 5: With age of kids and separate                          190.00**                         -276.88***
 state and federal EITC                                          (81.90)                           (74.43)
Table 7: Using state supplement percentage                      751.88***                        -611.75**
                                                                (203.56)                          (229.29)
Table 9, Part I: Fixing state at age 22                          203.04                          -354.01***
                                                                (123.37)                           (99.20)
Table 9, Part II: Using only federal EITC                         50.72                           -131.08*
 variation                                                       (76.17)                           (67.79)
Table 10: Including high-education women                         273.15*                         -301.44***
 as an additional difference                                    (160.79)                          (102.65)
Table 11: Including state-specific linear                       193.88**                         -256.74***
 trends                                                          (75.23)                           (78.73)
Table 12, Part I: Including parametric                          188.82**                         -273.25***
 welfare reform control                                          (81.82)                           (75.90)
Table 12, Part II: Including real minimum                        101.34                          -304.92***
 wage control                                                    (91.58)                           (97.89)
See notes to Tales 2 and 5. All coefficients come from the Table specified in each row. These effects are
calculated by the following formulas:
Column (1): (8)×[δUYF + (0.2)×δUYS] + (10)×[δUOF + (0.2)×δUOS)]
Column (2): (8)×[δMYF + (0.2)×δMYS] + (10)×[δMOF + (0.2)×δMOS)]
For Table 3, because there is neither an age of kids distinction nor separate federal and state credits, the effects
are (18)×δU and (18)×δM, respectively. For Table 4, the effects are (8)×δUY + (10)×δUO and (8)×δMY + (10)×δMO,
respectively. For Table 7, the state δ parameters are multiplied by 2, rather than 0.2. For Table 9, Part II, the state
portion of the calculation is omitted as that regression does not include state EITC variables. For Table 10, we
use the low-ed coefficients for the calculations. The δ parameters are the coefficients of the variables described
in equations (4), (5), (5’), and (6).
         Appendix A : Full Estimating Equation Corresponding to Equation (6) and Table 5



Yijt = α + βUF{ ∑t-1
                 a=t-18 (CRFedja ·Uija )/18} + β { ∑a=t-18 (CRStateja ·Uija )/18}
                                                US  t-1



       + γUY{ ∑t-1
               a=t-18 (YKija ·Uija )/18} + γ { ∑a=t-18 (OKija ·Uija )/18}
                                            UO  t-1



       + βMF{ ∑t-1
               a=t-18 (CRFedja ·Mija )/18} + β { ∑a=t-18 (CRStateja ·Mija )/18}
                                              MS  t-1



       + γMY{ ∑t-1
               a=t-18 (YKija ·Mija )/18} + γ { ∑a=t-18 (OKija ·Mija )/18}
                                            MO  t-1



       + δUYF{ ∑t-1
                a=t-18 (CRFedja ·YKija ·Uija )/18} + δ
                                                      UOF
                                                          { ∑t-1
                                                             a=t-18 (CRFedja ·OKija ·Uija )/18}


       + δMYF{ ∑t-1
                a=t-18 (CRFedja ·YKija ·Mija )/18} + δ
                                                      MOF
                                                         { ∑t-1
                                                            a=t-18 (CRFedja ·OKija ·Mija )/18}


       + δUYS{ ∑t-1
                a=t-18 (CRStateja ·YKija ·Uija )/18} + δ
                                                        UOS
                                                           { ∑t-1
                                                              a=t-18 (CRStateja ·OKija ·Uija )/18}


       + δMYS{ ∑t-1
                a=t-18 (CRStateja ·YKija ·Mija )/18} + δ
                                                        MOS
                                                           { ∑t-1
                                                              a=t-18 (CRStateja ·OKija ·Mija )/18}


       + η{ ∑t-1
             a=t-18 Mija /18} + β
                                  UF,40
                                        CRFedijt∙Uijt + βUS,40CRStateijt∙Uijt + γUY,40YKijt∙Uijt + γUO,40OKijt∙Uijt

       + δUYF,40CRFedijt∙YKijt∙Uijt + δUOF,40CRFedijt∙OKijt∙Uijt + δUYS,40CRStateijt∙YKijt∙Uijt

       + δUOS,40CRStateijt∙OKijt∙Uijt + βMF,40CRFedijt∙Mijt + βMS,40CRStateijt∙Mijt + γMY, 40YKijt∙Mijt

       + γMO, 40OKijt∙Mijt + δMYF,40CRFedijt∙YKijt∙Mijt + MOF,40CRStateijt∙OKijt∙Mijt + δMYS,40CRStateijt∙YKijt∙Mijt

       + δMOS,40CRStateijt∙OKijt∙Mijt + η40Mijt +Djθ + Dtλ + εijt .




                                                         A.i
          Appendix B: Replication Analysis, and Additional Robustness and Sensitivity Analyses

Replication of Past Results on EITC and Employment

           We have explored the replication of the results from key prior papers on the EITC using the PSID data.

Eissa and Liebman (1996) study federal EITC changes in 1986, which, as Figure 2 shows, increased EITC phase-in

rates, although not sharply. 61 They study only unmarried women, and report several difference-in-differences (DD)

estimators using treatment groups defined based on having children and, in some cases, lower education, and using

control groups of either women without children or women with children but higher education. The columns labeled

“E & L” in Appendix Table B1 report their estimates. The second-to-last column reports their DD estimates. All are

positive, consistent with a positive effect of the EITC on employment of women (possibly low-skilled) with

children. Three of the five estimates are statistically significant.

           The columns labeled “Replication” show results using the PSID data for the same years. Despite the much

smaller sample sizes, the PSID evidence is broadly consistent. First, most of the employment rates are similar to

those in Eissa and Liebman, as the first four columns show. Second, four of the five DD estimates are positive,

although standard errors are larger. The one exception is for the estimate using only those with less than a high

school education comparing those with children (the treated) and without children (the controls). However, as the

table shows, the sample size is particularly small for this analysis (175 observations in the control group), and the

estimates are, correspondingly, much less precise. For the larger sample of low-skilled women, defined as high

school or less, the replication is much more consistent.

           Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) focus on the much larger changes in the EITC in the mid-1990s. They

estimate year-by-year differences in the employment rate of women with and without children, controlling for other

characteristics, also considering only unmarried women. As shown in Appendix Table B2, they find clear evidence

that the difference in employment rates – with much lower employment rates for women with children initially –

shrinks considerably beginning with the changes in the EITC (see the columns labelled “M & R”). Our replication

extends the sample further in time. The same effect is clear in the PSID data, and we can see that it persists in years

beyond the Meyer and Rosenbaum sample period. Moreover, the decline starts a bit earlier, which is more consistent

with when the phase-in rate for women with children began increasing (as shown in Figure 2). Thus, it does appear

feasible to use the PSID to study the effects of the EITC on women’s labor market outcomes – at least with respect


61
     There were also increases in the maximum credit, and reductions in the phase-out rate.


                                                            B.i
to the simpler question of shorter-run effects on employment.

Robustness and Sensitivity Analysis

         Here, we consider weighting. We are quite reticent to put much store in the sample weights, given the

sample selection rules imposed to study longer-term effects of the EITC (see Table 1). However, while there is little

reason to believe the sample weights are very accurate, they ought to capture broad-brush differences between those

oversampled based on the low-income criterion. Appendix Table B3 reports results for the preferred specification

and sample when we weight by the PSID Core sample weights for the age 40 observations. With the weights, fewer

of the estimated coefficients (in the top four rows of the table) are significant, but the qualitative results are similar,

and the implied impacts for married women are frequently significant. While the exact estimates clearly are sensitive

to weighting, we view Appendix Table B3 as providing additional evidence of the robustness of our estimated

effects of longer-run exposure to the EITC.

         We know that a principal effect of the oversampling of low-income families in the PSID is a strong

overrepresentation of blacks. In our data set, the average weight on blacks is less than one-third that of non-blacks,

so the weighted estimates substantially downweight blacks. This suggests that we can also learn about the sensitivity

of the estimates to weighting by looking at estimates for blacks and non-blacks, which we do in Appendix Table B4.

The estimates for non-black women are, not surprisingly, very similar to the full sample and the weighted results

(since the weighting downweights blacks). Interestingly, the one difference is that for married black women the

signs of the estimated effects are not negative, but instead are positive like for unmarried women. One potential

explanation is lower black female earnings and lower black male earnings and employment, making the positive

extensive-margin effects of a more generous EITC more influential for married black women.




                                                            B.ii
Appendix Figure B1: Federal EITC Phase-in Rate




Appendix Figure B2: State EITC Supplements (%)
                           Appendix Table B1: Replication of Eissa & Liebman (1996) Table 1
                                 Pre-TRA 86            Post-TRA 86           Difference                            DD
                              E & L Replication E & L Replication E & L Replication                       E&L       Replication
Treatment group: with
children
  Estimates                    0.729        0.768       0.753        0.782       0.024       0.015
                              (0.004)      (0.015)     (0.004)      (0.014)     (0.006)     (0.021)
  N (pre and post)            20,810        3,231
Control group: without
children
  Estimates                    0.952        0.969       0.952        0.970       0.000       0.001        0.024        0.014
                              (0.001)      (0.005)     (0.001)      (0.006)     (0.002)     (0.008)      (0.006)      (0.022)
  N (pre and post)            46,287        2,265
Treatment group: less
than HS, with children
  Estimates                    0.479        0.571       0.497        0.615       0.018       0.044
                              (0.010)      (0.033)     (0.010)      (0.034)     (0.014)     (0.048)
  N (pre and post)             5,396         928
Control group 1: less
than HS, without children
  Estimates                    0.784        0.648       0.761        0.819      -0.023       0.171        0.041       -0.127
                              (0.010)      (0.076)     (0.009)      (0.055)     (0.013)     (0.094)      (0.019)      (0.105)
 N (pre and post)              3,958         175
Control group 2: beyond
HS, with children
 Estimates                     0.911        0.898       0.920        0.860       0.009      -0.038        0.009        0.082
                              (0.005)      (0.020)     (0.005)      (0.025)     (0.007)     (0.032)      (0.015)      (0.057)
  N (pre and post)             5,712         839
Treatment group: high
school, with children
  Estimates                    0.764        0.805       0.787        0.828       0.023       0.023
                              (0.006)      (0.021)     (0.006)      (0.019)     (0.008)     (0.029)
  N (pre and post)             9,702        1,409
Control group 1: high
school, without children
  Estimates                    0.945        0.963       0.943        0.958      -0.002      -0.006        0.025        0.028
                              (0.002)      (0.009)     (0.003)      (0.011)     (0.004)     (0.015)      (0.009)      (0.032)
 N (pre and post)             16,527         894
Control group 2: beyond
HS, with children
 Estimates                     0.911        0.898       0.920        0.860       0.009      -0.038        0.014        0.060
                              (0.005)      (0.020)     (0.005)      (0.025)     (0.007)     (0.032)      (0.011)      (0.043)
 N (pre and post)              5,712         839
Eissa and Liebman use the CPS March supplement weights. The PSID results use provided sampling weights to calculate means. The
sample, as in Eissa and Liebman (1996), is restricted to unmarried women between the ages of 16 and 44.
                 Appendix Table B2: Replication of Meyer & Rosenbaum (2001) Table III, Extended
                                                             M&R                                         Replication
Explanatory variable                       Marginal effect          Standard error         Marginal effect         Standard error
Any children × 1984                           -0.1087                  0.0160                 -0.0047                 0.0413
Any children × 1985                           -0.0120                  0.0156                 -0.0529                 0.0552
Any children × 1986                           -0.1144                  0.0153                 -0.0859                 0.0764
Any children × 1987                           -0.1056                  0.0144                 -0.0493                 0.0617
Any children × 1988                           -0.0918                  0.0140                 -0.1003                 0.0493
Any children × 1989                           -0.0745                  0.0131                 -0.0881                 0.0726
Any children × 1990                           -0.0832                  0.0136                 -0.0430                 0.0470
Any children × 1991                           -0.0916                  0.0151                 -0.0096                 0.0364
Any children × 1992                           -0.0706                  0.0159                 -0.0030                 0.0405
Any children × 1993                           -0.0830                  0.0153                  0.0095                 0.0293
Any children × 1994                           -0.0388                  0.0145                  0.0002                 0.0336
Any children × 1995                           -0.0154                  0.0143                  0.0207                 0.0249
Any children × 1996                            0.0042                  0.0140                 -0.0128                 0.0421
Any children × 1998                                                                            0.0120                 0.0322
Any children × 2000                                                                            0.0289                 0.0206
Any children × 2002                                                                            0.0457                 0.0148
Any children × 2004                                                                            0.0427                 0.0140
Any children × 2006                                                                            0.0465                 0.0128
Any children × 2008                                                                            0.0498                 0.0137
Any children × 2010                                                                            0.0431                 0.0220
Any children × 2012                                                                            0.0388                 0.0203
Any children × 2014                                                                            0.0490                 0.0140

Nonwhite                                         -0.0727                0.0033                   N/A                      N/A
Hispanic                                         -0.0608                0.0033                   N/A                      N/A
Black                                              N/A                    N/A                  -0.0381                  0.0130
Age 19-24                                        -0.0077                0.0055                  0.0036                  0.0076
Age 25-29                                        -0.0107                0.0095                 -0.0061                  0.0077
Age 35-39                                         0.0008                0.0052                 -0.0024                  0.0092
Age 40-44                                         0.0107                0.0116                 -0.0161                  0.0108
High school dropout                              -0.1512                0.0032                 -0.1050                  0.0191
Some college                                      0.0989                0.0055                  0.0227                  0.0102
Bachelors                                         0.1755                0.0055                  0.0659                  0.0046
Masters                                           0.1927                0.0095                  0.0638                  0.0040
Divorced                                          0.0620                0.0052                 -0.0463                  0.0168
Widowed                                          -0.1218                0.0116                 -0.2361                  0.0674
Any children × divorced                           0.0720                0.0063                  0.0462                  0.0124
Any children × widowed                            0.1148                0.0137                  0.0586                  0.0074
Number of children under 18                      -0.0325                0.0020                 -0.0221                  0.0042
Number of children under 6                       -0.0699                0.0027                 -0.0267                  0.0098
State unemployment rate                          -0.0101                0.0015                 -0.0026                  0.0029
Any children × state                              0.0032                0.0017                 -0.0050                  0.0037
unemployment rate
Number of observations                                      119,019                                         23,301
This sample includes 19-44 year-old single women (divorced, widowed, or never married) who are not in school. Fixed state and
year effects are included in the regression (not reported). Employment is defined as having worked in the past year (i.e., annual hours
greater than zero). Estimates are weighted using the sampling weights from the corresponding sample. Given the longer sample
period, the PSID weighting is more complicated than in Appendix Table B1. The PSID introduced new families in the early 1990s,
adding around 2,000 immigrant families from Mexico, Puerto Rico, and Cuba. However, because this misses families from other
Hispanic/Latino countries as well as all Asian immigrants, and due to a lack of funding, this sample was dropped in 1995. The PSID
also added 441 immigrant families in 1997 and an additional 70 families in 1999. We use the Core sample weights, which means
that the temporary families added in the early 1990s are not included (as they were never part of the Core sample), but the immigrant
families added in 1997 and 1999 are included, as they are representative (with different weights) of families in the Core sample.
(There are “Combined weights” that cover the earlier 2,000 immigrant families, but they are not defined for earlier years.)
  Appendix Table B3: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and
                                                 Hours at Age 40, Weighted
                                                                       Log hourly                                  Annual
                                                                          wage      Log earnings     Annual          hours
                                                     Employment (employed)           (employed)        hours     (employed)
                                                           (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)
A. Coefficient estimates (δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ )
                           UYF   UOF  MYF  MOF    UYS   UOS    MYS MOS

  Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                0.006           0.006          0.004         10.44         -1.72
   young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.005)         (0.010)        (0.011)       (12.24)        (8.85)
  Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×              0.0002           -0.001          0.007          4.67          6.42
   older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.004)         (0.006)        (0.007)        (7.99)        (4.20)
  Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               -0.005          -0.005         -0.012       -17.12**        -6.84
   young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.004)         (0.009)        (0.011)        (6.99)        (6.25)
  Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                0.001          -0.008         -0.018         -7.71        -8.80*
   older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.003)         (0.007)        (0.011)        (4.82)        (4.77)
  Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                  0.017           0.012         -0.006         27.40          7.29
   young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.027)         (0.047)        (0.074)       (44.94)       (35.85)
  Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                  0.011           0.005         0.079**        63.64        73.87*
   older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.020)         (0.030)        (0.038)       (45.97)       (37.31)
  Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×               -0.045**          -0.002         -0.062*    -146.68***     -91.78***
   young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.017)         (0.027)        (0.037)       (39.83)       (26.68)
  Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                 -0.021          -0.001         -0.004        -59.14        -15.77
   older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.016)         (0.023)        (0.034)       (39.36)       (24.40)
B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
  Unmarried (young children)                              0.009           0.008          0.003         15.92         -0.26
                                                        (0.006)         (0.011)        (0.018)       (10.26)        (9.22)
  Unmarried (older children)                              0.002         0.0003          0.023**       17.40*       21.19**
                                                        (0.004)         (0.007)        (0.009)        (8.74)        (8.85)
                                                               ***                             **            ***
  Married (young children)                             -0.014            -0.005        -0.024       -46.46        -25.20***
                                                        (0.004)         (0.008)        (0.011)        (9.09)        (6.67)
  Married (older children)                               -0.004          -0.008         -0.019*      -19.54**      -11.96*
                                                        (0.004)         (0.007)        (0.011)        (8.96)        (6.41)
R2                                                        0.15             0.23           0.21          0.16          0.16
N                                                         1,499           1,170          1,171         1,499         1,191
See notes to Tables 2 and 5. The difference is the estimates are weighted.
   Appendix Table B4: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings,
                            and Hours at Age 40, Separate Regressions by Race
                                                                          Log hourly wage      Log earnings   Annual      Annual hours
                                                         Employment         (employed)          (employed)     hours       (employed)
                                                            (1)                 (2)                (3)          (4)           (5)
 I. Black Only
 A. Coefficient estimates (δUYF, δUOF, δMYF, δMOF, δUYS, δUOS, δMYS, δMOS)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                    -0.007           -0.002             0.008       -7.38          4.72
     young children × unmarried, 22-39)                        (0.006)           (0.013)           (0.021)     (15.51)       (11.96)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                    -0.002            0.012            0.023*       -4.13          1.07
     older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)                 (0.004)           (0.009)           (0.013)     (10.49)        (7.96)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                     0.002            0.007             0.028       14.00         24.97
     young children × married, 22-39)                          (0.010)           (0.012)           (0.018)     (25.36)       (15.51)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                     0.007            0.008             0.016       17.52          9.32
     older (only) children × married, 22-39)                   (0.007)           (0.009)           (0.015)     (17.64)       (17.22)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                      -0.015           -0.039            -0.045        2.41         32.03
     young children × unmarried, 22-39)                        (0.030)           (0.071)           (0.066)    (116.28)       (94.43)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                      -0.024           -0.050             0.003       55.17       122.86*
     older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)                 (0.036)           (0.072)           (0.074)    (110.91)       (67.07)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                      0.029*           -0.212*         -0.935***       9.23      -386.73***
     young children × married, 22-39)                          (0.016)           (0.120)           (0.209)     (57.23)      (139.83)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                       0.012           -0.214*         -0.892***       1.81      -327.89**
     older (only) children × married, 22-39)                   (0.016)           (0.121)           (0.204)     (35.41)      (128.50)
 B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
   Unmarried (young children)                                   -0.010           -0.010            -0.001      -6.90         11.13
                                                               (0.007)           (0.014)           (0.017)    (19.02)       (14.38)
   Unmarried (older children)                                   -0.007            0.002             0.024       6.91         25.65*
                                                               (0.006)           (0.014)           (0.014)    (16.72)       (13.60)
   Married (young children)                                      0.007           -0.035*         -0.159***     15.85         -52.37
                                                               (0.010)           (0.020)           (0.044)    (24.82)       (32.96)
   Married (older children)                                      0.009           -0.035          -0.162***     17.88         -56.25
                                                               (0.006)           (0.023)           (0.044)    (16.98)       (34.43)
 R2                                                              0.12              0.25             0.29        0.13          0.19
 N                                                                622              458               458        622           465
 II. Non-Black Only
 A. Coefficient estimates (δUYF, δUOF, δMYF, δMOF, δUYS, δUOS, δMYS, δMOS)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                     0.006            0.004            -0.001        4.72          -4.18
  young children × unmarried, 22-39)                           (0.006)           (0.013)           (0.012)     (10.23)        (9.05)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                    -0.003            0.002             0.006       -4.95          0.05
  older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)                    (0.006)           (0.007)           (0.007)     (10.41)        (5.77)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                    -0.005           -0.003            -0.011      -14.55*         -6.25
  young children × married, 22-39)                             (0.004)           (0.008)           (0.011)      (7.97)        (6.95)
    Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                     0.002           -0.009            -0.018*      -3.86         -7.36*
  older (only) children × married, 22-39)                      (0.003)           (0.006)           (0.010)      (4.50)        (3.95)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                      -0.030            0.105            0.388**     108.42        100.66
  young children × unmarried, 22-39)                           (0.064)           (0.116)           (0.180)    (178.65)      (142.76)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                       0.035            0.023            0.137**     143.78*       102.08*
  older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)                    (0.025)           (0.039)           (0.055)     (73.74)       (57.48)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                      -0.021           -0.007            -0.069     -106.16**     -86.43***
  young children × married, 22-39)                             (0.021)           (0.028)           (0.043)     (49.12)       (29.56)
    Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                      -0.008           -0.012            -0.020      -38.48         -13.07
  older (only) children × married, 22-39)                      (0.013)           (0.022)           (0.031)     (38.23)       (26.23)
 B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
   Unmarried (young children)                                  -0.0001            0.026            0.077*       26.40         15.95
                                                               (0.013)           (0.024)           (0.039)     (36.26)       (30.23)
   Unmarried (older children)                                    0.004            0.007           0.033***      23.80         20.47
                                                               (0.006)           (0.010)           (0.011)     (16.45)       (12.86)
   Married (young children)                                     -0.009           -0.005           -0.025**    -35.78***     -23.54***
                                                               (0.005)           (0.008)           (0.012)     (12.29)        (8.26)
   Married (older children)                                      0.001           -0.011*          -0.022**     -11.55          -9.98
                                                               (0.004)           (0.006)           (0.010)      (9.44)        (6.78)
 R2                                                              0.16              0.23             0.22         0.16          0.16
 N                                                                883              718               719         883            732
See notes to Table 2 and 5.
 Appendix Table B5: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and
            Hours at Age 40, Using Separate Federal and State EITC Two-Child Phase-in Rates as Policy
                                                                                                                     Annual
                                                                        Log hourly                                     hours
                                                                           wage     Log earnings       Annual      (employed
                                                     Employment        (employed)    (employed)         hours             )
                                                            (1)              (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)
A. Coefficient estimates (δUYF, δUOF, δMYF, δMOF, δUYS, δUOS, δMYS, δMOS)
  Avg. (two-child federal phase-in rate ×                -0.002            0.002        0.002           -2.85           1.16
   young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.005)           (0.011)      (0.016)         (15.39)       (10.41)
  Avg. (two-child federal phase-in rate ×                 0.001            0.011       0.022**           2.81           5.04
   older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.003)           (0.007)      (0.009)          (6.80)        (6.13)
  Avg. (two-child federal phase-in rate ×                -0.006           -0.006       -0.013          -17.98*         -5.45
   young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.004)           (0.008)      (0.013)          (9.33)        (6.72)
  Avg. (two-child federal phase-in rate ×                 0.004           -0.008       -0.020           -2.38        -10.88*
   older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.003)           (0.006)      (0.013)          (6.38)        (6.18)
  Avg. (two-child state phase-in rate ×                   0.005            0.003        0.017           47.07          30.11
   young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.022)           (0.038)      (0.052)         (51.16)       (40.37)
  Avg. (two-child state phase-in rate ×                   0.007           -0.019        0.042          91.24***      86.45***
   older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.015)           (0.022)      (0.034)         (32.04)       (22.74)
  Avg. (two-child state phase-in rate ×                  -0.009           -0.006       -0.085*         -86.20*     -101.58***
   young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.020)           (0.024)      (0.044)         (46.93)       (29.30)
  Avg. (two-child state phase-in rate ×                  -0.002            0.001       -0.024          -39.35*        -26.96
   older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.011)           (0.014)      (0.028)         (22.16)       (24.97)
B. Implied effect of one-year, 7.5 percentage-point increase in federal and 1.5pp increase in state phase-in rates
  Unmarried (young children)                             -0.001            0.002        0.004            4.92           5.38
                                                        (0.004)           (0.007)      (0.012)          (8.90)        (6.26)
  Unmarried (older children)                              0.001            0.006      0.022***        15.79***      16.75***
                                                        (0.004)           (0.007)      (0.007)          (5.31)        (5.32)
  Married (young children)                               -0.006           -0.005      -0.022**       -26.41*** -19.32***
                                                        (0.004)           (0.006)      (0.009)          (7.74)        (5.34)
  Married (older children)                                0.003           -0.006      -0.018**          -7.69       -12.20**
                                                        (0.002)           (0.004)      (0.007)          (4.84)        (4.58)
R2                                                         0.09             0.16         0.17            0.09           0.11
N                                                         1,505            1,176        1,177           1,505          1,197
See notes to Tables 2 and 5. The difference relative to Table 5 is that the two-child phase-in rate is used, instead of the two-child
maximum credit. We use a policy simulation that amounts to about the same percentage increase in EITC generosity as the
$1,000/$200 increases in the maximum credits used in Table 5 – in this case, a 7.5-percentage point increase in the federal and 1.5-
percentage point increase in the state phase-in rates. These are approximately equal in relative terms. We have been using an increase
of $1,000 2016 dollars, which would represent a 38.3 percent increase over the sample average federal maximum EITC faced ($2,610
in 2016 dollars; Table 2, row 2). A 0.075 phase-in (7.5 percentage points) rate increase is a 38.5 percent increase in the two-child EITC
phase-in rate, based on a weighted average of observations in our sample (19.5 percentage points). Thus, the two measures are nearly
identical in proportional terms. In addition, as in Table 5, the state increase is 20 percent of the federal increase (0.075×0.2=0.015).
Note, though, that the regression coefficients in Panel A correspond to a one-year 10pp increase in the appropriate phase-in rate.
  Appendix Table B6: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and
     Hours at Age 40, Using Separate Federal and State EITC One-Child Maximum Credits and Age of Children
                                                                     Log hourly          Log                    Annual
                                                                        wage          earnings     Annual         hours
                                                     Employment (employed)          (employed)       hours    (employed)
                                                           (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)
 A. Coefficient estimates (δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ )
                            UYF   UOF  MYF  MOF    UYS  UOS    MYS MOS

   Avg. (one-child federal maximum credit ×             -0.002         -0.011          -0.008         2.19         3.06
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                 (0.008)         (0.016)         (0.026)     (21.11)      (13.93)
   Avg. (one-child federal maximum credit ×              0.001         0.021**        0.034***        2.47         3.82
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)          (0.006)         (0.010)         (0.013)     (11.11)       (9.78)
   Avg. (one-child federal maximum credit ×             -0.009         -0.016          -0.021       -20.97        -2.78
    young children × married, 22-39)                   (0.006)         (0.013)         (0.020)     (13.53)       (9.35)
   Avg. (one-child federal maximum credit ×            0.009**         -0.014          -0.031        -1.58      -19.71**
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)            (0.004)         (0.010)         (0.020)      (9.88)       (9.69)
   Avg. (one-child state maximum credit ×                0.015          0.018           0.044        54.28        45.99
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                 (0.025)         (0.044)         (0.061)     (58.75)      (48.67)
   Avg. (one-child state maximum credit ×                0.019         -0.022           0.040     104.07***     96.35***
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)          (0.017)         (0.028)         (0.039)     (36.69)      (25.43)
   Avg. (one-child state maximum credit ×                0.002          0.001          -0.065       -73.27     -94.47***
    young children × married, 22-39)                   (0.021)         (0.030)         (0.052)     (53.18)      (34.05)
   Avg. (one-child state maximum credit ×               -0.005         0.0004          -0.014       -40.89       -16.70
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)            (0.012)         (0.016)         (0.036)     (26.21)      (25.49)
 B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
   Unmarried (young children)                            0.001         -0.007           0.001        13.04        12.26
                                                       (0.007)         (0.014)         (0.025)     (16.90)      (12.07)
   Unmarried (older children)                            0.005          0.017         0.042***      23.28**      23.09**
                                                       (0.007)         (0.012)         (0.013)     (10.96)      (10.73)
                                                                                              *            **
   Married (young children)                             -0.009         -0.016          -0.034      -35.63       -21.67**
                                                       (0.006)         (0.012)         (0.018)     (13.61)       (9.25)
   Married (older children)                             0.008*         -0.014         -0.034**       -9.76      -23.05**
                                                       (0.004)         (0.009)         (0.017)     (10.07)       (8.64)
 R2                                                       0.09           0.16            0.17         0.09         0.11
 N                                                       1,505          1,176           1,177        1,505        1,197
See notes to Tables 2 and 5. The only difference between this table and Table 5 is that here we use the one-child EITC maximum credit.
  Appendix Table B7: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and
   Hours at Age 40, Using Separate Federal and State EITC Three-Child Maximum Credits and Age of Children
                                                                     Log hourly          Log                    Annual
                                                                        wage          earnings    Annual          hours
                                                     Employment (employed) (employed)               hours     (employed)
                                                           (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)
 A. Coefficient estimates (δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ , δ )
                            UYF   UOF  MYF  MOF    UYS  UOS    MYS MOS

   Avg. (three-child federal maximum credit ×           -0.002          0.001          0.0001       -3.94         -0.48
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                 (0.004)         (0.008)         (0.012)    (11.25)        (7.57)
   Avg. (three-child federal maximum credit ×           0.0004          0.008          0.015**       1.53          3.10
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)          (0.003)         (0.006)         (0.007)     (5.33)        (4.38)
   Avg. (three-child federal maximum credit ×           -0.004         -0.004          -0.008     -12.07*         -2.22
    young children × married, 22-39)                   (0.003)         (0.007)         (0.010)     (6.43)        (5.03)
   Avg. (three-child federal maximum credit ×            0.003         -0.006          -0.013       -2.04         -7.53
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)            (0.002)         (0.005)         (0.010)     (4.67)        (4.75)
   Avg. (three-child state maximum credit ×              0.004          0.007           0.012       30.58         18.46
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                 (0.016)         (0.028)         (0.039)    (39.96)       (32.47)
   Avg. (three-child state maximum credit ×              0.001         -0.012           0.027     57.95**       59.55***
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)          (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.022)    (26.87)       (16.72)
   Avg. (three-child state maximum credit ×              0.002          0.001         -0.059**    -48.77*      -74.82***
    young children × married, 22-39)                   (0.012)         (0.016)         (0.029)    (26.72)       (17.41)
   Avg. (three-child state maximum credit ×              0.001         -0.001          -0.021      -15.58        -16.05
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)            (0.008)         (0.009)         (0.017)    (18.16)       (13.41)
 B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
   Unmarried (young children)                           -0.001          0.002           0.003        2.18          3.21
                                                       (0.004)         (0.007)         (0.012)     (8.88)        (6.21)
   Unmarried (older children)                            0.001          0.006         0.021***    13.12**       15.01***
                                                       (0.004)         (0.007)         (0.007)     (5.81)        (5.02)
                                                                                              **          ***
   Married (young children)                             -0.004         -0.003         -0.020     -21.82        -17.18***
                                                       (0.003)         (0.006)         (0.009)     (6.76)        (5.04)
   Married (older children)                              0.003         -0.006         -0.018**      -5.15       -10.74**
                                                       (0.002)         (0.004)         (0.008)     (4.60)        (4.06)
 R2                                                       0.09           0.17            0.17        0.09          0.11
 N                                                       1,505          1,176           1,177       1,505         1,197
See notes to Tables 2 and 5. The only difference between this table and Table 5 is that here we use the three-child EITC maximum
credit.
  Appendix Table B8: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and
    Hours at Age 40, Using Separate Federal and State EITC Two-Child Maximum Credits and Age of Children,
                                           Including Completed Fertility Control
                                                                                                                Annual
                                                                        Log hourly                  Annual        hours
                                                                            wage    Log earnings     hours    (employed
                                                      Employment (employed)          (employed)                      )
                                                             (1)              (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)
 A. Coefficient estimates (δUYF, δUOF, δMYF, δMOF, δUYS, δUOS, δMYS, δMOS)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               -0.002            0.001       -0.001        -3.68       -0.76
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.004)           (0.008)     (0.012)      (11.60)      (7.58)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×             0.000001            0.009       0.015**        0.14        2.31
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.003)           (0.005)     (0.007)       (5.64)      (4.65)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               -0.004           -0.003       -0.007      -11.63*       -2.66
    young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.003)           (0.007)     (0.010)       (6.81)      (5.20)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×                0.003           -0.007       -0.015        -2.53      -8.53*
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.002)           (0.005)     (0.010)       (5.05)      (5.05)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                 -0.002            0.005        0.015       35.48        23.31
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.004)           (0.028)     (0.041)      (39.78)     (32.03)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                  0.007           -0.010        0.038      73.29***    67.82***
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.012)           (0.018)     (0.026)      (25.31)     (18.69)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                 -0.008           -0.002       -0.064*     -71.57*    -78.87***
    young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.016)           (0.020)     (0.033)      (35.75)     (20.96)
                                                                                                            *
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                 -0.002          -0.0002       -0.019      -31.93       -21.16
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.008)           (0.011)     (0.022)      (16.96)     (18.71)
 B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
   Unmarried (young children)                             -0.001            0.002        0.002         3.41        3.90
                                                         (0.004)           (0.007)     (0.012)       (9.01)      (6.20)
   Unmarried (older children)                              0.001            0.006      0.023***     14.80**     15.88***
                                                         (0.004)           (0.007)     (0.008)       (5.64)      (5.63)
   Married (young children)                               -0.006           -0.004      -0.021**    -25.94***   -18.43***
                                                         (0.004)           (0.006)     (0.009)       (7.73)      (5.25)
   Married (older children)                                0.003           -0.007      -0.019**      -8.92*    -12.76***
                                                         (0.002)           (0.004)     (0.008)       (4.91)      (4.69)
  2
 R                                                          0.09             0.17         0.18         0.11        0.12
 N                                                         1,505            1,176        1,177       1,505        1,197
See notes to Table 2 and 5. The only difference between this table and Table 5 is that we include a control for each woman’s total
completed fertility.
  Appendix Table B9: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and
                Hours at Age 40, Using Separate Federal and State EITC Two-Child Maximum Credits
                                                                  Log hourly                                    Annual
                                                                      wage         Log earnings   Annual         hours
                                                  Employment (employed)             (employed)     hours      (employed)
                                                         (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)          (5)
 A. Coefficient estimates (δ , δ , δ , δ )
                            UF   US  MF   MS

   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×           -0.001          0.003            0.006        -2.23        -0.62
    children × unmarried, 22-39)                     (0.003)         (0.004)          (0.006)      (6.12)        (3.92)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×            0.001         -0.007           -0.015        -5.38        -7.93*
    children × married, 22-39)                       (0.002)         (0.005)          (0.010)      (4.53)        (4.50)
                                                                                                          ***
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×              0.008         -0.010            0.025      62.66         60.21***
    children × unmarried, 22-39)                     (0.009)         (0.014)          (0.023)     (22.62)       (15.86)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×             -0.004          0.001           -0.029      -43.29**      -33.58*
    children × married, 22-39)                       (0.008)         (0.011)          (0.021)     (20.72)       (18.38)
 B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
   Unmarried                                           0.001          0.001            0.011       10.30*       11.42***
                                                     (0.003)         (0.005)          (0.007)      (5.23)        (3.80)
   Married                                            0.0003         -0.007          -0.021***   -14.04***     -14.64***
                                                     (0.002)         (0.004)          (0.007)      (4.99)        (3.99)
 R2                                                     0.08           0.15             0.15         0.08         0.10
 N                                                     1,505          1,176            1,177       1,505         1,197
See notes to Table 2. In contrast to Table 5, this table adds the separate federal and state EITC variation to Table 3, instead of Table 4.
  Appendix Table B10: Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and
                           Hours at Age 40, Projecting 1992 Federal EITC Parameters Forward
                                                                        Log hourly                            Annual
                                                                            wage    Log earnings   Annual       hours
                                                      Employment (employed)          (employed)      hours  (employed)
                                                             (1)              (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)
 A. Coefficient estimates (δUYF, δUOF, δMYF, δMOF, δUYS, δUOS, δMYS, δMOS)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               -0.001           -0.034        0.006       20.51      21.70
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.013)           (0.028)     (0.044)     (29.57)    (26.66)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               -0.003            0.016        0.054       12.58      21.13
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.012)           (0.024)     (0.034)     (24.56)    (26.40)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               -0.004         -0.059***     -0.077**     -21.05     -21.43
    young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.008)           (0.016)     (0.033)     (18.35)    (17.49)
   Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×              0.020**           -0.032       -0.072*       8.74     -38.55*
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.009)           (0.023)     (0.041)     (20.28)    (22.82)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                  0.010           -0.001        0.033       66.16      48.32
    young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.024)           (0.056)     (0.078)     (53.76)    (68.41)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                  0.008           -0.031        0.027      87.67**   98.12***
    older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.014)           (0.034)     (0.042)     (34.15)    (33.44)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                 -0.013            0.004       -0.062      -97.81   -118.07**
    young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.019)           (0.034)     (0.070)     (63.81)    (52.26)
   Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                 -0.002            0.003       -0.050      -62.15     -48.46
    older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.017)           (0.023)     (0.048)     (37.99)    (35.17)
 B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
   Unmarried (young children)                              0.001           -0.034        0.012       33.74      31.37
                                                         (0.012)           (0.025)     (0.045)     (28.99)    (28.96)
   Unmarried (older children)                             -0.001            0.010        0.059*      30.11      40.76
                                                         (0.014)           (0.023)     (0.032)     (26.03)    (26.18)
   Married (young children)                               -0.006         -0.058***    -0.089***    -40.61**  -45.04***
                                                         (0.009)           (0.017)     (0.032)     (18.00)    (16.31)
   Married (older children)                              0.020**           -0.032      -0.082**      -3.69    -48.24**
                                                         (0.008)           (0.023)     (0.039)     (20.95)    (21.67)
 R2                                                         0.08             0.18         0.17        0.09       0.11
 N                                                         1,488            1,168        1,169       1,488      1,189
See notes to Tables 2 and 5. The difference here is that, while the state EITC supplement percentages are kept at their actual levels
throughout the sample period, the OBRA 1993 expansion is, essentially, assumed to have never happened. Thus, we project the 1992
federal EITC parameters forward to 2016, only adjusting the maximum credit for inflation.
 Appendix Table B11: Estimated Effects for More-Educated Women Corresponding to Table 8’s Analysis of
Long-Run Effects of EITC on Less-Educated Women’s Employment, Wages, Earnings, and Hours at Age 40,
            Including More-Educated Women as an Additional Level of Differencing (Placebo Test)
                                                                       Log hourly      Log               Annual
                                                                           wage     earnings  Annual      hours
                                                     Employment (employed) (employed) hours (employed)
                                                           (1)               (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)
A. Coefficient estimates (δUYF, δUOF, δMYF, δMOF, δUYS, δUOS, δMYS, δMOS)
  Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×              -0.006**           0.001     -0.002   -12.65*     -2.87
   young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.002)          (0.005)     (0.008)   (7.48)     (6.06)
  Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               -0.001            0.003      0.003     -6.52     -1.47
   older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.002)          (0.003)     (0.005)   (4.45)     (3.73)
  Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×              -0.004**           0.005      0.012     -3.17      1.90
   young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.002)          (0.004)     (0.007)   (4.87)     (4.35)
  Avg. (two-child federal maximum credit ×               -0.003            0.002      0.008     -3.86     -0.98
   older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.002)          (0.003)     (0.005)   (3.43)     (2.33)
  Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                  0.020           -0.054     -0.080*     4.84    -44.80*
   young children × unmarried, 22-39)                   (0.012)          (0.033)     (0.040)  (31.80)    (23.53)
  Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                -0.016**           0.016      0.012    -20.55     24.78
   older (only) children × unmarried, 22-39)            (0.007)          (0.023)     (0.028)  (40.47)    (38.04)
  Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                -0.0001           -0.025     -0.033     -2.38     -2.61
   young children × married, 22-39)                     (0.009)          (0.042)     (0.053)  (23.61)    (24.41)
  Avg. (two-child state maximum credit ×                 0.0003           -0.030     -0.023     17.45     19.47
   older (only) children × married, 22-39)              (0.008)          (0.049)     (0.067)  (24.38)    (23.90)
B. Implied effect of one-year, $1,000 increase in federal and $200 increase in state maximum credits (%)
  Unmarried (young children)                             -0.002           -0.010    -0.018**   -11.68    -11.84*
                                                        (0.003)          (0.008)     (0.009)   (8.37)     (6.21)
  Unmarried (older children)                            -0.004**           0.006      0.005    -10.63      3.48
                                                        (0.002)          (0.006)     (0.008)   (8.23)     (7.95)
  Married (young children)                              -0.004**        -0.0003       0.006     -3.65      1.38
                                                        (0.002)          (0.007)     (0.010)   (5.06)     (5.32)
  Married (older children)                               -0.003           -0.004      0.003     -0.37      2.91
                                                        (0.002)          (0.009)     (0.012)   (4.78)     (4.63)
R2                                                        0.09              0.23       0.17      0.12      0.12
N                                                         3,358            2,757      2,760     3,358     2,804
See notes to Tables 2, 5, and 10. The estimates in this table – in contrast to Table 10 – are for the high-educated women.
