NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MARGINAL VALUE
OF SOCIAL SECURITY

Michael 0. Hurd

Working Paper No. 2411

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1987

Many thanks to Bryan Boudreau for research assistance. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research project in Aging. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2411
October 1987

The Marginal Value of Social Security

ABSTRACT

if annuities such as Social Security are not choosen freely, the
consumption path typically cannot be determined independently of the path

of annuities. This constraint reduces the value of the annuity from the
point of view of the annuitant.

I measure the value of the annuity by the

marginal rate of substitution (MRS), the amount of bequeathable wealth that

will substitute for a dollar of annuity wealth. In the analytical section
of the paper, I show that the MRS increases as bequeathable wealth

increases; in that sense the wealthy benefit more from Social Security

than the poor. In the empirical section, I estimate the MRS for a sample
of retired single elderly. The MRS varies considerably from individual to
individual because of differences in the mix of bequeathable wealth and

annuities. For the parameter values that best fit the data, a substantial
fraction of the sample has more Social Security than it would like in that
it would be willing to trade, at the margin, a claim to Social Security for
an increase in bequeathable wealth.

Michael D. Hurd
Department of Economics
SIJNY

Stony Brook, NY 11794

•

lntroouct ion

in a simple mooel in which

lifetime

utility only aepencls on the tiow

ot consumption, ano in which the only source ot uncertainty is the date of
ceath, a wel I—functioning annuity market can increase substantially the

expected utility of a retired person (Yaari, 1965). hssentially the market
increases the interest rate on the wealth held to finance retirement.

lrlis

mooel, however, envisions that the consumption path can be chosen
inoepenaently from the annuity path, or, eQuivalently, the annuity path can

e chosen to match a aesirea consumption path,

in the United States, and

surely in many other countries, this assumption is not even approximately
true because the qreat fraction ot annuities are not privately purchased
annuities Dut pensions ana Social Security.

In fact, for most ot the

eloerly in the United States, Social Security is the Dy far the most

important annuity. because an annuitant cannot borrow against future
Social Security Denel-its, in some cases the consumption path cannot be

chosen inaepenaentty trom the annuity path. For example, someone who
aes-ires a consumption path that declines with aqe but who has little

Deaueathabie wealth will be constrained to a consumption path the follows
the annuity path.

Ihe utility from this consumption path will be smaller

than the utility that could have oeen achieved trorn an annuity with the

same expected present value, but in which the consumption path could be
chosen inoependently from the annuity path.

Ihis example is by no means

acaaemic: a high fraction of the sinqle retirea elderly have small amounts
of bequeathable wealth compared to annuity wealth (Hurd and Shoven, 1983).
and eventually almost all must follow constrained consumption paths.
Another limitation of the simple annuity model is that in the rnooel

oeauests do not give utility; that

is,

there is no bequest motive for

saving. Although the empirical evidence is mixed on the importance of the
bequest motive, a numoer of authors have Cal led tor models that do incluae
a bequest motive (Kotlikoff and Summers (1981), Menchik ana David (19b3).

Kurz (194), and Modigliani (1986)). ihis is important for the valuation

or Social Security and other annuities because they cannot ne inherited. A
strong beQuest motive will, therefore, decrease the value of Social
Security relative to bequeathaole wealth.
Ihe value to the annuitant of exogenously given annuities is of

consiaerable policy interest because it bears on the issue ot the optimal

size of the Social Security program. if, at the margin. Social Security
beneticiaries value an increase in the benefit stream less than the cost to

the Social Security system ot the incremental stream, an increase based on
the annuity value of Social Security cannot be 1ustitied. An estimate of
of the value can be Dased on what an annuitant would be willing to pay for

an increase in Social Security: if this is less than the cost of the
increase, the beneficiary would not want an increase in which each
Deneticiary paio tor the increase through taxes.

Bernheim (1981) found analytically the compensating variation

associated with a small change in exogenously given annuities; that is, he
found the change in bequeathable wealth that would keep lifetime utility
constant following a change in the annuity stream.

Iflis is not quite the

same thinq as comparing the value to the individual of the change in Social

Security benetits with the cost of the change to the Social Security

system: one would want the compensating variation associated with a small
change in the cost ot the annuity stream, not in the level of the annuity
stream. But this is a minor difference involving renorroalizing by the
expected present value of the annuity stream.

lhe model Bernheim analyzed,

however, is based on a specific utility function which has no provision for

a eciuest motive, and on a simple representation of mortality rates. ihe
analysis should be extended to a general utility function and to a
realistic representation of mortality rates because the nature of the

solution may change considerably.1 Furthermore. bernheim's illustrative
examples or the compensating variation are not based on estimated
parameters or on actual data, so one has little sense of whether or not
they are reasonable.
In this paper I study both analytical ly and empirically the value at

the margin of an exogenously given annuity path.

2

10 the extent that

individuals choose their work etfort independently from their desired level
of Social Security retirement benefits, this model approximates the value

individuals place on Social Security benetits. in the first part of the
paper, I analyze how the marginal rate of substitution (MRS) of

oeQueathable wealth tor annuity wealth varies with the level of annuities

and beaueathable wealth. ihe main tinding is that at the margin Social
Security wealth becomes more valuable as bequeathable wealth increases.
Someone with very little bequeathable wealth may hold an excess of

annuities in the sense that he would be wifling to give up some claim to
Social Security benefits in exchange for bequeathable wealth at a rate of

exchange that would be favorable to the Social Security system; that is,
the marginal benefit of an increase in Social Security benefits costs the

ireasury more than it is worth to the individual. At the other extreme a
wealthy individual would like to increase his level of benefits: it costs
the Treasury less to finance an increase in his benefits than the increase
is worth to him.

in the second part or the paper, 1 use a model of consumption to
estimate the MRS for a sample of single people in the United States.

because of the complexity, the model must be solved numerically. Even
though the consumption model assigns the same utility function parameters
to all individuals, the MRS varies across individuals due to variation in

bequeathable wealth and annuites. Thus, the model must be solved for each
individual.

ihe estimates verify that the MRS increases in bequeathable wealth.
Most individuals have a MRS that is greater than one, which implies that
they would like to purchase at an actuarially fair price higher Social

Security benefits. A substantial fraction of the observations, however,

have a MRS that is less than one: they would like to reduce at a fair rate
of exchange their holdings of Social Security.

3

. The

Effect of Annuities on Utility.

in a typical model of lifetime utility under uncertainty about the
date of death4 the introduction of actuarially fair annuities will increase
utility (Yaari. 1965).

Ihe reasoning is as follows, in the absence of

annuities the budget constraint is

Sctetdt =

ti)

in

which r is the constant rate of interest. ct is the consumption stream,

and w is initial wealth. An actuarially fair annuity is priced such that

Ate_rtatdt = w,
where

is the stream of annuity payments4 and at, the life rate, is the

probability of being alive at t. at <

1

for t >

0.

The left hand side of

this equation is just the expected present value of the annuity stream. If
there are good capital markets and actuarially fair life insurance is
available, the consumption path can be chosen independently from the

annuity path. For example, suppose the annuity path is flat and the
desired consumption path declines with age. ihen a consumer can borrow
against the future annuity stream and simultaneously buy life Insurance to

protect the lender against the borrower's premature death. if the
consumption trajectory can be chosen independently from the annuity path4
then the budget constraint on consumption is

(2)

ctetatdt

W.

A comparison of (1) and (2) shows that any consumption path that is
feasible under (1) will be feasable under (2) but not the reverse.
Iherefore, utility can never be lower when there are actuarially tair

annuities, and in general it will be higher, An example is when at =

4

e%t4

which implies that the conditional mortality rate (the hazard rate) is X.
ihe budget constraint becomes

=

w.

so that the mortality risk with actuarially fair annuities acts exactly
like an increase in the interest rate.

In that the annuitants are lenders,

an increase in the interest rate must increase utility.
Ihis model of annuities is not well—suited to United States data.

First, neither privately purchased annuities nor life insurance are
actuarially fair: typical ly they have a load factor of about 357. (Friedman

and Warshawsky. 1985). This means that it is costly to choose the
consumption path independently from the annuity path. Second, almost all
annuities are lob related, either private or government pensions or Social

Security. Furthermore, for most people., Social Security is the largest
part ot job—related pensions.

Ihe benefit stream from Social Security

cannot be used as collateral tor a loan. Whether the benefit stream from a
private pension could be used as collateral would depena on the details of
in the United States the path of Social

the particular pension program.

Security benefits is fixed in real terms: therefore, if someone wanted a
aeclininq consumption path he would need bequeathable wealth.

lhird, a

substantial fraction of the elderly have low levels of Deaueathable wealth.

This means their consumption paths will eventually have to follow the

annuity path. Fourth, in the model I have outlined utility does not depend
on bequests: a bequest motive will lower the utility—value of an annuity.
1 now turn to models of utility maximization that are better suited to

US, data. The first model, which does not depend on any specific utility
function, accounts for annuities, but it has no bequest motive.

1 show

analytical ly that the MRS increases as beciueathable wealth increases. me
second model is based on a specific utility function including a bequest

motive. it is too complicated to be studied analytically, so, using oata
on retired individuals, I solve numerically for the MRS. and show how the
MRS varies with bequeathable wealth and annuities.

5

2.1. A Utility Model With Annuities.

1 assume that individuals maximize in the consumption path tc.j
lifetime utility

(3)

u(ct)atePtdt

in which

at = 1—Jç1 m Scis
is the

is the probability that the individual is alive at t;
instantaneous mortality rate.

1 have not given an upper bound to the

integral in (3), but I have in mind a finite—time problem. That is,

eventually, a becomes zero. p is the subjective time rate of discount r
is the real interest rate which is taken to be known and fixed. u(c) is
the instantaneous utility from consuming Ct; u > U;

U'' < 0. The

resources available are beciueathable wealth, wt, and annuities, including

pensions, Social Security and Medicare/Medicaid. Annuities are
distinguished from begueathable wealth in that they cannot be borrowed

against. ihe conditions on the utility maximization are that initial
bequeathable wealth. w, is given, and that

(4)

Wt =

wert + :tAscs1t_63rds

is the flow of annuities at time s.

U for all t,

This formulation cutters from the

usual intertemporal utility maximization problem in that the annuity stream

cannot be summarized by its expected present value, because many of the
elderly have large annuities relative to their beoueathable wealth, corner
Solutions are important.

Ihe Pontryaqin necessary conditions associated with this problem are

b

ct=Atifwt=0

(5)

and

(6)

Ut

ui(ai/at)eP

over an interval (t.T) in which Wt > 0. Ut and u1 are the marginal
utilities of consumDtion and t and T.

if
(at/at)e_P)(Tt) <
the marqinal utility trajectory will slope upward. As t—t ÷

0,

eqUation

(6) becomes

(1/ut)dut/dt = p + h —

in which ht =

mt/at

r

is the conditional mortality rate or the hazard rate.

Therefore, marginal utility will increase with t if (ht + p) > r.

In a

finite horizon problem and in actual mortality data ht increases In t;

fact ht is well approximated by the function et,
say, 60.

in

> 0, for ages over,

1 simply assume that h increases in t. Therefore, for large t,

(p + ht) > r and marginal Utility will increase With age. ibis means
consumption will eventually fall with age.

The complete solution will depend on both the consumption and annuity

paths. Suppose that annuities are constant in real terms: At

A. iwo

possible consumption paths, each based on different parameter values, are

shown in Figure 1. initially consumption may increase as in cons1, but

eventually it must decrease. The reasoning is based on the continuity of
the consumption path.

if dct/dt were positive as t approached 1, Ct would

be less than A because c1 = A.

But this implies that dwt/dt would be

positive; hence, w1 would be positive which violates a condition of the
solution.

At t in F-igure 1, the parameters generating cons1 are such that r =

(p

+

ht.).

The parameters generating cons2 are such that r < (p +

h0).

lith constant annuities, the consumption path follows equation (6)

until bequeathable wealth is exhausted at 1. The present value of the area
under the consumption path and above the annuity path equals initial

bequeathable wealth. The solution is implicitly defined by (6) and

(7.1)

CT = A

(/.2)

WI =

(7.3)

WT = U

(7.4)

c = A,

2.2.

w0erl

+

t > T.

ihe Marginal Rate of Substitution.

in this section I analyze how the MRS varies with initial bequeathable

wealth and the level of annuities. For this analytical section, 1 assume
the annuity stream is constant at A;

for many elderly in the U.S. this is

roughly accurate because the only pension of many is Social Security,
which, after retirement, is fixed in real terms.

Under these assumptions the optimal consumption path is given

implicitly by (6) and (7). Maximum lifetime utility Is given by

U =
0

In

u(c)aedt

a change of notation, Ct

is

now the optimal consumption path.

ihe MRS should give the change in bequeathable wealth required to keep

utility constant in response to a unit change in annuity wealth. That is,
it should not be defined in terms of the annuity stream, A, but in terms of

the cost to the government of the stream A. Let that cost be 5; then,

8

S =

Ae_rtatdt

This would also be the cost to an individual if the annuity were purchased

in a fair market. Hence. if the annuity were freely chosen. S would be the
value to him at the marqin.2
Let MRS be the absolute value of

(U/A)(äA/S)

auias

MRS=

holding utility constant. Then

=

aU/aw

U/aw

aias is just (etdtY'.
To find the MRS, we need the marginal utility of initial wealth and of
annuities.

(8)

Sutct1awatetdt

aU/aw =

=

Sutct/awatePtdt

in that ct = A tor t I.

From the budget constraint

enT tact/aw)et)dt
or

1 =

(ct/w)etdt.

Using (6) at T =

1

and () we see that

aUfaw =

y

= uracetr_Ic(act/aw)e_rtdt
=

u1a1e

this can be rewritten as

aulaw =

(9)

t

uate

T.

The RHS is the expected discounted marginal utility of consumption at t.

All along the consumption path this is put equal to the marginal utility of

initial wealth. Because utate(r_P)t is also the expected (at t =

0)

discounted marginal utility of wealth at t, (9) has the interpretation of

an Euler equation: the consumption path is chosen is that the marginal
utility of wealth at t =

U

equals the expected marginal utility of wealth

at all t.

[he marginal utilility of annuities is

=

u(actIaA)aePtdt

=

u(act/aA)atePtot + Sutate'tdt

where the last term follows trom äct/3A = 1. t 1. From the budget
constraint

(ac/aA —

1)etdt

=

U.

ihen, by using (6),

=

+

=

e

uatePtc1t

°ua e_r't(.ct,aA)dt + ulate_Ptdt.

10

using Ut = U1, t T.

auia = e
=

P)1ua'er't + uiate_Ptclt

u.raTe(r_T(1_e_rT) + uiSatetdt

This gives the marginal utility of A. Using this result, the calculation

of aU/aw and (aU/aS)5et = aU/aA. one can write

(10)

MRS=

) +
aias ?uTaTeP(1*e
_________________________—•

=

au/aw

If

ulaTe(P)edt

initial bequeathable wealth is zero, T is zero, a1 = 1, and

MRS =

a.ePcit
S ate

If p. the subjective time rate of discount, is greater than the interest

rate, MRS0 will be less than one. This happens because the discounting in
the utility function of the fiat consumption trajectory is at the effective
rate of (ht + p) whereas the discounting of the trajectory from the point
of view of the government is at the rate (ht + r).

Thus the annuity costs

the government more at the margin than it is worth to the individual. Said
differently, the individual would like to.cash in part of his annuity at

the actuarially fair rate. In that sense he is overannuitized. As far as
I know, the only estimates of p in the context of mortality risk and

annuities are in my paper, 'Mortality Risk and Bequests." As I report
there and discuss below, the simplest estimator produced an estimate of p

of 0.05 when r was assumed to be 0.03. If the hazard rate were constant at
0.03,

which is approximately the conditional mortality rate of a 65 year

11

old male, 8t =

e003t;

then, the MRS for someone with these parameter

values and initial wea'th of zero would be 0.06/3.08 =

0.75.

Such an

inaividual would, at the margin, be willing to give up a dollar in expected
discounted Social Security benefits in exchange for 75 cents in initial
wealth.

If initial wealth is large, T becomes large and

1

1

MRS

>

rSe'tdt

re_rtatdt

Ihis result follows
constraint when the

almost directly from the statement of

the budget

consumption path can be chosen independently from the

annuity path: when no annuities are available

is the wealth required to

produce a unit annuity flow; when annuities are available only Satetdt
in wealth will produce the unit flow. A constant hazard of 0.03 will yield
a MRS of (0.03 +

0.03)/0.3

= 2 in the high wealth case.

These examples give typical values of MRS at the extremes of initial
bequeathable wealth.

I next show how MRS varies With w and with A.

Examination of (10) shows that MRS only depends on w and A through 1.
That is,

aMRS/aw = (aMRS/BT)(aT/aw)

I first show that MRS/3T is positive.

and similarly for aMRs,aA.

MRS/T = —(E/D)LaT(r—p)
where E =

SatePtdt

0 if (r — p —

daT/dT3/(aeP'1T)

But da1/dl = —m1, so that MRS/T >
This condition will always hold at T because a

and 0 =

mT/al) < 0.

+

ate_rtdt.

condition for the optimum is that consumption is falling at T, which

12

requires that (r — p —

mi/aT)

0.

<

i31/Bw is easily seen to e positive: the consumption paths associated
with different initial wealth levels cannot cross which implies that the
consumption path associated with a particular initial wealth will lie above

the consumption path associated with any lower initial wealth. Therefore,
the higher wealth will lead to a greater T.

in that both BMRS/BT and 81/3w are positive, I conclude that BMRS/Bw >

0.
The sign of 81/BA depends on the particular form of the instantaneous

utility function; one, therefore, cannot in general give a sign to
aMPS/BA.

I demonstrate this result by giving two examples: the first is a

simple utility function in which I show graphically that 31/BA is positive;

the second is a widely used utility function in which I show analytically
that 31/BA is negative.
First, consider the utility function

u*(c) =
=

c,

C

a,

. c > a.

u and u, another utility function to be discussed below, are illustrated

in Figure 2. Let A <

a,

(ht +

p)

= X,

a constant, and r =

0.

The utility

maximizing consumption path is

ct =
=

a,

t < T

A, t

1.

1 is given by (—A)T = w.

The path is illustrated in Figure 3.

1/(a—A)

>

0.

31/BA = w/(a—A)2 >

0.

Therefore, both BMRS/Bw and BMPS/BA

are positive.

One can also directly verify from

u

= Su*ctetdt
13

31/8w =

Then, aMRS/aw = XaT/aw and MRS/A =

that MRS = Xl + 1.

XT/A

both of

which are positive.

Of course, this utility function does not satisfy the strict concavity

assumption. But, as illustrated in Figure 2, a slightly modified utility
tunction, u, would, and it would lead to the same qualitative result on 1.
In the second example I take the utility function to be

c1/(I-fl.

u(c) =

This utility function has been the subject of considerable analysis; the
empirical work to be reported later in this paper is based on it.

The optimal consumption trajectory is given by equations (7) and

cat =

(11)

This equation implies that
act/aA =

in which e

= (p
-T

0

e

—

+

+ &3T/3A)

ct(I/A
hT

r)I.

—

From the budget constraint

T

rdt = \ (ac4/aA)e rdt
C)

= (I/A

+

eaT/aA)Scte_rtdt.

(1/A

+

BaT/aA)(w

=

Thus,

ô/(w+M) = 1/A
where

=

+

&T/3A

Setdt. Then
14

+

Aet).

eaT/aA = -w/(wA+A2ô).

Because 0 and S are positive, aiia is negative. Therefore, with this

utility function MRS/A is negative.3

15

3.

Estimation.
Although the analytical model may give a good approximation to the

MWS, it has several shortcomings. First, people may desire to leave a
bequest: because annuity wealth is not bequeathab]e, this desire will

lower the MRS. Second, most private pensions are not indexed; yet, the
analysis assumed that the annuity flow was fixed in real terms. Although
the assumption is correct for many people, some have a mixture of real and
nominal annuities. Finally it is desirable to have magnitudes for the MRS

rather than lust the ranges given by the analysis. ExDandino the model to
include bequests and nominal annuities reauires that the model be solved
numerically, which, in turn, means definite utility functions for
consumption and for bequests must be specified.

I assume that

individuals maximize in the consumption path ct1 lifetime utility

(12)

Suctetatdt + V(w)ePtmdt

in which

u(ct) =

c/(1-).

V(.) is the utility from bequests. This formulation of utility
maximization with bequests is due to Yaari (1965).
1 parameterize the bequest function by assuming that the marginal

utility of bequests is constant. ihis assumption may be defended in
several ways. First, from a practical point of view, without such an
assumDtion the model cannot be solved; yet, the estimation requires a

model solution. Second. in other work I found that the strength of the
beauest motive did not seem to depend on the wealth level.4 Third,
variations in the level of wealth cause only small variations in the level

of the wealth of the heirs: therefore, the marginal utility of wealth of
the heirs will roughly be constant over variations in wealth of the older

16

generation, ana one would expect the marginal utility of bequests to be
constant.

The Pontryagin necessary conditions associated with this problem are

(13)

Ct

At, if Wt =

0,

and

c1at =

(14)

C

hat+heP +

aS

e(5tP)m5cjs

over an interval (t.t+h) in which Wt > 0. a is the constant marginal
utility of bequests.

The solution depends on the parameters, initial wealth and the annuity

path. Unless initial wealth is very large or annuities very small,
bequeathable is eventually consumed. Then the solution is given by

(15.1)

C1 = A1

(15.2) c = catet(1_P) + aSteP5m5ds
(15.3)

W1 = w0er1

(15.4)

WT = 0

+ SAs—cs)e15'ds

if initial wealth is very large, wealth will never go to zero, and the

nature of the solution is different. Although these cases are taken care
of in the estimation to be reported below, I will not discuss them here
because empirically they are not important.

In previous work I have estimated the parameters of this model. Given
the parameters, the model can be solved for the optimal consumption

trajectory and for the maximum utility. The solution will depend on
initial bequeathable wealth, the real annuity stream, the nominal annuity

stream, actual mortality data, and the marginal utility of bequests. A

17

second solution at a slighly higher level of bequeathable wealth can be

used to calculate a numerical approximation to au/aw. A third solution at
the original level of bequeathable wealth but at a higher level of Social

Security benefits will lead to a numerical approximation to au/as. The MRS
is estimated by taking ratios. These simulations are done for each single
person in the sample.

In that the estimated MRS depends critically on the parameter
estimates of the model in equations (15) 1 outline the data and estimation
methods on which they are based.

3.1.

Estimation

of a Consumption Model.5

ihe data are from the Lonqitudinal Retirement History Survey. which
was commissioned by the united States Social Security Administration.
About 11,000 households whose heads were born in 1906—1911 were interviewed

every two years from 1969 through 1979. Detailed questions were asked
about all assets (except a meaninaful question on life insurance), and the
data were linked with offical Social Security records so that one can

calculate exactly Social Security benefits. There are some data on
consumption, but they are not complete, so I estimated the parameters of

the model over wealth data. Bequeathable wealth includes stocks and bonds,
property, businesses and savings accounts, all less debts. As suggested by
King and Dicks—Mireaux (1982), I excluded housing wealth because the costs

of adjusting housing consumption are substantial; therefore, people may
not follow their desired housing consumption path. As long as the
consumption of other goods follows its desired path, the parameters may be

estimated over beaueathable wealth excluding housing wealth. Annuities
include pensions, Social Security benefits, an estimated income value from
Medicare/Medicaid, privately purchased annuities (which are very small),

welfare transfers, and transfers from relatives. See Hurd and Shoven
(1985) for a detailed description of the data.

The estimation method is to use equations (15) to solve for the
consumption path as a function of an initial choice of the parameter

18

values. This reciuires numerical integreation and a search for 1. The
solution will depend on initial wealth. Then, wealth in the next survey,

w2, is predicted from equation (4). That is, the necessary conditions and
the boundary conditions, equations (15), implicitly define

w2 =

in

which w is initial wealth, [A) is the annuity stream, and 0 is the

parameter vector ( p a) The parameter space is searched to minimize a
function of (w2 —

f).

Although a is, in principle, identified through nonlinearities in the

functional form, the identification is very weak. Therefore, I specify
that a is zero if a household has rio living children.6 The interpretation
of a is the increase in the marginal utility of bequests across households
according to whether they have living children or not.

The first set of parameter estimates comes from solving

mm (w2 — f(w0,(AI,0))2
0

The estimated parameter values, which I refer to later as the nonlinear
least squares (NLLS) estimates, are

.729

(.091)

.0501

5.0x107

(.004) (1x104)

Number of observations = 5452

An analysis of the residuals was consistent with the hypothesis that
wealth is observed with error.

Therefore, I estimated the parameters by

non)inear two—stage least squares (NL2SLS), in which the parameter
estimates come from solving

19

mm Lw2—t(O)J X(X'XY1X'Ew2—t(9)3
0

X is an nxlS matrix of observations on income from wealth; these data are
not derived from the wealth data but come from separate questions in the

RHS. Thus they should not be correlated with the observation errors in w.
The results from the NL2SLS are

p.

1.12

-0.011

6.0x107

(.074)

(.002)

(32x107)

Number of observations = 5452

The major difference between the two sets of results is in r—p,
which, if the mortality rate were zero, would control the slope of the

consumption trajectory. r is taken to be 0.03 so in the NLLS r—p is
approximately -0.02; even with a bequest motive, the consumption path will

slope downward. In the NL2SLS estimates r—p is about 0.04. Even without a
bequest motive, the consumption slope will have a positive slope until the

conditional mortality rate, mt/at, exceeds 0.04. The NL2SLS consumption
trajectories will look like cons1 in Figure 1, and the NLLS like cons2.
Both sets of estimates produce an estimate of a'

that

is much smaller that

what has typically been assumed in the literature. For example, Kotlikoff,
Shoven and Spivak (1983, 1984) and Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981) use a value

of 4 in their simulations. Hubbard (1984) uses values of 0.75, 2 and 4.
Davies (1981) "best guess" for his simulations is 4. Large values of a'
mean that the slope of the consumption trajectory is not sensitive to

variations in mortality rates; my estimates imply that the consumption
paths of the elderly will have substantial variation with mortality rates.

The marginal utility of bequests, a, is estimated to be very small,
which is consistent with other estimates I have made in a model that is

20

almost free of functional form restrictions.7 The small

estimate

of a is

caused by the fact that in the data there is little difference between the
saving rates of households with children and households without children.

3.2. Estimation of the MRS.

In that the utility model does not apply to couples. I estimated the

MRS of each single person who was observed for two consecutive interviews.
For the ith individual the estimate of the MRS is

MRS= (U/ES)/(AU/w)1,
where U is the change in utility associated with a change of S in Social
Security wealth, or a change of w in bequeathable wealth. The estimated
parameter values from either the NLLS or the NL2SLS and the individual's
actual data are used to solve for the optimal consumption trajectories and

utility levels. Thus, the distribution of the MRS will depend on the
distributions of initial bequeathable wealth and real annuities. The
distribution will also depend on the distributions of children, nominal

annuities, and mortality rates. These last variables were not considered
in the analytical section; but they are taken into account in the
estimates. Children enter through the parameter a, the marginal utility of
bequests: this parameter only affects the consumption path of individuals

with children. Nominal annuities are almost all job—related pensions which
are fixed in nominal terms. They, therefore, decline in real terms as the
owner ages. Mortality rates vary from individual to individual because of
differences in initial age, initial year (each of the five initial years
has a different mortality table), sex and race.

Initial bequeathable wealth (excluding housing wealth) is $15791 on

averaqe and $4720 at the median. The initial mean annual flow of real

annuities is $2984. This represents about $36000 of annuity wealth. The
sample, which is mostly widows, is certainly not very wealthy, and it has
the majority of its wealth in real annuities.

21

According to the NLLS parameter estimates, bequeathable wealth

declines rapidly: T, the mean time to exhaustion of bequeathable wealth,
is 6.1 years. One would expect the average MRS to be quite low, and that,

indeed, is the case: the mean MRS is just 1.06. Of course, there is
substantial variation in the MRS, as the following table shows.

Distribution of MRS: NLLS estimates

Percentile
Point

100 99

95

90

15

50

25

10

5

1

0

2.34 1.60 1.40 1.30 1.17 1.05 0.96 084 0.75 0.57 0.31

MRS

The median MRS is only slightly above one, which according to these
estimates, implies that a substantial fraction of the sample of singles is

over—annuitized. The variation in the MRS means that different individuals
would be willing to pay different amounts for variations in Social

Security: for example, someone at the 95th percentile with a MRS of 1.40
would be willing to pay almost twice as much as someone at the 5th
percentile with a MRS of 0.75.

Although the bequest motive for saving could, in principle, cause the

MRS to vary by a great deal, in fact it makes very little difference. This
is, of course, a consequence of the small estimate of x.

The estimated

value of a changes the consumption path by a negligible amount, and the
addition to utility in equation (3) that arises from holding wealth is very
small.

In fact, the average MRS over individuals with children is 1.09;

over individuals without children it is 1.05. This is the opposite of what

one would expect cet. p., but, of course, these averages do not hold
constant other, more powerful, determinents of the MRS such as bequeathable
wealth and annuities.
In Table 1, I give the average MRS for the NLLS parameter estimates.

22

As the last column shows, the MRS increases in wealth. The difference
between the highest and lowest intervals is rather substantial when the MRS

are viewed as prices: had the annuity levels been freely chosen the price
at the margin of annuities for someone in the upper wealth interval would
have been 1/1.28 =

0.78.

For someone in the lowest wealth interval the

price would have been 1/0.91 =

1.10, which is 41X higher.

The last row has variation in MRS by initial real annuity level.
Although the theoretical analysis of the simple model indicated that the
MRS should decrease with increasing real annuities, the row shows little,

if any, variation. Of course, other determinents of the MRS vary across
the annuity intervals.

The first column of the table shows how MRS varies with wealth

catagory holding annuities roughly constant. The variation is large,

especially at the lowest annuity 1evel: there is about a 74 difference in
the MRS between the lowest and highest wealth intervals. At higher annuity
levels the variation with initial bequeathable wealth is smaller because at

low wealth levels there is an increase in MRS with annuities. This is
counter to the analytical results;

it is caused by variation in the other

determinents of the MRS. It is not clear how to hold these other
deterrninents constant in that they cannot be summarized as single numbers:

for example, both the mortality rates and the nominal annuities are vectors
of length 55.

The NL2SLS estimates of the parameters imply much flatter consumption

paths than the NLLS parameter estimates: the consumption path slopes
upward until the conditional mortality rate exceeds r—p which is about

0.04. Under the NL2SLS parameter values the mean time to exhaustion of
bequeathable wealth is 15.5 years. Because the desired consumption path is

closer to the annuity path, one would expect the MRS to be higher. The
mean MRS is 1.41, and the distribution is

23

Distribution of MRS: NL2SLS Estimates

Percentile
Point

100 99

95

90

75

50

25

10

5

1

0

2.41 1.86 1.71 1.62 1.50 1.41 1.35 1.27 1.06 0.71 0.30

MRS

Less that 57. of the sample has an estimated MRS less than one. This is a
much smaller fraction of the sample than under the NILS parameter
estimates.

Table 2 has the averages of MRS by initial bequeathable wealth and by

initial real annuity interval. The pattern is about the same as before
although there is somewhat less variation by wealth interval. As before,
the MRS increases with bequeathable wealth, and it has little variation by

annuity level. Holding annuity level constant, the MRS increases in

wealth, especially at the lowest annuity level. As before, the variation
with annuity level depends on the wealth interval: the MRS increases at
low wealth levels and decreases at high wealth levels.

4 Conclusion.
When annuities are given exogenously, and actuarially fair life
insurance is not available! the desired consumption path may differ from
the actual consumption path.

In a simplified model the analytical results

showed that the greater the initial bequeathabIe wealth the more

valuable, at the margin, the annuity stream. This result was verified in

the empirical part of the paper. The MRS varied substantially from
individual to individual even though everyone was assumed to have the same

utility function parameters. The variation was entirely due to variations
in economic resources, age and demographic variables.

Under the NLLS parameter estimates! 90Z of the retired single

individuals had a MRS less than 1.3. We are used to valuing an annuity

24

stream by its expected present value; but these results suggest that from
the point of the view of the individual, such a valuation is very
inaccurate.

In this sample a fair annuity would pay a return of about 2.5

times that of bequeathable wealth with some variation due to differences in
initial age. One would normally think, therefore, that the elderly would be
willing to exchange 2.5 dollars of bequeathable wealth for one dollar of

annuity wealth. But these results suggest that for most individuals that
rate of exchange is too large by a factor of about two.

These results have some bearing on why so few elderly purchase

annuities: with the normal loading of annuities, anyone with a MRS less
than about 1.35 will find the annuities too costly.

According to the '1LLS

estimates, this covers about 90—95Z of the sample. In addition, of course,
privately purchased annuities are risky because they have no inflation

protection. Finally, many elderly surely have a precautionary motive for
saving: they want to protect themselves against bad health outcomes or
against variations in rates of return on their assets. Annuities do not
satisfy the precautionary motive.

A substantial fraction of the sample had a MRS less than one, which
implies they would like to reduce their holdings of annuities at an

actuarially fair rate of exchange. The results also imply that they would
not want an expansion of the Social Security system unless there were a
favorable transfer compenent in Social Security.

A comparison of the MRS based on the NLLS parameter estimates with
those based on the NL2SLS estimates shows that the level of the MRS is

quite sensitive to the parameters. But, even though the median and average
MRS are higher according to the NL2SLS parameter estimates, the bulk of the
distribution is much below 2.5, so the same general conclusions hold.

In

particular, under either set of parameter estimates the wealthy can make

better use of an increase in Social Security benefits than the poor. Of
course, there are some parameter values that would so flatten the
consumption trajectories that bequeathable wealth would remain positive for

the lifetimes of almost everyone in the sample; then the MRS would be

about 2.5 for everyone. Such parameter values would be very different from

25

the values behind these estimates because the principle reason the MRS are
low is that most of the sample has much less bequeathabIe wealth than
annuity wealth.

26

Footnotes

1. The specific utility function he uses implies that the compensating

variation decreases as Social Security benefits increase; but this result
does not generally hold. See footnote 3 and the associated discussion.

2. Bernheim calculates the compensating variation to be (3U/8A)/(aU/aw) in
a model with a constant hazard. He takes the instantaneous utility
function to be the constant relative risk aversion utility function Which

has marginal utility c. For this special case, his results differ from
mine by aA/aS.

3. Bernheim bases a test of the Life Cycle Hypothesis on the variation in
d(ln wt)/dt with A/w. His analysis of the constant risk aversion Utility
function calls for a negative relationship. He takes his finding of a
positive relationship to be evidence against the LCH. The two examples I

give here indicate that because the sign of T/3A is indeterminate d(ln
wt)/dt may either increase or decrease in A. Thus his test depends on the
special nature of the utility function he chose, and, in general, is not
valid.

4. See my "Savings of the Elderly and Desired Bequests,"

5. This discussion of the estimation is a summary of material in my
"Mortality Risk and Bequests."

6. Although the RHS does not have information about the ages of the
children, because of the ages of the RHS population the median age of the

children would be about 30 in the first year of the survey. Thus, almost
all the children will have their own households.

7.

"Savings of the Elderly and Desired Bequests."

Cois
C' eiSa

Anuri5

Figure 1

Two Consumption Paths

f

Figure 2

Two Utility Functions

inihj 141e(/J(

I
Ape..
Figure 3

Consumption Path for u

Table 1

Average Marginal Rate of Substitution Based on the
NLLS Parameter Estimates
Initial Annuity

Initial Wealth
Less Than
$1,000

Less Than
$l.000

1,000 — 2,500

2,500 — 5,000

More Than
5,000

All

0.85

0.87

0.98

1.06

0.91

(229)

(551)

(474)

(47)

(1301)

1.02

0.96

1.00

0.96

0.99

(224)

(551)

(619)

(86)

(1480)

1.23
(166)

1.10
(416)

1.10
(700)

(197)

More Than
20,000

1.48
(127)

1.29
(259)

1.27

1.17

(522)

(249)

All

1.09
(746)

1.02
(1777)

1.09

1.08

(2315)

(579)

1,000 —

5,000

5,000 — 20,000

Note: Number in parenthesis is the number of observations.

1.04

1.11
(1479)

1.28
(1157)

1.06
(5417)

Table 2

Average Marginal Rate of Substitution Based on the
NL2SLS Parameter Estimates
Initial Annuity

Initial Wealth
Less Than
$1,000
1,000 —

5,000

5,000 — 20,000

More Than
20,000
All

Less Than
$1,000

More Than
1,000 —

2,500

2,500 — 5,000

5.000

All

1.13
(229)

1.26

1.33

1.32

1.27

(551)

(474)

(47)

(1301)

1.35

1.36

1.40

1.35

1.37

(224)

(551)

(619)

(86)

(1480)

1.40
(197)

(1479)

1.52

1.45

1.45

(166)

(416)

(700)

1.73
(127)

1.57
(259)

1.57
(522)

1.39

1.38

(746)

(1777)

1.44
(2315)

Note: Number in parenthesis is the number of observations.

1.48
(249)

1.42
(579)

1.45

1.57
(1157)

1.41
(5417)

References

Bernheim, B. Douglas (1987), "Dissaving After Retirement: Testing the

Pure Life Cycle Hypothesis," in issues in Pension Economics, John
Shoven, editor, Chicago. National Bureau of Economic Research and the
University of Chicago Press.
Davies, 3.

(1981), Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption and

Retirement, Journal of Political Economy, 86

Dissaving in

(June), pp 561—577

Friedman, B. and M. Warshawsky (1985), Annuity Yields and Saving
Behavior in the United States, presented at the NBER conference

on

Pensions in the U.S. Economy, March, 1985, Baltimore, Md.
Hubbard. P. 6. (1987), Uncertain Lifetimes, Pensions, and Individual
Saving, in Issues in Pension Economics, Z. Bodie, J. Shoven and 0.

Wise, eds., NBER and the University of Chicago Press.
Hurd, M. (1986), Mortality Risk and Bequests, in process.
Hurd, M. (1987), Savings of the Elderly and Desired Bequests, American
Economic Review, 77 (June) pp. 298—312.

Hurd, M., and J. Shaven (1983), The Economic Status of the Elderly, in
Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System, Z. Bodie and J.
Shoven, eds., NBER and the University of Chicago Press
Hurd, M., and J. Shoven (1985), Inflation Vulnerability, Income, and
Wealth of the Elderly, 1969—1979, in Horizontal Equity, Uncertainty,
and Economic Well—Being, M. David and T. Smeeding, eds., NBER and the
University of Chicago Press
King, H., and L—D. Dicks—Mireaux (1982), Asset Holdings and the Life—
Cycle, The Economic Journal, 92 (June), pp 247—267.
Kotlikoff, L., and L. Summers (1981), The Role of Intergenerational

Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation, Journal of Political
Economy, 89 (August), pp 706—732
Kotlikoff, L., 3. Shoven and A. Spivak (1983), Annuity Markets,

Saving, and the Capita] Stock, NBER Working Paper 1250.
Kotlikoff, L.., 3. Shoven and A. Spivak (1984), The Impact of Annuity

Insurance on Savings and Inequality, NBER Working Paper 1403

Kotlikoff, L., and A. Spivak (1981), The Family as an Incomplete
Annuities Market, Journal of Political Economy, 89 (April), pp 372—391
Kurz, M. (1984), Capital Accumulation and the Characteristics of
Private Intergenerational Transfers, Economica, 51 (February), pp 1—22
Menchik, P., and M. David (1983), Income Distribution, Lifetime
Savings

and Bequests, American Economic Review, 73. pp 672—690

Mocligliani, F. (1986), Life Cycle, Individual Thrift, and the Wealth of
Nations, American Economic Review, 76, 3 (June), pp 297—313

Yaari, M. (1965), Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance and the Theory of
the Consumer. Review of Economic Studies, 32 (March), pp 137—150,

