                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                A MACROECONOMIC MODEL WITH FINANCIAL PANICS

                                        Mark Gertler
                                      Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
                                      Andrea Prestipino

                                      Working Paper 24126
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24126


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2017




The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, the Federal Reserve System, or National
Bureau of Economic Research. We thank for their helpful comments Frederic Boissay, Pat
Kehoe, John Moore as well as participants in various seminars and conferences. Financial support
from the National Science Foundation and the Macro Financial Modeling group at the University
of Chicago is gratefully acknowledged.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

Â© 2017 by Mark Gertler, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Andrea Prestipino. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including Â© notice, is given to the source.
A Macroeconomic Model with Financial Panics
Mark Gertler, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Andrea Prestipino
NBER Working Paper No. 24126
December 2017
JEL No. E0,E44

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper incorporates banks and banking panics within a conventional macroeconomic
framework to analyze the dynamics of a financial crisis of the kind recently experienced. We are
particularly interested in characterizing the sudden and discrete nature of the banking panics as
well as the circumstances that makes an economy vulnerable to such panics in some instances but
not in others. Having a conventional macroeconomic model allows us to study the channels by
which the crisis affects real activity and the effects of policies in containing crises.


Mark Gertler                                    Andrea Prestipino
Department of Economics                         Federal Reserve System
New York University                             Washington DC, 20551
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor                    andrea.prestipino@frb.gov
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
mark.gertler@nyu.edu

Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
kiyotaki@princeton.edu
1         Introduction

As both Bernanke (2010) and Gorton (2010) argue, at the heart of the recent
  nancial crisis was a series of bank runs that culminated in the precipitous
demise of a number of major nancial institutions. During the period where
the panics were most intense in October 2008, all the major investment banks
eÂ¤ectively failed, the commercial paper market froze, and the Reserve Pri-
mary Fund (a major money market fund) experienced a run. The distress
quickly spilled over to the real sector. Credit spreads rose to Great De-
pression era levels. There was an immediate sharp contraction in economic
activity: From 2008:Q4 through 2009:Q1 real output dropped at an eight
percent annual rate, driven mainly by a nearly forty percent drop in invest-
ment expenditure. Also relevant is that this sudden discrete contraction in
  nancial and real economic activity occurred in the absence of any apparent
large exogenous disturbance to the economy.
    In this paper we incorporate banks and banking panics within a con-
ventional macroeconomic framework - a New Keynesian model with capital
accumulation. Our goal is to develop a model where it is possible to analyze
both qualitatively and quantitatively the dynamics of a nancial crisis of the
kind recently experienced. We are particularly interested in characterizing
the sudden and discrete nature of banking panics as well as the circumstances
that make the economy vulnerable to such panics in some instances but not
in others. Having a conventional macroeconomic model allows us to study
the channels by which the crisis aÂ¤ects aggregate economic activity and the
eÂ¤ects of various policies in containing crises.
    Our paper ts into a lengthy literature aimed at adapting core macroeco-
nomic models to account for nancial crises1 . Much of this literature empha-
sizes the role of balance sheets in constraining borrowers from spending when
  nancial markets are imperfect. Because balance sheets tend to strengthen in
booms and weaken in recessions, nancial conditions work to amplify Â‡uctu-
ations in real activity. Many authors have stressed that this kind of balance
sheet mechanism played a central role in the crisis, particularly for banks
and households, but at the height of the crisis also for non- nancial rms.
Nonetheless, as Mendoza (2010), He and Krishnamurthy (2017) and Brun-
nermeier and Sannikov (2014) have emphasized, these models do not capture
the highly nonlinear aspect of the crisis. Although the nancial mechanisms
    1
        See Gertler and Kiyotaki (2011) and Brunnermeier et. al (2013) for recent surveys.

                                               2
in these papers tend to amplify the eÂ¤ects of disturbances, they do not easily
capture sudden discrete collapses. Nor do they tend to capture the run-like
behavior associated with nancial panics.
    Conversely, beginning with Diamond and Dybvig (1983), there is a large
literature on banking panics. An important common theme of this literature
is how liquidity mismatch, i.e. partially illiquid long-term assets funded
by short-term debt, opens up the possibility of runs. Most of the models
in this literature, though, are partial equilibrium and highly stylized (e.g.
three periods). They are thus limited for analyzing the interaction between
  nancial and real sectors.
    Our paper builds on our earlier work - Gertler and Kiyotaki (GK, 2015)
and Gertler, Kiyotaki and Prestipino (GKP, 2016) - which analyzed bank
runs in an in nite horizon endowment economy. These papers characterize
runs as self-ful lling rollover crises, following the Calvo (1988) and Cole and
Kehoe (2001) models of sovereign debt crises. Both GK and GKP empha-
size the complementary nature of balance sheet conditions and bank runs.
Balance sheet conditions aÂ¤ect not only borrower access to credit but also
whether the banking system is vulnerable to a run. In this way the model
is able to capture the highly nonlinear nature of a collapse: When bank bal-
ance sheets are strong, negative shocks do not push the nancial system to
the verge of collapse. When they are weak, the same size shock leads the
economy into a crisis zone in which a bank run equilibrium exists.2 While
our earlier work restricted attention to a simple endowment economy, here
we extend the analysis to a conventional macroeconomic model. By doing
so, we can explicitly capture both qualitatively and quantitatively the eÂ¤ect
of the nancial collapse on investment, output and employment. In particu-
lar, we proceed to show that a calibrated version of our model is capable of
capturing the dynamics of key nancial and real variables over the course of
the recent crisis.
    Also related is important recent work on occasionally binding borrowing
constraints as a source of nonlinearity in nancial crises such as Mendoza
(2010) and He and Krishnamurthy (2017). There, in good times the bor-
   2
     Some recent examples where self-ful lling nancial crises can emerge depending on the
state of the economy include Benhabib and Wang (2013), Bocola and Lorenzoni (2017),
Farhi and Maggiori (2017) and Perri and Quadrini (forthcoming). For further attempts
to incorporate bank runs in macro models, see Angeloni and Faia (2013), Cooper and
Ross (1998), Martin, Skeie and Von Thadden (2014), Robatto (2014) and Uhlig (2010) for
example.


                                           3
rowing constraint is not binding and the economy behaves much the way it
does with frictionless nancial markets. However, a negative disturbance can
move the economy into a region where the constraint is binding, amplifying
the eÂ¤ect of the shock on the downturn. In a similar spirit, Brunnermeier
and Sannikov (2014) generate nonlinear dynamics based on the precaution-
ary saving behavior by intermediaries worried about survival in the face of
a sequence of negative aggregate shocks. Our approach also allows for occa-
sionally binding nancial constraints and precautionary saving. However, in
quantitative terms, bank runs provide the major source of nonlinearity.
    Section 2 presents the behavior of bankers and workers, the sectors where
the novel features of the model are introduced. Section 3 describes the fea-
tures that are standard in the New Keynesian model: the behavior of rms,
price setting, investment and monetary policy. Section 4 describes the cal-
ibration and presents a variety of numerical exercises designed to illustrate
the main features of the model, including how the model can capture the
dynamics of some of the main features of the recent nancial crisis.


2       Model: outline, households, and bankers
The baseline framework is a standard New Keynesian model with capital ac-
cumulation. In contrast to the conventional model, each household consists
of bankers and workers. Bankers specialize in making loans and thus inter-
mediate funds between households and productive capital. Households may
also make these loans directly, but they are less eÂ¢cient in doing so than
bankers.3 On the other hand, bankers may be constrained in their ability to
raise external funds and also may be subject to runs. The net eÂ¤ect is that
the cost of capital will depend on the endogenously determined Â‡ow of funds
between intermediated and direct nance.
    We distinguish between capital at the beginning of period t, Kt , and
capital at the end of the period, St : Capital at the beginning of the period is
used in conjunction with labor to produce output at t. Capital at the end of
period is the sum of newly produced capital and the amount of capital left
after production:
    3
     As section 2.2. makes clear, technically it is the workers within the household that are
left to manage any direct nance. But since these workers collectively decide consumption,
labor and portfolio choice on of behalf the household, we simply refer to them as the
Â‘householdÂ’ going forward.


                                             4
                                    
                                  It
                        St =           Kt + (1 )Kt ;                      (1)
                                 Kt
where  is the rate of depreciation. The quantity of newly produced capital,
 (It =Kt )Kt , depends upon investment It and the capital stock. We suppose
that () is an increasing and concave function of It =Kt to capture convex
adjustment costs.
   A rm wishing to nance new investment as well as old capital issues
a state-contingent claim on the earnings generated by the capital. Let St
be the total number of claims (eÂ¤ectively equity) outstanding at the end of
period t (one claim per unit of capital), Stb be the quantity intermediated by
bankers and Sth be the quantity directly held by households. Then we have:

                                    Stb + Sth = St :                                  (2)
Both the total capital stock and the composition of nancing are determined
in equilibrium.
    The capital stock entering the next period Kt+1 diÂ¤ers from St due to
a multiplicative "capital quality" shock,  t+1 ; that randomly transforms the
units of capital available at t + 1:
                                    Kt+1 =  t+1 St :                                 (3)
The shock  t+1 provides an exogenous source of variation in the return to
capital.
    To capture that households are less eÂ¢cient than bankers in handling
investments, we assume that they suÂ¤er a management cost that depends on
the share of capital they hold, Sth =St . The management cost reÂ‡ects their
disadvantage relative to bankers in evaluating and monitoring investment
projects. The cost is in utility terms and takes the following piece-wise form:
                             (  h        2
                                 St                  Sth
                   h                         S t ; if     > >0
               &(St ; St ) =     2  S t               St                     (4)
                                         0; otherwise
with  > 0.4
   4
     For a deeper model of the costs that non-experts face in nancial markets see Kurlat
(2016). Our assumption that households intermediation costs are non pecuniary is made
for simplicity only. All of our results go through if we assume that householdsÂ’ interme-
diated capital is less productive, as in e.g. Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), as long as
productivity losses increase with the quantity of capital intermediated by households.

                                            5
    For Sth =St  there is no eÂ¢ciency cost: Households are able to manage
a limited fraction of capital as well as bankers. As the share of direct nance
exceeds , the eÂ¢ciency cost &() is increasing and convex in Sth =St : In
this region, constraints on the householdÂ’s ability to manage capital become
relevant. The convex form implies that the marginal eÂ¢ciency losses rise
with the size of the householdÂ’s direct capital holdings, capturing limits on
its capacity to handle investments.
    We assume that the eÂ¢ciency cost is homogenous in Sth and St to simplify
the computation. As the marginal eÂ¢ciency cost is linear in the share Sth =St ,
it reduces the nonlinearity in the model. An informal motivation is that, as
the capital stock St increases, the household has more options from which to
select investments that it is better able to manage, which works to dampen
the marginal eÂ¢ciency cost.
    Given the eÂ¢ciency costs of direct household nance, absent nancial
frictions banks will intermediate at least the fraction 1         of the capital
stock. However, when banks are constrained in their ability to obtain external
funds, households will directly hold more than the share of the capital stock.
As the constraints tighten in a recession, as will happen in our model, the
share of capital held by households will expand. The reallocation of capital
holdings from banks to less eÂ¢cient households raises the cost of capital,
reducing investment and output in equilibrium. In the extreme event of
a systemic bank run, banks liquidate all their holdings, and the resale of
assets from banks to households will lead to a sharp rise in the cost of capital,
leading to a deep contraction in investment and output.
    In the rest of this section we characterize the behavior of households and
bankers which are the non-standard parts of the model.

2.1    Households
We formulate this sector in a way that allows for nancial intermediation yet
preserves the tractability of the representative household setup. In particular,
each household (family) consists of a continuum of members with measure
unity. Within the household there are 1 f workers and f bankers. Workers
supply labor and earn wages for the household. Each banker manages a
bank and transfers non-negative dividend back to the household. Within the
family there is perfect consumption sharing.
   In order to preclude a banker from retaining suÂ¢cient earnings to per-
manently relax any nancial constraint, we assume the following: In each

                                       6
period, with i.i.d. probability 1 , a banker exits. Upon exit it then gives
all its accumulated earnings to the household. This stochastic exit in con-
junction with the payment to the household upon exit is in eÂ¤ect a simple
way to model dividend payouts.5
    After exiting, a banker returns to being a worker. To keep the population
of each occupation constant, each period, (1 ) f workers become bankers.
At this time the household provides each new banker with an exogenously
given initial equity stake in the form of a wealth transfer, et . The banker
receives no further transfers from the household and instead operates at arms
length.
    Households save in the form of deposits at banks and direct claims on
capital. Bank deposits at t are one period bonds that promise to pay a non-
contingent gross real rate of return Rt+1 in the absence of default. In the
event of default at t + 1, depositors receive the fraction xt+1 of the promised
return, where the recovery rate xt+1 2 [0; 1) is the value of bank assets per
unit of promised deposit obligations.
    There are two reasons the bank may default: First, a suÂ¢ciently negative
return on its portfolio may make it insolvent. Second, even if the bank
is solvent at normal market prices, the bankÂ’s creditors may "run" forcing
the bank to liquidate assets at resale prices. We describe each of these
possibilities in detail in the next section. Let pt be the probability that the
bank defaults in period t + 1. Given pt and xt ; we can express the gross rate
of return on the deposit contract Rt+1 as

                              
                                  Rt+1 with probability 1 pt
                     Rt+1 =                                     :                        (5)
                                  xt+1 Rt+1 with probability pt
   Similar to the Cole and Kehoe (2001) model of sovereign default, a run
in our model will correspond to a panic failure of households to roll over
deposits. This contrasts with the "early withdrawal" mechanism in the classic
Diamond and Dybvig (1983) model. For this reason we do not need to
impose a "sequential service constraint" which is necessary to generate runs
in Diamond and Dybvig. Instead we make the weaker assumption that all
households receive the same pro rata share of output in the event of default,
whether it be due to insolvency or a run.
   5
     As section 2.2 makes clear, because of the nancial constraint, it will always be optimal
for a bank to retain earnings until exit.

                                             7
    Let Ct be consumption, Lt labor supply, and 2 (0; 1) the householdÂ’s
subjective discount factor. As mentioned before, &(Sth ; St ) is the household
utility cost of direct capital holding Sth , where the household takes the ag-
gregate quantity of claims St as given. Then household utility Ut is given
by
                    (1         "                                     #)
                      X          (C  ) 1 h
                                             (L  ) 1+'
                            t
           Ut = Et                                      &(Sh ; S )    ;
                       =t
                                  1       h   1 +    '
Let Qt be the relative price of capital, Zt the rental rate on capital, wt the real
wage rate, Tt lump sum taxes, and t dividend distributions net transfers to
new bankers, all of which the household takes as given. Then the household
chooses Ct ; Lt Sth and deposits Dt to maximize expected utility subject to
the budget constraint

  Ct + Dt + Qt Sth = wt Lt       Tt + t + Rt Dt        1   +  t [Zt + (1   )Qt ]Sth 1 : (6)


       The rst order condition for labor supply is given by:

                                     wt t = (Lt )' ;                                     (7)
where t  (Ct ) h denotes the marginal utility of consumption.
    The rst order condition for bank deposits takes into account the possi-
bility of default and is given by

           1 = [(1   pt )Et (t+1 jno def ) + pt Et (t+1 xt+1 jdef )]  Rt+1             (8)
where Et ( j no def ) (and Et ( j def )) are expected value of  conditional on
no default (and default) at date t+1. The stochastic discount factor t+1
satis es
                                            t+1
                                 t+1 =          :                            (9)
                                             t
Observe that the promised deposit rate Rt+1 that satis es equation (8) de-
pends on the default probability pt as well as the recovery rate xt+1 :6
   Finally, the rst order condition for capital holdings is given by
   6
   Notice that we are already using the fact that in equilibrium all banks will choose the
same leverage so that all deposits have the same probability of default.



                                            8
                       2                                           3
                                     Zt+1 + (1        )Qt+1 5
                    Et 4t+1  t+1            @&(Sth ;St )
                                                                       = 1;          (10)
                                      Qt +       @Sth
                                                             =t
where                                      h                                  
                 @&(Sth ; St )              St
                        h
                               =t = M ax                             =t ; 0       (11)
                    @St                     St
is the householdÂ’s marginal cost of direct capital holding.
     The rst order condition given by (10) will be key in determining the
market price of capital. Observe that the market price of capital will tend to
be decreasing in the share of capital held by households above the threshold
   since the eÂ¢ciency cost &(Sth ; St ) is increasing and convex. As will become
clear, in a panic run banks will sell all their securities to households, leading
to a sharp contraction in asset prices. The severity of the drop will depend
on the curvature of the eÂ¢ciency cost function given by (4), which controls
asset market liquidity in the model.

2.2     Bankers
The banking sector we characterize corresponds best to the shadow banking
system which was at the epicenter of the nancial instability during the Great
Recession. In particular, banks in the model are completely unregulated,
hold long-term securities, issue short-term debt, and as a consequence are
potentially subject to runs.

2.2.1   Bankers optimization problem
Each banker manages a nancial intermediary with the objective of maximiz-
ing the expected utility of the household. Bankers fund capital investments
by issuing short term deposits dt to households as well as by using their own
equity, or net worth, nt . Due to nancial market frictions, described later,
bankers may be constrained in their ability to obtain deposits.
    So long as there is a positive probability that the banker may be nan-
cially constrained at some point in the future, it will be optimal for the banker
to delay dividend payments until exit (as we will verify later). At this point
the dividend payout will simply be the accumulated net worth. Accordingly,
we can take the bankerÂ’s objective as to maximize the discounted expected
value of net worth upon exit. Given that  is the survival probability and

                                          9
given that the banker uses the householdÂ’s intertemporal marginal rate of
             e t; =  t  =t to discount future payouts, we can express the
substitution 
objective of a continuing banker at the end of period t as
                              " 1                           #
                                 X
                    Vt = Et           e t; (1 )  t 1 n
                                      
                                  =t+1
                         = Et ft+1 [(1        )nt+1 + Vt+1 ]g ;              (12)
where (1 )  t 1 is probability of exiting at date  ; and n is terminal
net worth if the banker exits at  :
   During each period t; a continuing bank (either new or surviving) nances
asset holdings Qt sbt with newly issued deposits and net worth:
                                  Qt sbt = dt + nt :                            (13)
We assume that banks can only accumulate net worth by retained earnings
and do not issue new equity. While this assumption is a reasonable ap-
proximation of reality, we do not explicitly model the agency frictions that
underpin it.
   The net worth of surviving bankers, accordingly, is the gross return on
assets net the cost of deposits, as follows:
                           nt = Rtb Qt 1 sbt   1   Rt dt 1 ;                    (14)
where Rtb is the gross rate of return on capital intermediated by banks, given
by:
                                       Zt + (1 )Qt
                             Rtb =  t                 :                       (15)
                                            Qt 1
So long as nt is strictly positive the bank does not default. In this instance it
pays its creditors the promised rate Rt : If the value of assets, Rtb Qt 1 sbt 1 ; is
below the promised repayments to depositors R       t dt 1 (due to either a run or
simply a bad realization of returns), nt goes to zero and the bank defaults. It
then pays creditors the product of recovery rate xt and Rt ; where xt is given
by:
                                    Rb Qt 1 sbt 1
                              xt = t              < 1:                         (16)
                                       Rt dt 1
    For each new banker at t, net worth simply equals the start-up equity et
it receives from the household:
                                      nt = et :                                 (17)

                                          10
    To motivate a limit on a bankÂ’s ability to issue deposits, we introduce
the following moral hazard problem: After accepting deposits and buying
assets at the beginning of t, but still during the period, the banker decides
whether to operate "honestly" or to divert assets for personal use. To operate
honestly means holding assets until the payoÂ¤s are realized in period t + 1
and then meeting deposit obligations. To divert means selling a fraction  of
assets secretly on a secondary market in order to obtain funds for personal
use. We assume that the process of diverting assets takes time: The banker
cannot quickly liquidate a large amount of assets without the transaction
being noticed. Accordingly, the banker must decide whether to divert at t;
prior to the realization of uncertainty at t+1: Further, to remain undetected,
he can only sell up to a fraction  of the assets. The cost to the banker of
the diversion is that the depositors force the intermediary into bankruptcy
at the beginning of the next period.7
    The bankerÂ’s decision on whether or not to divert funds at t boils down
to comparing the franchise value of the bank Vt ; which measures the present
discounted value of future payouts from operating honestly, with the gain
from diverting funds, Qt sbt . In this regard, rational depositors will not lend
to the banker if he has an incentive to cheat. Accordingly, any nancial
arrangement between the bank and its depositors must satisfy the incentive
constraint:

                                    Qt sbt  Vt :                               (18)
    To characterize the bankerÂ’s optimization problem it is useful to let t
denote the bankÂ’s ratio of assets to net worth, Qt sbt =nt , which we will call
the "leverage multiple." Then, combining the balance sheet constraint (13)
and the Â‡ow of funds constraint (14) yields the expression for the evolution
of net worth for a surviving bank that does not default as:

                                 b
                       nt+1 = [(Rt+1Rt+1 )t + Rt+1 ]nt :                (19)
where we used (5) to substitute the promised rate R t+1 for the deposit rate
Rt+1 in case of no default.
  7
    We assume households deposit funds in banks other than the ones they own. Hence,
diverting involves stealing funds from families other than the one to which the banker
belongs.




                                         11
   Using the evolution of net worth equation (19) ; we can write the franchise
value of the bank (12) as

                                Vt = (t t +  t ) nt ;                    (20)

where
                                                b
               t = (1        pt )Et f    t+1 (Rt+1     Rt+1 ) j no def g   (21)
                t = (1       pt )Et f    t+1 Rt+1   j no def g             (22)

with
                        t+1   = t+1 (1      +       t+1 );   and
                                            Vt+1
                                     t+1        :
                                            nt+1
    The variable t is the expected discounted excess return on banks assets
relative to deposits and  t is the expected discounted cost of a unit of de-
posits. Intuitively, t t is the excess return the bank receives from having on
additional unity of net worth (taking into account the ability to use lever-
age), while  t is the cost saving from substituting equity nance for deposit
 nance.
    Notice that the bank uses the stochastic discount factor t+1 to value
returns in t + 1. t+1 is the bankerÂ’s discounted shadow value of a unit of
net worth at t + 1; averaged across the likelihood of exit and the likelihood
of survival. We can think of t+1 in the expression for t+1 as the bankÂ’s
"TobinÂ’s Q ratio", i.e., the ratio of the franchise value to the replacement
cost of the bank balance sheet. With probability 1  the banker exits,
implying the discounted shadow value of a unit of net worth simply equals
the household discount factor t+1 . With probability  the banker survives
implying the discounted marginal value of nt+1 equals the discounted value
of the bankÂ’s TobinÂ’s Q ratio, t+1 t+1 . As will become clear, to the extent
that an additional unit of net worth relaxes the nancial market friction,
  t+1 in general will exceed unity provided that the bank does not default.
    The bankerÂ’s optimization problem is then to choose the leverage multiple
t to solve
                                t = max (t t +  t ) ;                    (23)
                                     t

subject to the incentive constraint (obtained from equations (18) and (20)):

                                 t  t t +  t ;                        (24)

                                            12
and the deposit rate constraint (obtained from equations (8) and (16)):
                                                                            1
        Rt+1 = [(1    pt )Et (t+1 j no def ) + pt Et (t+1 xt+1 j def )]       ;     (25)

where xt+1 is the following function of t :
                                                       b
                                               t     Rt+1
                                 xt+1 =                    :
                                          t        1 Rt+1

and t and  t are given by (21) and (22):
    Notice that since individual bank net worth does not appear in the bank
optimization problem, the optimal choice of t is independent of nt : This im-
                                                                         t+1 ; and
plies that the default probability, pt ; the promised rate on deposits, R
the bankÂ’s TobinÂ’s Q are all independent from bankÂ’s speci c characteristics.
    Since the franchise value of the bank Vt is proportionate to nt by a factor
that only depends on the aggregate state of the economy, a bank cannot
operate with zero net worth. In this instance Vt falls to zero, implying that
the incentive constraint (18) would always be violated if the bank tried to
issue deposits. That banks require positive equity to operate is vital to the
possibility of bank runs. In fact, as we show below, a necessary condition for
a bank run equilibrium to exist is that banks cannot operate with zero net
worth.

2.2.2     BankerÂ’s decision rules
We derive the optimal portfolio choice of banks by restricting attention to a
symmetric equilibrium in which all banks choose the same leverage.8
   Let rt be the expected discounted marginal return to increasing the lever-
   8
    In this section we describe the leverage choice of banks as determined by the rst order
conditions of the banksÂ’ optimization problem. The Appendix discusses the assumptions
under which rst order conditions actually select a global optimum for the bankÂ’s problem,
ensuring that a symmetric strategy equilibrium exists.




                                            13
age multiple9

                         d t                        t dRt+1 (t )
                 rt =       = t     (t    1)                    < t :              (26)
                         dt                      Rt+1    dt

The second term on the right of equation (26) reÂ‡ects the eÂ¤ect of the increase
in Rt+1 that arises as the bank increases t . An increase in t reduces the
recovery rate, forcing Rt+1 up to compensate depositors, as equation (25)
suggests. The term (t 1)  t =Rt+1 then reÂ‡ects the reduction in the bank
franchise value that results from a unit increase in Rt+1 : Due to the eÂ¤ect on
Rt+1 from expanding t ; the marginal return rt is below the average excess
return t .
     The solution for t depends on whether or not the marginal return of
increasing leverage multiple rt is positive. If it is positive, the incentive
constraint (24) binds and limits the bank from increasing leverage to acquire
more assets. Then from (24) with equality, we get the following solution for
t :
                                   t
                            t =       ; if rt > 0:                       (27)
                                  t
The constraint (27) limits the leverage multiple to the point where the bankÂ’s
gain from diverting funds per unit of net worth t is exactly balanced by the
cost per unit of net worth of losing the franchise value, which is measured by
  t = t t +  t : Note that t tends to move countercyclically since the excess
                                 b
return on bank capital Et Rt+1         Rt+1 widens as the borrowing constraint
tightens in recessions. As a result, t tends to move countercyclically. As we
show later, the countercyclical movement in t contributes to making bank
runs more likely in bad economic times.10
   9
     Note that, although t aÂ¤ects the default probability pt , the indirect eÂ¤ect of t on
 rm value Vt through the change of pt is zero. This is because at the borderline of default,
nt+1 = 0 and thus Vt+1 = 0. Thus a small shift in the probability mass from the no-
default to the default state has no impact on Vt . Similarly, the indirect eÂ¤ect of t on
the promised deposit rate Rt through pt is zero, since the recovery rate xt is unity at the
borderline of default. See Appendix for details. Important to the argument is the absence
of deadweight loss associated with default.
  10
     In the data, net worth of our model corresponds to the mark-to-market diÂ¤erence
between assets and liabilities of the bank balance sheet. It is diÂ¤erent from the book
value often used in the oÂ¢cial report, which is slow in reacting to market conditions.
Also bank assets here are securities and loans to the non- nancial sector, which exclude
those to other nancial intermediaries. In the data, the net mark-to-market leverage


                                            14
    Conversely, if the marginal return to increasing the leverage multiple be-
comes zero before the incentive constraint becomes binding, the bank chooses
leverage as,
                                              t
                           rt = 0; if t <        :                      (28)
                                             t
When the constraint does not bind, even if discounted excess returns are
                            b
strictly postive, Et t+1 Rt+1    Rt+1 > 0, the bank still chooses to limit the
leverage multiple so long as there is a possibility that the incentive constraint
could bind in the future. In this instance, as in Brunnermeier and Sannikov
(2014) and He and Krishnamurthy (2015), banks have a precautionary mo-
tive for scaling back their respective leverage multiples.11 The precautionary
motive is reÂ‡ected by the presence of the discount factor t+1 in the measure
of the discounted excess return t . The discount factor t+1 , which reÂ‡ects
the shadow value of net worth, tends to vary countercyclically given that
borrowing constraints tighten in downturns. By reducing their leverage mul-
tiples, banks reduce the risk of taking losses when the shadow value of net
worth is high.

2.2.3    Aggregation of the nancial sector absent default
We now characterize the aggregate nancial sector during periods where
banks do not default. Given that the optimal leverage multiple t is in-
dependent of bank-speci c factors, individual bank portfolio decisions, sbt
and dt ; are homogenous in net worth. Accordingly, we can sum across banks
to obtain the following relation between aggregate bank asset holdings Qt Stb
and the aggregate quantity of net worth Nt in the banking sector:

                                      Qt Stb = t Nt :                                  (29)
multiple of the nancial intermediation sector - the ratio of securities and loans to the
non nancial sector to the net worth of the aggregate nancial intermediaries - tends to
move counter-cyclically, even though the gross leverage multiple - the ratio of book value
total assets (including securities and loans to the other intermediaries) to the net worth of
some individual intermediaries may move procyclically. Concerning the debate about the
procyclicality and countercyclicality of the leverage rate of the intermediaries, see Adrian
and Shin (2010) and He, Khang and Krishnamurthy (2010).
  11
     One diÂ¤erence of our model from these papers is that, because default occurs in
equilibrium, the bankÂ’s leverage aÂ¤ects the promised deposit rate and the cost of funds.
This eÂ¤ect provides an additional motive for the bank to reduce its leverage multiple as
implied by the fact that when the constraint is not binding t > rt = 0.


                                             15
     The evolution of Nt depends on both the retained earnings of bankers that
survived from the previous period and the injection of equity to new bankers.
For technical convenience again related to computational considerations, we
suppose that the household transfer et to a each new banker is proportionate
to the stock of capital at the end of the previous period, St 1 ; with et =
   
       S :12 Aggregating across both surviving and entering bankers yields
(1 )f t 1
the following expression for the evolution of net worth

                   Nt = [(Rtb     Rt )t    1   + Rt ]Nt   1   + St 1 :       (30)

The rst term is the total net worth of bankers that operated at t 1 and
survived until t: The second, St 1 , is the total start-up equity of entering
bankers.

2.3     Runs, insolvency and the default probability
We now turn to the case of default due to either runs or insolvency. After
describing bank runs and the condition for a bank run equilibrium to exist,
we characterize the overall default probability.

2.3.1   Conditions for a bank run equilibrium
As in Diamond and Dybvig (1983), the runs we consider are runs on the entire
banking system and not an individual bank. A run on an individual bank
will not have aggregate eÂ¤ects as depositors simply shuÂ­e their funds from
one bank to another. As we noted earlier, though, we diÂ¤er from Diamond
and Dybvig in that runs reÂ‡ect a panic failure to roll over deposits as opposed
to early withdrawal.
    Consider the behavior of a household that acquired deposits at t 1:
Suppose further that the banking system is solvent at the beginning of time
t : assets valued at normal market prices exceed liabilities. The household
must then decide whether to roll over deposits at t: A self-ful lling "run"
equilibrium exists if and only if the household correctly believes that in the
event all other depositors run, thus forcing the banking system into liquida-
tion, the household will lose money if it rolls over its deposits individually.
Note that this condition is satis ed if and only if the liquidation forces banks
  12
    Here we value capital at the steady state price Q = 1: If we use the market price
instead, the nancial accelerator would be enhanced but not signi cantly.


                                            16
into default, i.e. reduces the value of bank assets below promised obligations
to depositors driving aggregate bank net worth to zero. A household that
deposits funds in a zero net worth bank will simply lose its money as the
bank will divert the money for personal use.13 If instead bank net worth is
positive even at liquidation prices, banks would be able to oÂ¤er a pro table
deposit contract to an individual household deciding to roll over.
    The condition for a bank run equilibrium to exist at t, accordingly, is
that in the event of liquidation following a run, bank net worth goes to zero.
Recall that earlier we de ned the depositor recovery rate, xt , as the ratio of
the value of bank assets to promised obligations to depositors. Therefore, a
bank run equilibrium exists at t if and only if the recovery rate conditional
on a run, xRt , is less than unity:

                                      )Qt + Zt ]Stb
                                    t [(1                  1
                         xR
                          t =                                                     (31)
                                      Rt Dt 1
                                 b
                                Rt    t 1
                              =             <1
                                Rt t 1 1

where Qt is the asset liquidation price, Zt is rental rate, and Rtb is the return
on bank assets conditional on a run. Since the liquidation price Qt is below
the normal market price Qt ; a run may occur even if the bank is solvent at
normal market prices. Moreover, as we will show below, when deteriorat-
ing economic conditions cause bank leverage t 1 to increase substantially,
                                                               Rb
even relatively small new disturbances which decrease Rtt can open up the
possibility of a banking panic.

2.3.2    The liquidation price
Key to the condition for a bank run equilibrium is the behavior of the liquida-
tion price Qt : A depositor run at t induces all the existing banks to liquidate
their assets by selling them to households. We suppose that new banks can
only store their net worth during a run and start raising deposit one period
  13
    As we mention below, we assume that new entrant banks during a run do not setup
their banking operations until a period after the run. Thus an individual depositor who
does not run would be forced to save in a bank with zero net worth instead of in a new
bank.




                                             17
after the panic.14 Accordingly in the wake of the run:

                                                 Sth = St :                                            (32)

The banking system then rebuilds itself over time as new banks enter. The
evolution of net worth following the run at t is given by

         Nt+1 = St + St 1 :                                                                         (33)
          N = [(Rb R )                1   + R ]N      1   + S   1;   for all   t + 2:

       To obtain Qt , we invert the household Euler equation:

                (   1                                  
                                                                 !                                  )
                    X                                  Y                               Sh
 Qt = Et                  e t; (1
                                     )       t 1
                                                               j  Z                          =
                   =t+1                              j=t+1
                                                                                       S
                (1        ) =t :                                                                     (34)

where the term  (1      ) =t is the period t marginal eÂ¢ciency cost following
a run at t (given St =St = 1 in this instance).15 The liquidation price is thus
                    h

equal to the expected discounted stream of dividends net the marginal eÂ¢-
ciency losses from household portfolio management. Since marginal eÂ¢ciency
losses are at a maximum when Sth equal St , Qt is at a minimum, given the
expected future path of Sh : Further, the longer it takes the banking system
to recover (so Sh falls back to its steady state value) the lower will be Qt .
Finally, note that Qt will vary positively with the expected path of   and
Z and with the stochastic discount factor    e t; :

2.3.3      The default probability: illiquidity versus insolvency
In the run equilibrium, banks default even though they are solvent at normal
market prices. It is the forced liquidation at resale prices during a run that
pushes these banks into bankruptcy. Thus, in the context of our model, a
bank run can be viewed as a situation of illiquidity. By contrast, default is
also possible if banks enter period t insolvent at normal market prices.
  14
    Although goods are storable one-for-one, people do not use storage in equilibrium
except for a period of bank run.
  15                           Sth
       We are imposing that    St      0 as is the case in all of our numerical simulations.



                                                      18
      Accordingly, the total probability of default in the subsequent period, pt ,
is the sum of the probability of a run pR   t and the probability of insolvency
pIt :

                                       pt = pR    I
                                             t + pt :                              (35)
   We begin with pIt . By de nition, banks are insolvent if the ratio of assets
valued at normal market prices is less than liabilities. In our economy, the
only exogenous shock to the aggregate economy is a shock to the quality of
capital  t . Let us de ne  It+1 to be the value of capital quality,  t+1 , that
makes the depositor recovery rate at normal market prices, x( It+1 ) equal to
unity:

                            It+1 [Zt+1 ( It+1 ) + (1 )Qt+1 ( It+1 )]Stb
            x( It+1 ) =                                                    = 1:   (36)
                                                   Rt Dt
For values of  t+1 below  It+1 , the bank will be insolvent and must default.
The probability of default due to insolvency is then given by
                                                         
                               pIt = probt  t+1 <  It+1 ;                        (37)
where probt () is the probability of satisfying  conditional on date t infor-
mation.
    We next turn to the determination of the run probability. In general, the
time t probability of a run at t + 1 is the product of the probability a run
equilibrium exists at t + 1 times the probability a run will occur when it is
feasible. We suppose the latter depends on the realization of a sunspot. Let
t+1 be a binary sunspot variable that takes on a value of 1 with probability
{ and a value of 0 with probability 1 {. In the event of t+1 = 1, depositors
coordinate on a run if a bank run equilibrium exists. Note that we make the
sunspot probability { constant so as not to build in exogenous cyclicality in
the movement of the overall bank run probability pR   t :
    A bank run arises at t + 1 iÂ¤ (i) a bank run equilibrium exists at t + 1
and (ii) t+1 = 1. Let ! t be the probability at t that a bank run equilibrium
exists at t + 1: Then the probability pRt of a run at t + 1 is given by

                                       pR
                                        t = ! t  {:                               (38)

   To nd the value of ! t ; let us de ne  R
                                           t+1 as the value of  t+1 that makes
the recovery rate conditional on a run xR   t+1 unity when evaluated at the


                                             19
 resale liquidation price Qt+1 and rental rate during run Zt+1
                                                            
                                                                :
                            R
                             t+1 [(1   )Q ( R         R        b
                                               t+1 ) + Z ( t+1 )]St
              x( R
                  t+1 ) =                                            = 1:   (39)
                                            Rt Dt
For values of  t+1 below  R       R
                            t+1 , xt+1 is below unity and a bank run equilibrium
is feasible. Therefore, the probability that a bank run equilibrium exists is
given by the probability that  t+1 lies in the interval below  R t+1 but above
                                  I
the threshold for insolvency  t+1 : In particular,
                                                          
                        ! t = probt  It+1   t+1 <  R
                                                       t+1 :                 (40)
Given equation (40), we can distinguish regions of  t+1 where insolvency
emerges ( t+1 <  It+1 ) from regions where an illiquidity problem may emerge
( It+1   t+1 <  R
                    t+1 ):
      Overall, the probability of a run varies inversely with the expected recov-
ery rate Et xt+1 : The lower the forecast of the depositor recovery rate, the
higher ! t and thus the higher pt : In this way the model captures that an
expected weakening of the banking system raises the likelihood of a run.
      Finally, comparing equations (37) and (40) makes clear that the possi-
bility of a run equilibrium signi cantly expands the chances for a banking
collapse, beyond the probability that would arise simply from default due
to insolvency. In this way the possibility of runs makes the system more
fragile. Indeed, within the numerical exercises we present the probability of
a fundamental shock that induces an insolvent banking system is negligible.
However, the probability of a shock that induces a bank run equilibrium is
not negligible.


3     Production, market clearing and policy
The rest of the model is fairly standard. There is a production sector consist-
ing of producers of nal goods, intermediate goods and capital goods. Prices
are sticky in the intermediate goods sector. In addition there is a central
bank that conducts monetary policy.

3.1    Final and intermediate goods rms
There is a continuum of measure unity of nal goods producers and inter-
mediate goods producers. Final goods rms make a homogenous good Yt

                                           20
that may be consumed or used as input to produce new capital goods. Each
intermediate goods rm f 2 [0; 1] makes a diÂ¤erentiated good Yt (f ) that is
used in the production of nal goods.
    Final goods rm transforms intermediate goods into nal output accord-
ing to the following CES production function:
                                 Z   1                             "1
                                                                      "
                                                        "1
                         Yt =                 Yt (f )    "    df           ;       (41)
                                  0
where " > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between intermediate goods.
    Let Pt (f ) be the nominal price of intermediate good f . Then cost min-
imization of nal goods rms yields the following demand function for each
intermediate good f (after integrating across the demands of by all nal
goods rms):
                                                "
                                        Pt (f )
                            Yt (f ) =               Yt ;                (42)
                                         Pt
where Pt is the price index as
                                 Z       1                     1"
                                                                  1


                         Pt =                 Pt (f )1 " df                :
                                      0

   There is a continuum of intermediate good rms owned by consumers,
indexed by f 2 [0; 1]. Each produces a diÂ¤erentiated good and is a mo-
nopolistic competitor. Intermediate goods rm f uses both labor Lt (f ) and
capital Kt (f ) to produce output according to:

                        Yt (f ) = At Kt (f ) Lt (f )1                          ;   (43)
where At is a technology parameter and 0 > > 1 is the capital share.
   Both labor and capital are freely mobile across rms. Firms rent capital
from owners of claims to capital (i.e. banks and households) in a competitive
market on a period by period basis. Then from cost minimization, all rms
choose the same capital labor ratio, as follows
                          Kt (f )                       wt   Kt
                                  =                        =    :                  (44)
                          Lt (f )   1                   Zt   Lt
where, as noted earlier, wt is the real wage rate and Zt is the rental rate of
capital. The rst order conditions from the cost minimization problem imply
that marginal cost is given by

                                                21
                                                  1           
                                 1            wt            Zt
                          M Ct =                                     :               (45)
                                 At       1
Observe that marginal cost is independent of rm-speci c factors.
    Following Rotemberg (1982), each monopolistically competitive rm f
faces quadratic costs of adjusting prices. Let r ("r" for Rotemberg) be the
parameter governing price adjustment costs. Then each period, it chooses
Pt (f ) and Yt (f ) to maximize the expected discounted value of pro t:
       (1           "                                          2 #)
         X             P   (f )               r
                                                       P   (f )
   Et         e t;
              
                         
                                M C Y (f )     Y
                                                         
                                                                1       ; (46)
          =t
                         P                   2       P 1 (f )

subject to the demand curve (42). Here we assume that the adjustment cost
is proportional to the aggregate demand Yt .
     Taking the rmÂ’s rst order condition for price adjustment and imposing
symmetry implies the following forward looking PhillipÂ’s curve:
                                                                
                  "          " 1               Yt+1
    ( t 1)  t = r M Ct            + Et t+1       ( t+1 1)  t+1 ; (47)
                              "                Yt
               Pt
where  t =   Pt1
                     is the realized gross inÂ‡ation rate at date t.

3.2     Capital goods producers
There is a continuum of measure unity of competitive capital goods rms.
Each produces new investment goods that it sells at the competitive market
price Qt : By investing It (j) units of nal goods output, rm j can produce
 (It (j)=Kt )  Kt new capital goods, with 0 > 0; 00 < 0; and where Kt is the
aggregate capital stock.16
    The decision problem for capital producer j is accordingly
                                           
                                     It (j)
                         max Qt               Kt It (j):                 (48)
                          It (j)      Kt
  16
    For simplicity we are assuming that the aggregate capital stock enters into production
function of investment goods as an externality. Alternatively, we could make an assumpi-
ton similar to Cao, Lorenzoni and Walentin (2016): Each capital goods producer buys
capital after being used to produce intermediated goods and combines the capital with
 nal output goods to produce the total capital stock. One can then obtain a rst order
condition like (49).

                                              22
Given symmetry for capital producers (It (j) = It ); we can express the rst
order condition as the following "Q" relation for investment:
                                     1
                                        It
                             Qt = 0                                    (49)
                                        Kt
which yields a positive relation between Qt and investment.

3.3     Monetary Policy
Let t be a measure of cyclical resource utilization, i.e., resource utilization
                                                              1
relative to the Â‡exible price equilibrium. Next let R =         denote the real
interest rate in the deterministic steady state with zero inÂ‡ation. We suppose
that the central bank sets the nominal rate on the riskless bond Rtn according
to the following Taylor rule:
                                      1
                              Rtn =       ( t ) (t )y                      (50)

with  > 1. Note that, if the net nominal
                                     n          rate cannot
                                                          o go below zero, the
                                       1             
policy rule would become Rtn = max       ( t ) (t ) ; 1 .
                                                       y


    A standard way to measure t is to use the ratio of actual output to
a hypothetical Â‡exible price equilibrium value of output. Computational
considerations lead us to use a measure which similarly captures the cyclical
eÂ¢ciency of resource utilization but is much easier to handle numerically.
Speci cally, we take as our measure of cyclical resource utilization the ratio
of the desired markup, 1 +  = "=(" 1) to the current markup 1 + t :17
                                              1+
                                   t =                                         (51)
                                              1 + t
with
                                          1        (1     )(Yt =Lt )
                       1 + t = M Ct          =                        :        (52)
                                                        L't Ct   h


The markup corresponds to the ratio of the marginal product of labor to the
marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure, which corre-
sponds to the labor market wedge. The inverse markup ratio t thus isolates
  17
    In the case of consumption goods only, our markup measure of eÂ¢ciency corresponds
exactly to the output gap.


                                              23
the cyclical movement in the eÂ¢ciency of the labor market, speci cally the
component that is due to nominal rigidities.
    Finally, one period bonds which have a riskless nominal return have zero
net supply. (Bank deposits have default risk). Nonetheless we can use the
following household Euler equation to price the nominal interest rate of these
bonds Rtn as
                                          
                                      Rtn
                            Et t+1          = 1:                         (53)
                                      t+1

3.4    Resource constraints and equilibrium
Total output is divided between consumption, investment, the adjustment
cost of nominal prices and a xed value of government consumption G:
                                    r
                     Yt = Ct + It +    ( t 1)2 Yt + G:                (54)
                                     2
Given a symmetric equilibrium, we can express total output as the following
function of aggregate capital and labor:

                              Yt = At Kt L1t   :                         (55)
Although we consider a limiting case in which supply of government bond
and money is zero, government adjusts lump-sum tax to satisfy the budget
constraint. Finally, labor market must clear, which implies that aggregate
labor demand of producers equals aggregate labor supply of households.
   This completes the description of the model. See Appendix for details.


4     Numerical exercises
4.1    Calibration
Table 1 lists the choice of parameter values for our model. Overall there
are twenty one parameters. Thirteen are conventional as they appear in
standard New Keynesian DSGE models. The other eight parameters govern
the behavior of the nancial sector, and hence are speci c to our model.
    We begin with the conventional parameters. For the discount rate ; the
risk aversion parameter h ; the inverse Frisch elasticity ', the elasticity of
substitution between goods ", the depreciation rate  and the capital share

                                      24
we use standard values in the literature. Three additional parameters (; a; b)
involve the investment technology, which we express as follows:
                                      1 
                             It           It
                                   =a            + b:
                             Kt          Kt
We set , which corresponds to the elasticity of the price of capital with
respect to investment rate, equal to 0:25, a value in line with panel data
estimates. We then choose a and b to hit two targets: rst, a ratio of quarterly
investment to the capital stock of 2:5% and, second, a value of the price of
capital Q equals unity in the risk-adjusted steady state. We set the value
of xed government expenditure G to 20% of steady state output. Next we
choose the cost of price adjustment parameter jr to generate an elasticity of
inÂ‡ation with respect to marginal cost equal to 1 percent, which is roughly
in line with the estimates.18 Finally, we set the feedback parameters in the
Taylor rule,  and y to their conventional values of 1:5 and 0:5 respectively.
    We now turn to the nancial sector parameters. There are six parameters
that directly aÂ¤ect the evolution of bank net worth and credit spreads: the
bankerÂ’s survival probability ; the initial equity injection to entering bankers
as a share of capital ; the asset diversion parameter ; the threshold share
for costless direct household nancing of capital, ; the parameter governing
the convexity of the eÂ¢ciency cost of direct nancing ; and the probability
of observing a sunspot {.
    We choose the values of these parameter to hit the following six targets:
(i) the average arrival rate of a systemic bank run equals 4 percent annually,
corresponding to a frequency of banking panics of once every 25 years, which
is in line with the evidence for advanced economies19 ; (ii) the average bank
leverage multiple equals 10;20 (iii) the average excess rate of return on bank
assets over deposits equals 2%; based on Philippon (2015); (iv) the average
share of bank intermediated assets equals 0:5; which is a reasonable estimate
of the share of intermediation performed by investment banks and large com-
mercial banks; (v) and (vi) the increase in excess returns (measured by credit
  18
     See, for example, Del Negro, Giannoni and Shorfheide (2015)
  19
     See, for example, Bordo et al (2001), Reinhart and RogoÂ¤ (2009) and Schularick and
Taylor (2012).
  20
     We think of the banking sector in our model as including both investment banks
and some large commercial banks that operated oÂ¤ balance sheet vehicles without explicit
guarantees. Ten is on the high side for commercial banks and on the low side for investment
banks. See Gertler, Kiyotaki and Prestipino (2016).

                                            25
spreads) and the drop in investment following a bank run match the evidence
from the recent crisis.
   The remaining two parameters determine the serial correlation of the
capital quality  and and the standard deviation of the innovations   :
That is we assume that the capital quality shock obeys the following rst
order process :                       
                         t+1 = 1  +   t + t+1
with 0 <  < 1 and where t+1 a (truncated) normally distributed i.i.d.
random variable with mean zero and standard deviation   .21 We choose
 and   so that the unconditional standard deviations of investment and
output match the ones observed over the 1983Q1-2008Q3 period.
    Given that our policy functions are non linear we obtain model implied
moments by simulating our economy for 100 thousand periods. Table 2 shows
unconditional standard deviations for some key macroeconomic variables in
the model and in the data. The volatilities of output, investment and labor
are reasonably in line with the data. Consumption is too volatile, but the
variability of the sum of consumption and investment matches the evidence.

4.2     Experiments
In this section we perform several experiments that are meant to illustrate
how our model economy behaves and compares with the data. We rst show
the response of the economy to a capital quality shock with and without runs
to illustrate how the model generates a nancial panic. We then compare
how runs versus occasionally binding constraints can generate nonlinear dy-
namics. Finally, we turn to an experiment that shows how the model can
replicate salient features of the recent nancial crisis.

4.2.1    Response to a capital quality shock: no bank run case
We suppose the economy is initially in a risk-adjusted steady state. Figure
1 shows the response of the economy to a negative one standard deviation
  21
    In practice we assume that t+1 is a truncated normal with support ( 10  ; 10  ).
Given our calibration for   and  the probability that  t goes below zero is computa-
tionally zero.




                                           26
(.75%) shock to the quality of capital.22 The solid line is our baseline model
and the dotted line is the case where there are no nancial frictions. For both
cases the shock reduces the expected return to capital, reducing investment
and in turn aggregate demand. In addition, for the baseline economy with
  nancial frictions, the weakening of bank balance sheets ampli es the contrac-
tion in demand through the nancial accelerator or credit cycle mechanism of
Bernanke Gertler and Gilchrist (1999) and Kiyotaki and Moore(1997). Poor
asset returns following the shock cause bank net worth to decrease by about
15%. As bank net worth declines, incentive constraints tighten and banks
decrease their demand for assets causing the price of capital to drop. The
drop in asset prices feeds back into lower bank net worth, an eÂ¤ect that is
magni ed by the extent of bank leverage. As nancial constraints tighten
and asset prices decline, excess returns rise by 75 basis points which allows
banks to increase their leverage by about 10%: Overall, a 0:75 percent decline
in the quality of capital results in a drop in investment by 5 percent and a
drop in output by slightly more than 1 percent. The drop in investment is
roughly double the amount in the case absent nancial frictions, while the
drop in output is about thirty percent greater.
    In the experiment of Figure 1, the economy is always ex post in a "safe
zone", where a bank run equilibrium does not exist. Under our parame-
trization, a bank run cannot happen in the risk-adjusted steady state: bank
leverage is too low. The dashed line in the rst panel of Figure 1 shows the
size of the shock in the subsequent period needed to push the economy into
the run region: In our example, a two standard deviation shock is needed to
open up the possibility of runs starting from the risk adjusted steady state,
which is double the size of the shock considered in Figure 1.
    Even though in this case the economy is always in a safe region ex post,
it is possible ex ante that a run equilibrium could occur in the subsequent
period. In particular, the increase in leverage following the shock raises the
probability that a suÂ¢ciently bad shock in the subsequent period pushes the
economy into the run region. As the top middle panel of Figure 1 shows, the
overall probability of a run increases following the shock.
  22
    In all of the experiments we trace the response of the economy to the shocks consid-
ered assuming that after these shocks capital quality is exactly equal to its conditional
expectations, i.e. setting future "t to 0:




                                           27
4.2.2   Bank runs
In the previous experiment the economy was well within a safe zone. A one
standard deviation shock did not and could not produce a nancial panic. We
now consider a case where the economy starts in the safe zone but is gradually
pushed to the edge of the crisis zone, where a run equilibrium exists. We
then show how an arrival of sunspot induces a panic with damaging eÂ¤ects
on the real economy.
    To implement this experiment, we assume that the economy is hit by a
sequence of three equally sized negative shocks that push the economy to the
run threshold. That is, we nd a shock  that satis es:
                                                    
                          R3 = 1+
                                     
                                       1 +  + 2

where  R3 is the threshold level for the capital quality below which a run is
possible in period 3; given that the economy is in steady state in period 0
and is hit by two equally sized shocks in periods 1 and 2, i.e. 1 = 2 =  :
The rst two shocks push the economy to the edge of the crisis zone. The
third pushes it just in.
    The solid line in Figure 2 shows the response of the economy starting from
period two onwards under the assumption that the economy experiences a
run with arrival of a sunspot in period 3. For comparison, the dashed line
shows the response of the economy to the same exact capital quality shocks
but assuming that no sunspot is observed and so no run happens.
    As shown in panel 1 the size of the threshold innovation of capital qual-
ity shock turns out to be roughly equal to one standard deviation, i.e.
 = :83%:, which is the size of the shock in Figure 1. After the rst
two innovations, the capital quality is 1:4% below average and the run prob-
ability is about 2% quarterly. The last innovation pushes the economy into
the run region. When the sunspot is observed and the run occurs, bank net
worth is wiped out which forces banks to liquidate assets. In turn, house-
holds absorb the entire capital stock. Households however are only willing to
increase their portfolio holdings of capital at a discount, which leads excess
returns to spike and investment to collapse. When the run occurs, investment
drops an additional 25% resulting in an overall drop of 35%. Comparing with
the case of no run clari es that almost none of this additional drop is due
to the capital quality shock itself: The additional drop in investment absent
a run is only 2.5%. The collapse in investment demand causes inÂ‡ation to
decrease and induces monetary policy to ease by reducing the policy rate to

                                     28
slightly below zero. However, reducing the nominal interest rate to roughly
zero is not suÂ¢cient to insulate output which drops by 7%.
    As new bankers enter the economy, bank net worth is slowly rebuilt and
the economy returns to the steady state. This recovery is slowed down by a
persistent increase in the run probability following the banking panic. The
increase in the run probability reduces the amount of leverage that banks are
willing to take on.
    To get a sense of the role that nominal rigidities are playing, Figure 3
describes the eÂ¤ect of bank runs in the economy with Â‡exible prices. For
comparison, with the analogous experiment in our baseline (in Figure 2) we
hit the Â‡ex price economy with the same sequence of shocks that would take
the baseline economy to the run threshold.23 There are two main takeaways
from Figure 3. First, the output drop in the Â‡exible price case is only about
half that in our benchmark sticky price case. The New Keynesian features
thus magnify the eÂ¤ects of the banking crisis. The reason is that the banking
crisis generates a steep decline in the natural rate of interest by inducing a
collapse in investment demand. As a result, in the Â‡exible price case the real
interest rate, which is equals the natural rate, drops roughly eight hundred
basis points below zero leading to a temporary expansion in consumption
demand and hence dampening the output contraction. Clearly, such a dra-
matic drop in real rates would not be feasible with nominal rigidities and a
zero lower bound. Second, even in the Â‡exible price case, a bank run will
amplify the contraction in output by inducing a large drop in investment
demand. In our example, relative to the no run case, the run increases the
drop in output from about one percent to three and a half percent.

4.2.3    Nonlinearities: occasionally binding constraints vs runs
We now turn to nonlinearities within our baseline model. We will start by
considering the eÂ¤ects of occasionally binding constraints. Figure 4 shows
the behavior of the economy when it transits from slack to binding nancing
(incentive) constraints. In our calibration, the risk adjusted steady state lies
at the borderline for the nancing constraint to be binding. If the shock
to capital quality is positive the constraint is slack, while it becomes bind-
  23
    However, since in the Â‡ex price economy there is much less ampli cation, the ex-
post run that we consider is actually not an equilbrium. As the rst panel in the gure
shows, even after the rst two shocks the shock that is needed to push the economy to the
threshold is still very large in the Â‡ex price economy, i.e. around -4%.


                                          29
ing with negative capital quality shocks. Overall, nonlinearities are present,
though they do not turn out to be as large as in the case of bank runs. A neg-
ative capital quality shock aÂ¤ects investment, asset prices and credit spreads
only a little more, in absolute value, than does a similar magnitude increase.
The asymmetries arising in our framework are somewhat dampened for two
reasons: First, in many frameworks the maximum leverage multiple is xed
(e.g. Mendoza, 2010). However, in our model, as the economy moves into
the constrained region the maximum leverage multiple increases (see section
2.2.2). This relaxing of the leverage constraint mitigates the decline in real
activity and asset prices and the rise in credit spreads. Second, it is often as-
sumed that the real interest rate is xed. In our model, however, the real rate
declines as the economy weakens, which also works to dampen the decline in
the constrained region.
    Next we consider bank runs. Figure 5 shows the response of the economy
to a capital quality shock starting from the same initial state considered in
Figure 2. The dashed line depicts the response in the case in which no sunspot
occurs (so that a bank run cannot happen) and the solid one shows the case in
which a sunspot appears (so that a run will occur if a run equilibrium exists).
As long as capital quality shocks are above the run threshold the responses
are identical in the both cases since in this region a run is not possible. When
the shock lies below the run threshold, however, a run equilibrium exists. In
this region, when agents observe a sunspot they run on nancial institutions
pushing the economy to an equilibrium in which banks are forced to liquidate
assets at re sale prices. The discrete and highly nonlinear behavior during
 nancial crisis (which we described in Introduction) then emerges: excess
returns spike and investment and asset prices collapse.

4.2.4   Crisis experiment: model versus data
Figure 6 illustrates how the model can replicate some salient features of the
recent nancial crisis. We hit the economy with a series of capital quality
shocks over the period 2007Q4 until 2008Q3. The starting point is the begin-
ning of the recession, which roughly coincides with the time credit markets
 rst came under stress following Bear StearnsÂ’ losses on its MBS portfolios.
We pick the size of the capital quality shocks to match the observed decline
in investment during this period, in panel 1. We then assume that a run hap-
pens in 2008Q4, the quarter in which Lehman failed and the shadow banking
system collapsed. The solid line shows the observed response of some key

                                       30
macroeconomic variables.24 The dashed line shows the response of the econ-
omy when a run occurs in 2008Q4 and the dotted line shows the response
under the assumption that a run does not happen.
    As indicated in panel 2, the sequence of negative surprises in the quality
of capital needed to match the observed contraction in investment leads to a
gradual decline in banks net worth that matches closely the observed decline
in nancial sector equity as measured by the XLF index, which is an index of
S&P 500 nancial stocks. Given that banks net worth is already depleted by
poor asset returns, a very modest innovation in 2008Q4 pushes the economy
into the run region. When the run occurs, the model economy generates a
sudden spike in excess returns and a drop in investment, output, consumption
and employment of similar magnitudes as those observed during the crisis
in panels 3 - 6. The dotted line shows how, absent a run, the same shocks
would generate a much less severe downturn.
    The model economy also predicts a rather slow recovery following the
  nancial crisis, although faster than what we observed in the data. It is
important however to note that in the experiment we are abstracting from
any disturbances after 2008Q4. This implies a rather swift recovery of nan-
cial equity and excess returns to their long run value. On the other hand,
the observed recovery of net worth and credit spreads was much slower with
both variables still far from their pre-crisis values as of today. Various factors
that are not captured in our model economy, such as a drastic change in the
regulatory framework of nancial institutions, increased uncertainty follow-
ing the crisis and slow adjustment of household balance sheets, have likely
contributed to the very slow recovery of these nancial variables. Incorpo-
rating these factors could help the model account for the very slow recovery
of investment and employment. However we leave this extension for future
research.


5      Conclusion
We have developed a macroeconomic model with a banking sector where
costly nancial panics can arise. A panic or run in our model is a self-
ful lling failure of creditors to roll over their short-term credits to banks.
  24
    For output, investment and consumption we show deviation from a trend computed
by using CBO estimates of potential output and similarly for hours worked we let the
CBO estimate of potentail labor represent the trend.


                                        31
When the economy is close to the steady state a self-ful lling rollover crises
cannot happen because banks have suÂ¢ciently strong balance sheets. In this
situation, "normal size" business cycle shocks do not lead to nancial crises.
However, in a recession, banks may have suÂ¢ciently weak balance sheet so as
to open up the possibility of a run. Depending on the circumstances either
a small shock or no further shock can generate a run that has devastating
consequences for the real economy. We show that our model generates the
highly nonlinear contraction in economic activity associated with nancial
crises. It also captures how crises may occur even in the absence of large
exogenous shocks to the economy. We then illustrate that the model is
broadly consistent with the recent nancial crisis.
    One issue we save for further work is the role of macroprudential policy.
As with other models of macroprudential policy, externalities are present that
lead banks to take more risk than is socially eÂ¢cient. Much of the literature
is based on the pecuniary externality analyzed by Lorenzoni (2008), where
individual banks do not properly internalize the exposure of the system to
asset price Â‡uctuations that generate ineÂ¢cient volatility, but not runs. A
distinctive feature of our model is that the key externality works through the
eÂ¤ect of leverage on the bank run probability: Because the run probability
depends on the leverage of the banking system as a whole, individual banks
do not fully take into account the impact of their own leverage decisions on
the exposure of the entire system. In this environment, the key concern of
the macroprudential policy becomes reducing the possibility of a nancial
collapse in the most eÂ¢cient way. Our model will permit us to explore the
optimal design of policies qualitatively and quantitatively.




                                     32
References
 [1] Adrian, T., and H. Shin. 2010. The Changing Nature of Financial In-
     termediation and the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009. Annual Review of
     Economics: 603-618.

 [2] Angeloni, I., and E. Faia, 2013. Capital Regulation and Monetary Policy
     with Fragile Banks. Journal of Monetary Economics 60(3): 311-324.

 [3] Benhabib, J., and P. Wang. 2013. Financial Constraints, Endogenous
     Markups, and Self-Ful lling Equilibria. Journal of Monetary Economics
     60: 789-805

 [4] Bernanke, B., 2010. Causes of the Recent Financial and Economic Crisis.
     Statement before the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, Washington,
     September 2.

 [5] Bernanke, B., M. Gertler and S. Gilchrist. 1999. Financial Accelera-
     tor in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework. In Taylor, J.B., and
     Woodford, M. (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics. Vol. 1: 1341-1393.
     Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

 [6] Bocola L. and G. Lorenzoni, 2017, "A Model of Financial Crises in Open
     Economies," mimeo.

 [7] Bordo,M. D., B. Eichengreen, D. Klingebiel and M. Soledad Martinez-
     Peria. 2001. Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?. Economic
     Policy: A European Forum 32: 51-75.

 [8] Brunnermeier, M. K., T. Eisenbach and Y. Sannikov. 2013. Macroeco-
     nomics with Financial Frictions: A Survey." In D. Acemoglu, M. Arel-
     lano and E. Dekel (Eds.) Advances in Economics and Econometrics:
     Tenth World Congress of the Econometric Society. Vol. 2: 3-94. Cam-
     bridge: Cambridge University Press.

 [9] Brunnermeier, M. K., and Y. Sannikov. 2014. A Macroeconomic Model
     with a Financial Sector. American Economic Review 104, 379-421.

[10] Calvo, G. 1988. "Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations,
     American Economic Review 78, 647-661.


                                    33
[11] Cao, D., G. Lorenzoni and K. Wallentin. 2016. Financial Frictions, In-
     vestment and TobinÂ’s Q. Mimeo, Georgetown University.

[12] Cole, H. and T. Kehoe, 2000, Self-ful lling Debt Crises, Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies 67, 91-161.

[13] Cooper, R. and T. Ross, 1998, Bank Runs: Liquidity Costs and Invest-
     ment Distortions, Journal of Monetary Economics 41, 27-38.

[14] Del Negro, M., M. Giannoni and F. Shorfheide 2015. InÂ‡ation in the
     Great Recession and New Keynesian Models. American Economic Jour-
     nal, 7(1): 168-196

[15] Diamond, D., and P. Dybvig. 1983. Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
     Liquidity. Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-419.

[16] Farhi, E. and M. Maggiori, 2017, "A Model of the International Mone-
     tary System", Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

[17] Gertler, M., and N. Kiyotaki. 2011. Financial Intermediation and Credit
     Policy in Business Cycle Analysis. In Friedman, B., and Woodford, M.
     (Eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics. Vol. 3A: 547-599. Elsevier,
     Amsterdam, Netherlands.

[18] Gertler, M., N. Kiyotaki. 2015. Banking, Liquidity and Bank Runs in an
     In nite Horizon Economy, American Economic Review, 105: 2011-2043.

[19] Gertler, M., N. Kiyotaki and A. Prestipino. 2016. Wholesale Banking
     and Bank Runs in Macroeconomic Modeling. In Taylor, J.B., and H.
     Uhlig. (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics. Vol. 2B: 1345-1425. Else-
     vier, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

[20] Gilchrist, S., and E. Zakrajsek. 2012. Credit Spread and Business Cycle
     Fluctuations, American Economic Review, 102: 1692-1720.

[21] Gorton, G., 2010. Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007.
     Oxford: Oxford University Press.

[22] He, Z. and A. Krishnamurthy, 2017. A Macroeconomic Framework for
     Quantifying Systemic Risk. Working Paper, University of Chicago and
     Stanford University.


                                    34
[23] He, Z., I.G. Khang, and A. Krishnamurthy, 2010. Balance Sheet Adjust-
     ment during the 2008 Crisis. IMF Economic Review 1: 118-156.

[24] Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore. 1997. Credit Cycles. Journal of Political
     Economy 105, 211-248.

[25] Kurlat, P. 2016. Asset markets With Heterogeneous Information. Econo-
     metrica. 84(1):33-85.

[26] Lorenzoni, G., 2008. IneÂ¢cient Credit Booms. Review of Economic Stud-
     ies 75, 809-833.

[27] Martin, A., D. Skeie and E.L. Von Thadden. Repo Runs. Review of
     Financial Studies, 27: 957-989.

[28] Mendoza, E. 2010. "Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage.
     American Economic Review 100, 1941-1966.

[29] Perri, F. and V. Quadrini. forthcoming. "International Recessions,"
     American Economic Review.

[30] Phillipon, T. 2015. Has the U.S. Finance Industry Become Less EÂ¢cient?
     American Economic Review.

[31] Reinhart, C. and K. RogoÂ¤ 2009. This Time Is DiÂ¤erent: Eight Centuries
     of Financial Folly. Princeton,NJ: Princeton University Press.

[32] Robatto, R. 2014, Financial Crises and Systematic Bank Runs in a
     Dynamic Model of Banking, Working Paper, University of Wisconsin-
     Madison

[33] Schularick, M. and A. Taylor. 2012. Credit Booms Gone Bust: Mone-
     tary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008. American
     Economic Review102(2): 1029-1061

[34] Uhlig, H., 2010, A Model of a Systemic Bank Run, Journal of Monetary
     Economics 57, 78-96.




                                    35
                 Table : &DOLEUDWLRQ


Parameter              Description               Value                Target

                                    Standard Parameters
    Î²                    Impatience                 .99            Risk Free Rate
   Î³h                   Risk Aversion                 2               Literature
    Ï•                  Frish Elasticity               2               Literature
    Ç«        Elasticity of subst across varieties    11             Markup 10%
    Î±                   Capital Share               .33             Capital Share
                                                                       I
    Î´                   Depreciation               .025               K = .025
    Î·                Elasticity of q to i           .25               Literature
    a       Investment Technology Parameter         .53                  Q=1
                                                                       I
    b       Investment Technology Parameter -.83%                     K = .025
                                                                         G
    G            Government Expenditure             .45                  Y = .2
   Ïjr                 Price adj costs             1000      Slope of Phillips curve .01
   ÎºÏ€           Policy Response to Inflation        1.5               Literature
   Îºy           Policy Response to Output            .5               Literature
                            Financial Intermediation Parameters
                                                                               b
    Ïƒ               Banker Survival rate            .93          Leverage QSN = 10
                 New Bankers Endowments
    Î¶                                              .1%          % âˆ† I in crisis â‰ˆ 35%
                    as a share of Capital
    Î¸             Share of assets divertible        .23   Spread Increase in Crisis = 1.5%
                        Threshold for                                   Sb
    Î³                                              .432                  S = .5
                 HH Intermediation Costs
   Ï‡             HH Intermediation Costs           .065       ERb âˆ’ R = 2% Annual
   Îº                Sunspot Probability             .15     Run Probability 4% Annual
  Ïƒ(Ç«Î¾ )    std of innovation to capital quality .75%                std Output
   ÏÎ¾       serial correlation of capital quality    .7            std Investment




                                     1
Table 2: Standard Deviations Data vs. Model
                                       Data                     Model
                                      _________
                                    1983-2007q3              No ________
                                                                 Runs Happen

                           Y            1.9                     2.4
                           C+I          2.7                     3
                           I            7.2                     6.9
                           C            1.3                     3.1
                           L            3.1                     3.


All values in percentages.
NOTE: For output, investment, consumption, and government spending we compute real per
capita terms by dividing the nominal variables by the population and adjusting by the GDP
deflator. For labor we compute per capita hours worked by dividing total labor hours by the
population. We then show the standard deviations of the logged variables in deviations from a
linear trend starting in 1983q1 and ending in 2007q3.
SOURCE: Output, investment (gross private domestic investment plus durable good
consumption), consumption (personal consumption expenditure less durable good consumption),
government spending, and the GDP deflator are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Total
labor hours (aggregate hours, nonfarm payrolls) and population (civilian noninstitutional, 16 years
and over) are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
                                       Fig. 1. Response to a Capital Quality Shock (1 std): No Run Case

                                                                                                          Baseline        No Financial Fricitons


                                            Capital Quality                                                       Run Probability                                                     Bank Net Worth
                              0                                                                       0.01                                                                   5


                                                                                       0.008                                                                                 0
                            -0.5
%  from SS




                                                                                                                                                %  from SS
                                                                                       0.006                                                                                -5

                                                                      Level
                             -1                    Capital Quality
                                                   Run Threshold                       0.004                                                                               -10

                            -1.5
                                                                                       0.002                                                                               -15


                             -2                                                                          0                                                                 -20
                                   0          20        40           60                                       0      20        40       60                                        0     20            40   60



                                         Leverage Multiple:                                                         Investment                                                              Output
                             12                                                                          1                                                                 0.5

                             10                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                             0
            %  from SS




                                                                                           %  from SS




                                                                                                                                             %  from SS
                              8                                                                          -1

                              6                                                                          -2                                                                -0.5

                              4                                                                          -3
                                                                                                                                                                            -1
                              2                                                                          -4

                              0                                                                          -5                                                                -1.5
                                   0          20        40           60                                       0      20        40       60                                        0     20            40   60



                                       Excess Return: ER b -R free                                                   Policy Rate                                                         Inflation
                            250                                                                       450                                                                   15
Level Annual Basis Points




                                                                          Level Annual Basis Points




                                                                                                                                               Level Annual Basis Points




                            200                                                                                                                                             10

                                                                                                      400
                            150                                                                                                                                              5


                            100                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                      350

                             50                                                                                                                                             -5


                              0                                                                       300                                                                  -10
                                   0          20        40           60                                       0      20        40       60                                        0     20            40   60
                                                Quarters                                                              Quarters                                                           Quarters
                                           Fig. 2. Response to a Sequence of Shocks: Run VS No Run

                                          RUN (Run Threshold Shock and Sunspot)                                             NO RUN (Run Threshold Shock and No Sunspot)


                                            Capital Quality                                                      Run Probability                                                             Bank Net Worth
                              1                                                                       0.12                                                                          0

                             0.5                                                                       0.1
                                                                                                                                                                               -20
          %  from SS




                                                                                                                                          %  from SS
                              0                                                                       0.08
                                                                                                                                                                               -40
                                                   Capital Quality         Level
                            -0.5                                                                      0.06
                                                   Run Threshold
                                                                                                                                                                               -60
                              -1                   Initial Threshold                                  0.04

                                                                                                                                                                               -80
                            -1.5                                                                      0.02

                              -2                                                                        0                                                               -100
                                   2         20          40          60                                      2    20          40     60                                                  2    20          40   60



                                         Leverage Multiple:                                                       Investment                                                                      Output
                            1500                                                                       10                                                                           0


                                                                                                        0
                            1000                                                                                                                                                    -2
%  from SS




                                                                                        %  from SS




                                                                                                                                                                      %  from SS
                                                                                                       -10
                            500                                                                                                                                                     -4
                                                                                                       -20

                              0                                                                                                                                                     -6
                                                                                                       -30


                            -500                                                                       -40                                                                          -8
                                   2         20          40          60                                      2    20          40     60                                                  2    20          40   60



                                       Excess Return: ER b -R free                                                 Policy Rate                                                                     Inflation
                            2000                                                                      500                                                                           50
Level Annual Basis Points




                                                                          Level Annual Basis Points




                                                                                                                                          Level Annual Basis Points




                                                                                                      400
                            1500
                                                                                                      300                                                                           0

                            1000                                                                      200

                                                                                                      100                                                                      -50
                            500
                                                                                                        0

                              0                                                                       -100                                                              -100
                                   2         20          40          60                                      2    20          40     60                                                  2    20          40   60
                                                  Quarters                                                             Quarters                                                                    Quarters
Fig. 3. Response to the Same Sequence of Shocks in Flex Price Economy:
                            Run VS No Run
                                                                                                                              RUN (Off-Equilibrium)      NO RUN


                                                        Capital Quality                                                                Run Probability                                             Bank Net Worth
                                          2                                                                                  0.1                                                          0


                                                                                                                        0.08                                                         -20
                                          0
                            %  from SS




                                                                                                                                                              %  from SS
                                                                                                                        0.06                                                         -40
                                                               Capital Quality
                                                                                                 Level
                                          -2
                                                               Run Threshold
                                                                                                                        0.04                                                         -60
                                                               Initial Threshold
                                          -4
                                                                                                                        0.02                                                         -80


                                          -6                                                                                  0                                               -100
                                               2         20          40         60                                                 2    20          40   60                                    2    20          40   60



                                                          Leverage:                                                                     Investment                                                      Output
                             1500                                                                                             5                                                           0

                                                                                                                              0
                             1000                                                                                                                                                         -1
%  from SS




                                                                                                               %  from SS




                                                                                                                                                                            %  from SS
                                                                                                                              -5

                                  500                                                                                        -10                                                          -2

                                                                                                                             -15
                                          0                                                                                                                                               -3
                                                                                                                             -20

                              -500                                                                                           -25                                                          -4
                                               2         20          40         60                                                 2    20          40   60                                    2    20          40   60



                                                   Excess Return: ER B-R free                                                           Natural Rate                                                Consumption
                             2000                                                                                            500                                                          1
Level Annual Basis Points




                                                                                   Level Annual Basis Points




                             1500                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                            %  from SS




                                                                                                                              0

                             1000                                                                                                                                                         -1

                                                                                                                       -500
                                  500                                                                                                                                                     -2


                                          0                                                                      -1000                                                                    -3
                                               2         20          40         60                                                 2    20          40   60                                    2    20          40   60
                                                              Quarters                                                                       Quarters                                                    Quarters
             Fig. . Non-Linearities due to Occasionally Binding Constraints
                                           Constraint Binds       Constraint Slack


                                                                                                                                        free
               Investment                         Price of Capital                                             Real Interest Rate: R
     10                                     2                                                                  7


      5                                     1                                                                  6




                                                                                        Net Level (Annual %)
      0                                     0                                                                  5
%




                                    %

      -5                                   -1                                                                  4


     -10                                   -2                                                                  3


     -15                                   -3                                                                  2
              - 1%   0   + 1%                      - 1%       0   + 1%                                                - 1%   0   + 1%
           Capital Quality Shock                Capital Quality Shock                                              Capital Quality Shock


            Bank Net Worth                      Leverage multiple:                                            Excess Returns: ER b-R
     30                                    10                                                   2.5

     20
                                                                                                               2
                                            9
                                                                           Level (Annual %)




     10

      0                                                                                         1.5
                                   Level
%




                                            8
     -10                                                                                                       1
     -20
                                            7
                                                                                                0.5
     -30

     -40                                    6                                                                  0
              - 1%   0   + 1%                      - 1%       0   + 1%                                                - 1%   0   + 1%
           Capital Quality Shock                Capital Quality Shock                                              Capital Quality Shock
                                 )LJ1RQOLQHDULWLHVIURP5XQV
                             No Sunspot           Sunspot           Run Threshold: r= - 0.9%


                                                                                                                                 free
                Investment                         Price of Capital                                      Real Interest Rate: R
      10                                     4                                                          6

                                             2                                                          4




                                                                                 Net Level (Annual %)
       0
                                             0
                                                                                                        2
                                            -2
 %




                                    %
      -10                                                                                               0
                                            -4
                                                                                                        -2
                                            -6
      -20
                                            -8                                                          -4

      -30                                -10                                                            -6
                         r                                      r
                            0    1%                                0    1%                                          r   0     1%
            Capital Quality Shock                Capital Quality Shock                                       Capital Quality Shock


                 Net Worth                            Leverage                                           Excess Returns: ER b-R
      40                                    25                                                      25

      20
                                            20                                                      20
                                                                             Level (Annual %)




       0

      -20                                   15                                                      15
                                    Level
%




      -40                                   10                                                      10
      -60
                                             5                                                          5
      -80

     -100                                    0                                                          0
                         r                                      r
                            0    1%                                0    1%                                          r   0     1%
            Capital Quality Shock                Capital Quality Shock                                       Capital Quality Shock
                      )LJ)LQDQFLDO&ULVLV0RGHOYV'DWD

                      Shocks* :            -0.3 %           -0.6 %          -0.5 %           -0.8 %          -0.7 %
                                           2007q4          2008q1           2008q2           2008q3          2008q4


1. Investment                                                                   2. XLF Index and Net Worth
                                                                 10                                                                              25
   Bear Stearns          Lehman Brothers

                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                 0

                                                                 -10
                                                                                                                                                 -25
                                                                 -20
                                                                                                                                                 -50
                                                                 -30
                                           Data
                                                                                                                                                 -75
                                           Model                 -40
                                           Model No Run
                                                                 -50                                                                             -100
2004       2007q3     2008q4                             2016                  2004        2007q3      2008q4                             2016


3. Spreads (AAA-Risk Free)                                                      4. GDP
                                                                 4                                                                               5



                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                 0

                                                                 2

                                                                                                                                                 -5
                                                                 1



                                                                 0                                                                               -10
2004       2007q3     2008q4                             2016                  2004        2007q3      2008q4                             2016


5. Labor (hours)                                                                6. Consumption
                                                                 5                                                                               5




                                                                 0

                                                                                                                                                 0

                                                                 -5




                                                                 -10                                                                             -5
2004       2007q3     2008q4                             2016                  2004        2007q3      2008q4                             2016
NOTE: The data for GDP, Investment, and Consumption are computed as logged deviations from trend where the trend is the CBO potential GDP.
Labor data is computed as logged deviations from trend where the trend is the CBO potential hours worked. The XLF Index data is computed as
the percent deviation from its 2007q3 level.
6     Appendix

This Appendix describes the details of the equilibrium.
    The aggregate state of the economy is summarized by the vector of state
variables M~ t = (St 1 ; S b ; Rt Dt 1 ;  t ); with sunspot realization t at time t,
                          t 1
where St 1 = capital stock at the end of t 1; Stb 1 = bank capital holdings
in t 1; Rt Dt 1 = bank deposit obligation at the beginning of t; and  t =
capital quality shock realized in t:

6.1     Producers
As described in the text, the capital stock for production in t is given by

                                      Kt =  t S t 1 ;                           (56)

The capital quality shock is serially correlated as follows
                                                      
                       t+1  F  t+1 j  t = Ft  t+1

with a continuous density:
                                     
                  Ft0  t+1 = ft  t+1 ; for  t+1 2 (0; 1):

Capital at the end of period is
                                
                                It
                       St =        Kt + (1                          )Kt :       (57)
                                Kt
As we described in the text, capital goods producerÂ’s rst order condition
for investment is                   
                                 0  It
                             Qt          = 1:                        (58)
                                    Kt
   A nal goods rms chooses intermediate goods fYt (f )g to minimize the
cost                    Z 1
                            Pt (f ) Yt (f ) df
                                  0
subject to the production function:
                                  Z      1                         "1
                                                                      "
                                                        "1
                           Yt =               Yt (f )    "    df           :     (59)
                                      0


                                                36
The cost minimization then yields a demand function for each intermediate
good f :                                       "
                                       Pt (f )
                           Yt (f ) =               Yt ;              (60)
                                         Pt
where Pt is the price index, given by
                               Z 1               1"
                                                    1

                                            1 "
                         Pt =        Pt (f ) df         :
                                   0

   Conversely, an intermediate goods producer f chooses input to minimize
the production cost
                           wt Lt (f ) + Zt Kt (f )
subject to
                       At [Kt (f )] [Lt (f )]1   = Yt (f ):
The rst order conditions yield
                          Kt (f )            wt   Kt
                                  =             =    ;                  (61)
                          Lt (f )   1        Zt   Lt
and the following relation for marginal cost:
                                              1
                               1 Zt           wt
                      M Ct =                                  :         (62)
                               At          1
Each period, the intermediate goods producer chooses Pt (f ) and Yt (f ) to
maximize the expected discounted value of pro ts:
       (1          "                                          2 #)
        X             P   (f )               r
                                                      P   (f )
    Et       e t;
             
                        
                               M C Y (f )     Y
                                                        
                                                               1       ;
         =t
                        P                  2        P 1 (f )

subject to the demand curve (60), where  e t; =  t (C =Ct ) h is the dis-
count factor of the representative household. Taking the rmÂ’s rst order
condition for price adjustment and imposing symmetry implies the following
forward looking PhillipÂ’s curve:
                                                                  
                 "           " 1          e      Yt+1
   ( t 1)  t = r M Ct             + Et t;t+1       ( t+1 1)  t+1 ; (63)
                              "                  Yt
where  t = PPt1
               t
                  is the realized gross inÂ‡ation rate at date t. The cost
minimization conditions with symmetry also imply that aggregate production
is simply
                             Y t = At K t L t 1 :                     (64)

                                        37
6.2    Households
We modify the householdÂ’s maximization problem in the text by allowing
for a riskless nominal bond which will be in zero supply. We do so to be
able the pin down the riskless nominal rate Rtn : Let Bt be real value of this
riskless bond. The household then chooses Ct ; Lt ; Bt ; Dt and Sth to maximize
expected discounted utility Ut :
                   (1                                                )
                    X           (C  ) 1 h
                                           (L  ) 1+'
                           t
           Ut = Et                                       &(Sh ; S )    ;
                     =t
                                 1       h  1 +    '
subject to the budget constraint
                                                 Rtn 1
Ct +Dt +Qt Sth +Bt   = wt Lt   Tt +t +Rt Dt 1 +       Bt 1 + t [Zt +(1 )Qt ]Sth 1 :
                                                  t
As explained in the text, the rate of return on deposits is given by
                                                     
                              t [Zt + (1 )Qt ]Stb 1
          Rt = M ax Rt ;
                                        Dt 1
                                                                
                              t [Zt + (1 )Qt ]      Qt 1 Stb 1
              = M ax Rt ;
                                      Qt 1       Qt 1 Stb 1 Nt 1
                                         
                                    t 1
              = M ax Rt ; Rtb               ;
                                  t 1 1

where Rtb = t [Zt +(1
                   Qt1
                        )Qt ]
                               and where t = Qt Stb =Nt is the bank leverage
multiple.
   We obtain the rst order conditions for labor, riskless bonds, deposits
and direct capital holding, as follows:

                               wt = (Ct ) h (Lt )'                               (65)
                                            
                                       Rtn
                              Et t+1          =1                                (66)
                                       t+1
                                                   
                                            b     t
                     Et t+1 M ax Rt+1 ; Rt+1           =1                       (67)
                                               t 1

                     (                                               )
                                    Zt+1 + (1 )Qt+1
                Et     t+1  t+1                                        = 1;    (68)
                                  Qt + @S@ h &(Sth ; St )  Ct   h
                                            t


                                           38
where
                                                h
                                  e        Ct+1
                        t+1 = t;t+1 =             ; and
                                            Ct
                                        h      
                @      h                 St
                    &(St ; St ) = M ax          ; 0 :
               @Sth                      St

6.3     Bankers
For ease of exposition, the description of the bankerÂ’s problem in the text
does not specify how the individual choice of bankÂ’s leverage aÂ¤ects its own
probability of default. This was possible because, as argued in footnote 9, the
indirect marginal eÂ¤ect of leverage on the objective of the rm, Vt ; through
the change in pt is zero. Therefore the rst order conditions for the bankÂ’s
problem, equations (27) and (28) ; can be derived irrespectively of how the
individual choice of bankÂ’s leverage aÂ¤ects its own probability of default.
    We now formalize the argument in footnote 9 and describe how the default
thresholds for individual banks vary with individual bank leverage. As will
become clear in section 6.5 below, this analysis is key in order to study global
optimality of the leverage choice selected by using the rst order conditions
in the text, equations (27) and (28).
    As in the text,  is a sunspot which takes on values of either unity or zero.
                                                             b
We can then express the rate of return on bank capital Rt+1

               b             Zt+1 + (1 )Qt+1    b
              Rt+1 =  t+1                    = Rt+1 ( t+1 ; t+1 );
                                     Qt
The individual bank defaults at date t+1 if and only if
                                           b
            t+1 [Zt+1 + (1 )Qt+1 ]sbt   Rt+1 ( t+1 ; t+1 ) Qt sbt
        1>                              =                               ;
                       Rt+1 dt                  Rt+1          Qt sbt nt
or
                         b                                 t
                        Rt+1 ( t+1 ; t+1 ) < Rt+1                 :
                                                      t        1
   Let Dt+1 () be the set of capital quality shocks and sunspot realizations
which make the individual bank with a leverage multiple of  default and
conversely let Nt+1 () be the set that leads to non-default at date t+1:
                                                                         
          D                           b                        1
        t+1 () = ( t+1 ; t+1 ) j Rt+1 ( t+1 ; ; t+1 ) <     Rt+1 () ;
                                                               

                                         39
                                                                                             
                                                                                  1
         N
          t+1 ()   =       ( t+1 ; t+1 ) j    b
                                                Rt+1 ( t+1 ; t+1 )                  Rt+1 () :
                                                                               
where Rt+1 () is the promised deposit interest rate when the individual bank
chooses  which satis es the condition for the household to hold deposits:
               Z                        Z
                                      
  1 = Rt+1 ()           t+1 dFet +                    b
                                                  t+1 Rt+1 ( t+1 ; t+1 )dFet : (69)
                 N
                t+1 ()              1 t+1 ()
                                          D



Here Fet ( t+1 ; ; t+1 ) denotes the distribution function of ( t+1 ; t+1 ) condi-
tional on date t information:
   Assume that the aggregate leverage multiple is given by t . When the
individual banker chooses the leverage multiple ; which can be diÂ¤erent
from t ; the individual bank defaults at date t+1 if and only if
                                t+1 <  It+1 () and t+1 = 0
                                             where                                                  (70)
                         t+1 ()Rt+1 ( t+1 (); 0) =   1 Rt+1 ()
                          I         b      I


or
                        t+1 <  R
                                 t+1 () and t+1 = 1

                      n             where                                                   o       (71)
         R                               b
                                                                           1
        t+1 () = sup  t+1 s.t.  t+1 Rt+1  t+1 ; 1 <                    
                                                                               Rt+1      () :

Thus the set of capital quality shocks and sunspots which make the individual
bank default D t+1 () is
                      8                                              9
                      <               t+1 <  It+1 () and t+1 = 0 =
         Dt+1 () =     ( ; t+1 )                  or               : (72)
                      : t+1                    R                     ;
                                      t+1 <  t+1 () and t+1 = 1
                      8                                              9
                      <               t+1   It+1 () and t+1 = 0 =
         Nt+1 () =     ( ; t+1 )                  or               : (73)
                      : t+1                     R                    ;
                                      t+1   t+1 () and t+1 = 1
    The behavior of  It+1 () is straightforward and can be easily characterized
                                                   b
from (70) under the natural assumption that Rt+1      is increasing in the quality
of capital at t + 1: This gives:
                                 d It+1 ()
                                      d
                                            > 0; for  2 (1; 1)
                                                                                                    (74)
                                          lim  It+1 () = 0:
                                          #1


                                                    40
    The behavior of  R t+1 () is more complicated because, when a sunspot is
                             b
observed, the function Rt+1       t+1 ; 1 that determines returns on bankÂ’s assets
as a function of the capital quality is discontinuous around the aggregate run
threshold  R         R                                 R
            t+1 =  t+1 (t ) : at the threshold  t+1 asset prices jump from
liquidation prices up to their normal value (See Figure 5):
                                                                         
       lim Rt+1b
                     t+1 ; 1 = Rt+1b
                                          R
                                           t+1 ; 0   > lim R b
                                                             t+1  t+1 ; 1   : (75)
      t+1 # R
              t+1                                                     t+1 " R
                                                                              t+1


This implies that, if the capital quality shock is at the aggregate run threshold
R
 t+1 ; an increase in leverage from the value that makes the recovery rate equal
to unity at liquidation prices, does not induce default as long as it is not so
large that the bank becomes insolvent even at normal prices.
    By de nition of the run threshold  R  t+1 ; the value of leverage that makes
the recovery rate at liquidation prices equal to unity is exactly the aggregate
leverage   ; that is
            t

                    t
                              1                                                 
                                          =
                                    Rt+1               lim          b
                                                                    Rt+1  t+1 ; 1 :
                         
                                         t
                                                      t+1 " R
                           t                                  t+1



On the other hand, we let ^ denote the value above which the bank defaults
                            t
at the aggregate run threshold  R
                                 t+1 even at normal prices. This value satis es

                               ^t
                                        1                           
                                                  ^ t = Rb
                                             Rt+1             R
                                                         t+1  t+1 ; 0
                                    ^t
                                    

and (75) implies that       t.
                        ^t > 
    For any value of leverage above the aggregate level  but below ^ , when
                                                          t            t
a sunspot is observed, the bank defaults if and only if a system wide run
happens. That is  R  t+1 () is insensitive to variation in individual bankÂ’s
leverage in this region:

                          R           R                        b
                           t+1 () =  t+1 (t ) f or  2 [t ; t ]:


     For values of leverage above  bt the bank is always insolvent even at non
liquidation prices whenever defaults, i:e:  R           I               ^
                                             t+1 () =  t+1 () for  > t : When
 is smaller than aggregate t ; the bank is less vulnerable to the run so that
R            R
  t+1 () <  t+1 . In the extreme when the leverage multiple equals unity, the
individual bank is not vulnerable to run so that  R  t+1 (1) = 0.


                                                     41
   To summarize, the behavior of  R
                                   t+1 () can be characterized as follows:


                                         lim  R
                                               t+1 () = 0
                                          #1
                                 d R
                                    t+1 ()
                                                               
                                     d
                                            >
                                           0; for  2 1; t                                (76)
                 R           R                   b            I    b        R
                  t+1 () =  t+1 ; for  2 [t ; t ] where  t+1 (t ) =  t+1
                           R            I                  b
                            t+1 () =  t+1 (); for  2 [t ; 1):

See Figure A-1.
    We can now rewrite the problem of the bank as in the text, but incorpo-
rating explicitly the dependence of the default and non default sets on the
individual choice of leverage; as captured by D            N
                                               t+1 () and t+1 () :

                                        max (t  +  t ) ;                                (77)
                                          


subject to the incentive constraint:

                                           t  +  t ;                                 (78)

the deposit rate constraint obtained from (69) :
                       h        R                                  i
                                             b                 e
                         1  1 D () t+1 Rt+1 ( t+1 ; t+1 )dFt
                                  t+1
            Rt+1 () =              R                                :                     (79)
                                             dFet
                                      N () t+1  t+1


t and  t given by
                                   Z
                        t =                          b
                                                t+1 [Rt+1     Rt+1 ()]dFet                (80)
                                    N
                                     t+1 ()
                                   Z
                        t =                                    e
                                                t+1 Rt+1 ()dFt :                          (81)
                                    N
                                     t+1 ()



and where D             N
            t+1 () and t+1 () are given by (72) (73),  It+1 () and  R
                                                                          t+1 ()
satisfy (70) (71).
    Using (80) (81) in the objective we can write the objective function as

                 Z
     t   () =                      b
                             t+1 f[Rt+1 ( t+1 ; t+1 )     Rt+1 ()] + Rt+1 ()gdFet :   (82)
                  N
                   t+1 ()



                                                 42
   Before proceeding with diÂ¤erentiation of the objective above, we intro-
duce some notation
                     that will be helpful in what follows. For any function
G ;  t+1 ; t+1 and for any  diÂ¤erent from       or  ^ we let
                                                     t        t
                   "Z                             # Z
                d                                               @G
   (G)t                  G(; ; )dFet (; )                  (; ; )dFet (; )
               d Dt+1 ()                             D
                                                       t+1 () @

                                        d It+1 ()                                        d R
                                                                                                  t+1 ()
= (1 {)G ;  It+1 (); 0 ft  It+1 ()               +{G ;  R  t+1 ();  1   ft  R
                                                                                     t+1 ()              :
                                               d                                                  d
                                                                                       (83)
denote the marginal eÂ¤ect of  on G only through its eÂ¤ect on the default
probability. Then we know that as long as G () is continuous at  It+1 () and
R
 t+1 () we have
       "Z                             # Z
    d                                              @G
                G(; ; )dFet (; )                  (; ; )dFet (; ) = (G)t :
   d Nt+1 ()                           N
                                           t+1 ()
                                                   @

                                                      or  = 
      Notice that we have not de ned (G)t for t =         ^ because
                                                      t    t   t
d R
   t+1 ()
    d
             does not exist at that point.
                                                         t and 
      DiÂ¤erentiation of (82) at any value diÂ¤erent from        ^ t yields

  0                           t dRt+1 ()                     b
                                                                                                              
  t   () = t (      1)                           t+1       [Rt+1 ( t+1 ; t+1 )   Rt+1 ()] + Rt+1 ()    t
                            Rt+1    d

Now notice that for  2 [1;  ) and  > 
                                         ^ we have that the bank networth
                              t           t
is zero at both thresholds, that is
                       b
                     [Rt+1 ( It+1 () ; 0)   Rt+1 ()] + Rt+1 () = 0
                   b
               [Rt+1 ( Rt+1 () ; 1) Rt+1 ()] + Rt+1 () = 0
                b                                          
implying t+1 [Rt+1 ( t+1 ; t+1 ) Rt+1 ()] + Rt+1 () t = 0:
                  
   For  2     ^ t we have that at the insolvency threshold net worth is still
            t; 
zero
                   b
               [Rt+1 ( It+1 () ; 0) Rt+1 ()] + Rt+1 () = 0
while the run threshold is xed at the aggregate level
                                         d R
                                            t+1 ()
                                                    =0
                                             d

                                               43
                              b
                                                                                  
so that again      t+1       [Rt+1 ( t+1 ; t+1 )
                                       Rt+1 ()] + Rt+1 ()                       t
                                                                                        = 0:
   Therefore we have that for all  diÂ¤erent from  and ^
                                                    t       t


                             0                                     t dRt+1 ()
                             t   () = t         (        1)
                                                                 Rt+1    d
                                                      ()
and by continuity of t () and t ( 1) R t dRt+1 d
                                                          it can be extended
                                             t+1
    and 
to      ^ as well.
    t     t
   Then, as reported in the text, the rst order condition is

                                   t =   t ; if rt > 0; and
                                              t                                                (84)
                                      rt = 0; if t <   t ;
                                                                     t


                                                              t dRt+1 (t )
                         rt = t           (t        1)                    :                 (85)
                                                            Rt+1    dt
(Here we assume t <  which we will verify later).
    As explained below in section 6:5; we make assumptions such that con-
ditions (84) (85) characterize the unique global optimum for the bankÂ’s
choice of leverage. Since these conditions donÂ’t depend on the individual net
worth of a banker, every banker chooses the same leverage multiple and has
the same TobinÂ’s Q
                                 t = t t +  t :                       (86)
Thus from the discussion in the text, it follows that there is a system wide
default if and only if

                                    Zt+1 + (1 )Qt+1       1
        b
       Rt+1 ( t+1 ; 0) =  t+1                      < t      Rt+1 (t ) ; or
                                            Qt           t
                                        
                                       Zt+1 + (1 )Qt+1       1
          b
         Rt+1 ( t+1 ; 1) =  t+1                        < t      Rt+1 (t ) ;
                                               Qt            t
where Rt+1 (t ) is the aggregate promised deposit interest rate.
   A systemic default occurs if and only if

                                      Zt+1 + (1 )Qt+1       1
      t+1 <  It+1 , where  It+1                     = t      Rt+1 (t ) ;                   (87)
                                              Qt           t



                                                       44
or
                                            
                                        R Zt+1  + (1 )Qt+1               1
  t+1 < R
          t+1and t+1 = 1, where       t+1                          = t      Rt+1 (t ) :
                                                     Qt                  t
                                                                                    (88)
It follows that the probability of default at date t+1 conditional on date t
information in the symmetric equilibrium is given by
                                                                   
                   pt = Ft ( It+1 ) + { Ft ( R
                                               t+1 )    Ft ( It+1 ) :              (89)

   The aggregate capital holding of the banking sector is proportional to the
aggregate net worth as
                               Qt Stb = t Nt :                          (90)
The aggregate net worth of banks evolves as
     8        
     <  max  t (Zt + (1 )Qt ) Stb 1 Rt Dt              1   ; 0 + St   1   if no default at t
Nt =                                                                                               :
     :
                                 0                              otherwise
                                                                     (91)
Banks nance capital holdings by net worth and deposit, which implies

                                   Dt = (t      1)Nt :                              (92)



6.4     Market Clearing
The market for capital holding implies

                                    St = Stb + Sth :                                 (93)

The nal goods market clearing condition implies
                                                r 2
                            Yt = Ct + It +         t Yt + G:                        (94)
                                                2
     As is explained in the text, the monetary policy rule is given by
                                               '
                             n    1    '   M Ct y
                           Rt = ( t )      " 1     :                                (95)
                                                    "



                                           45
     The recursive equilibrium is given by a set of ten quantity variables
(Kt ; St ; It ; Lt ; Yt ; Ct ; Sth ; Stb ; Dt ; Nt ), seven price variables (wt ; Zt ; M
                                                                                        Ct ;  t ; Rt+1 ,
Qt ; Rtn ) and eight bank coeÂ¢cients t ; t ;  t ; rt ; t ; pt ;  R         ;  I
                                                                             t+1 t+1 as a func-
tion of the four state variables M               ft = (St 1 ; S ; Rt Dt 1 ;  t ) and a sunspot
                                                                 b
                                                                 t 1
variable t ; which satis es twenty ve equations, given by: (56,57,58,61,62,63,
     64,65,66,67,68,70,71,80,81,84,85,86,89,90,91,92,93,94,95). Here, the cap-
ital quality shocks follow a Markov process  t+1  F  t+1 j  t and the
sunspot is iid. with t = 1 with probability {:

6.5        On the Global Optimum for Individual BankÂ’s Choice
To study global optimality of the individual leverage choice selected by the
  rst order conditions in (84) we need to analyze the curvature of the objective
function t () in (82) :
                                                          
     To do so we use (79) to derive an expression for ddR and substitute it into
(85) to obtain
            Z                       "    Z                     #R                  e
                                                                  N         t+1 dFt
   0                        b    e                      b    e     t+1 ()
   t () =             t+1 Rt+1 dFt   1           t+1 Rt+1 dFt R                     ;
             N   ()                      D ()
                                                                   N        t+1 dFet
              t+1                           t+1                   t+1 ()
                                                                                 (96)
     Proceeding as in section 6.3 to diÂ¤erentiate (96) for any value of  diÂ¤erent
from   t and 
               ^ t ; we get
                                                                                                   R
                                               b
                                                                       b
                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                    t+1 ()
                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                      t+1 dFt
                                          t+1 Rt+1 t         +    t+1 Rt+1 t
                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                  t+1 dFet
                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                        t+1 ()

  t "()   =                                                              +
               h                                       i RN                  e                                                                   
                       R                                                t+1 dFt                (        
                                                                                                   t+1 )t                      (t+1 )t
                   1       D
                                          b
                                    t+1 Rt+1 dFet      R    t+1 ()
                                                                       t+1 dFet
                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                                       t+1 dFet
                                                                                                                                                       :
                            t+1 ()                      N                            N                 t+1 dFt           N
                                                          t+1 ()                       t+1 ()                              t+1 ()
                                                                                                                                (97)
    Note that for  2 [1;  )
                              t
                                                                                        1
             b
           Rt+1    It+1 ();  = Rt+1
                                   b
                                       R
                                        t+1 (); 1 =                                           Rt+1 () :
                                                                                   
                       
                 t; 
                     ^ t we have          d R
                                             t+1 ()
  For  2                                    d
                                                       = 0 which implies that for any function
               
G  t+1 ; t+1
                                                                        d It+1 ()                
 (G)t = (1 {)G(;  It+1 (); 0)ft ;  It+1 ()                                   for  2     ^ t (98)
                                                                                              t; 
                                                                              d

                                                        46
and also
                                                                                        1
                                              b
                                             Rt+1  It+1 (); 0 =                             Rt+1 ()
                                                                                    
        Then, we learn

                                             b
                                                                                              1
                                        t+1 Rt+1 t        = (           t+1 )t                     Rt+1 ()
                                                                                              
                                                                                               1
                                           b
                                     t+1 Rt+1       t
                                                           = (t+1 )t                              Rt+1 () :
                                                                                              

        Substituting this back into (97) and using (79) to substitute for Rt+1 ()

we get
                               R                          2                                                                      3
                                                      e
                                                t+1 dFt             (           
                                                                                                             (t+1 )t
                           1       N
                                    t+1 ()                                t+1 )t
         t "()    =         R                            4R                                          R                          5          (99)
                           
                                   N
                                              t+1 dFet        N
                                                                                       e
                                                                                  t+1 dFt                 N
                                                                                                                     t+1 dFet
                                    t+1 ()                     t+1 ()                                    t+1 ()



for any  diÂ¤erent from    and ^ :25
                            t      t
    We assume that a bank that individually survives a systemic bank run by
choosing its own leverage below the aggregate level t behaves just like new
entrants during the panic: it stores its net worth and starts operating the
period right after the crisis. Given that both leverage and spreads increase
dramatically after a crisis, new bankerÂ’s TobinÂ’s Q is very high during a crisis
so that
                                            
           t+1  t+1 ; 1      t+1  t+1 ; 1
        R                  >R                  for  t+1 =  R           R
                                                             t+1 () <  t+1 :
          N       t+1 dFt
                         e     N     t+1 dFte
                 t+1 ()                             t+1 ()

  25
        Notice that (
                                        
                                   t+1 )t
                                                                                  since, for instance
                                              and (t+1 )t are not continuous at t
                                                                                                                                             "         #
                                                                                 d I                                                     d R ()
                                                      I                              t+1 ()                                                    t+1
lim (     t+1 )t          =       (1    {)     t+1 ( t+1 ; 0)ft        It+1                    +{                R
                                                                                                             t+1 ( t+1 ; 1)ft       R
                                                                                                                                      t+1
  
" t
                                                                                         d                                                       d
                                                                                 d I
                                                       I                              t+1 ()                             
                           > (1          {)     t+1 ( t+1 ; 0)ft        It+1                    = lim (            t+1 )t
                                                                                         d                 
                                                                                                          # t

          h                i
              d R
                 t+1 ()                                                  
where             d               is the left derivative of  R
                                                               t+1 () at t : This implies that                               "() does not
         .
exist at t




                                                                        47
By the same argument, we also have that
                                          
          t+1  t+1 ; 0     t+1  t+1 ; 0
        R                 >R                 for  t+1 =  It+1 () <  It+1
          N      t+1 dFt
                        e    N   t+1 dFt  e
           t+1 ()              t+1 ()


Given this, equation (99) and (83) imply that the objective function of the
banker is strictly convex in the region where leverage is below the aggregate
level   ; that is t "() > 0 for  2 [1;          ); as long as the probability of a run
         t
                               R
                                                     t
is still positive, i:e: ft  t+1 () > 0. If, on the other hand, leverage is so low
                                                                         
that default is not possible, i.e. ft  R                            I
                                                   t+1 () = ft  t+1 () = 0; the second
derivative iszero. 
    For  2      ;  ^ equations (98) and (99) imply that t "() depends on
                   t    t
the relative increase in the marginal value of wealth of the banker and of
the households only at the insolvency threshold, See Figure A1. Therefore
in this case   we have that the objective is convex, t "() > 0; as long as
      I
ft  t+1 () > 0:
    Summing up we have:
             8                                                                  
             >  =    0    if  2 [1;   ) and ft  R () = 0 = ft  I ()
                                      
             >
             >                         t                t+1                t+1
             >
             < >0                  if  2 [1;  t ) and ft  R () > 0
                                                               t+1
                                                                        
      t "()    =    0          if   2      ;
                                               ^ and ft  I () = 0                   (100)
             >
             >                              t    t
                                                                t+1
             >
             >                                                          
             : >0               if  2         ^ t and ft  I () > 0
                                            t; 
                                                                 t+1


    Equation (100) implies that the objective of the bank is weakly convex.
Thus, to study global optimality it is suÂ¢cient to compare the equilibrium
                     ; to deviations to corner solutions.
choice of leverage, t
                                                           
    When the incentive constraint is binding, i.e. 0t t = rt > 0 at t =
 t
     ; a bank cannot increase its own leverage above       t so that the only
 t
deviation that we need to check is  = 1: Therefore, the condition for global
optimality in this case is:
                                                
                                            t
                              t (1) <  t           :                      (101)
                                            t
                                                     
    When the constraint is not binding, i.e. 0t t = rt = 0 and t <   t ;
                                                                               t
an individual bank could deviate to either  = 1 or  = IC       t ; where IC
                                                                             t


                                            48
is the maximum level of leverage compatible with incentive constraints, i.e.
      IC     IC
  t ( ) =  : In this case given weak convexity of the objective, the global
optimality condition is satis ed if and only if
                                                   
                          t (1) =
                                      
                                    t t =
                                                 IC
                                              t t    :                  (102)

Notice that equation (100) implies that the above equality is satis ed if and
onlyif the probability of default is zero for any feasible choice of leverage
 2 1; ICt   which would result in a Â‡at objective function:
    We verify numerically that condition (101) is satis ed in the neighborhood
of the risk adjusted steady state, where the constraint is binding. Moreover,
in our calibration, whenever the incentive constraint is not binding in equi-
librium the probability of insolvency is zero for any feasible choice of leverage
above the equilibrium level, i.e. ft  It+1 () = 0 for  2 (   ; IC ]; so that a
                                                                 t   t
deviation by an individual bank to a higher level of leverage is never strictly
preferred:
    However the economy does occasionally transit to extreme states in which
the constraint is binding but the probability of the run is high enough that
equation (101) is violated and to states in which the constraint is slack and
the probability of the run is positive thus violating (102). In such states a
bank would gain by a deviation to  = 1; See Figure A2. The only equilib-
rium in these cases would then be one in which a fraction of banks decrease
their leverage in anticipation of a run while all of the others are against the
constraint, i.e. there is no symmetric equilibrium. In order to focus on the
symmetric equilibrium, we introduce a small cost to a bank to deviating to
a position of taking no leverage  = 1. This cost could reÂ‡ect expenses in-
volved in a major restructuring of the bankÂ’s portfolio. It could also reÂ‡ect
reputation costs associated with the bankÂ’s refusal to accept deposits in a
given period in order to survive a run in the subsequent period. In particular,
we posit that the objective of the bank is given by
                                                
                 Vt (nt ) = t () nt 1      t f or  2 [1; 
                                                               ):
                                                               t

That is, a deviation of a bank that reduces leverage below the aggregate
value  entails a xed cost   per unit of net worth. We check computa-
        t                       t                         
                                                        t > t (1) ; in all of
tionally that the deviation is never pro table, i.e. t 
our experiments for values of  which are greater than or equal to 0:77%:26
  26
    The value of deviating can increase in very extreme cases but in a simulation of 100
thoushands periods it is still below 1.7% for 99 percent of the times.

                                          49
Examining asymmetric equilibrium without such reputation cost is a topic
of future research.

6.6     Computation
It is convenient for computations to let the aggregate state of the economy
be given by
                           Mt =(St 1 ; Nt ;  t ; t ):
Notice that bank net worth replaces the speci c asset and liability position of
banks in the natural state that we have used so far M~ t =(St 1 ; Stb 1 ; Dt 1 R  t ;  t ):
To see that this state is suÂ¢cient to compute the equilibrium we rewrite the
evolution of net worth, equation (91), forward. Using the de nition of the
leverage multiple and the budget constraint of the banker we get that when-
ever there is no run at time t, so that Nt > 0; the evolution of net worth is
given by
        8       n                                    o
        >
        > Nt t  t+1 Zt+1 +(1 )Qt+1 Rt+1 + Rt + St                 if there is no default :
        >
        >                                                                    t+1 2 N    t+1 (t )
                                Qt
        >
        >
        >
        >
        >
        >
        <                                                                 if there is a run :
Nt+1 =                              0                                                                 :
        >
        >                                                             t+1 <  R t+1 and t+1 = 1
        >
        >
        >
        >
        >
        >
        >
        >                                                             if banks are insolvent:
        :                          St
                                                                      t+1 <  It+1 and t+1 = 0
                                                                                 (103)
Otherwise, if a run has happened at time t so that Nt = 0; the evolution of
net worth is given by equation (33) ; which we report for convenience:
                                                  
                                             St 1
                           Nt+1 = St 1 +           :                           (104)
                                              St

We can then look for a recursive equilibrium in which each equilibrium vari-
able is a function of Mt and the evolution of net worth is given by a function
Nt+1 Mt ;  t+1 ; t+1 that depends on the realization of the exogenous shocks
  t+1 ; t+1 and satis es equations (103) and (104) above.
     We use time iteration in order to approximate the functions
             
      # = Q (M) ; C (M) ; (M) ;  R                I                0 0
                                       t+1 (M) ;  t+1 (M) ; T (M;  ;  )



                                         50
where T (Mt ;  0 ; 0 ) is the transition law determining the stochastic evolution
of the state.
    The computational algorithm proceeds as follows:

   1. Determine a functional space to use for approximating equilibrium
      functions. (We use piecewise linear).
                                                                               
   2. Fix a grid of values for the state G  S m ; S M  0; N M  1 4  ; 1 + 4 
       f0; 1g

   3. Set j = 0 and guess initial values for the equilibrium objects of interest
      on the grid
            n                                                                         o
      #j = Qj (M) ; Cj (M) ; j (M) ;  R   t+1;j (M) ;  I
                                                         t+1;j (M) ; T
                                                                     / j (M;  0 0
                                                                                ;  )
                                                                                      M2G


   4. Assume that #i has been found for i < M where M is set to 10000: Use
      #i to nd associated functions #i in the approximating space, e.g. Qi
      is the price function that satis es Qi (M) = Qi (M) for each M 2 G.

   5. Compute all time t + 1 variables in the system of equilibrium equations
      by using the functions
                            #i from the previous step; e.g. for each M 2 G
                               0 0
      let Qt+1 = Qi T/ j (M;  ;  ) ; and then solve the system to get the
      implied #i+1

   6. Repeat 4 and 5 until convergence of #i




                                         51
                    )LJ$5XQDQG,QVROYHQF\WKUHVKROGV
Threshold capital quality




ÉŒà¯‹ à¯§à¬¾à¬µ

                 ÉŒà¯‹ à¯§à¬¾à¬µ Ô„

                                          ÉŒà¯‚ à¯§à¬¾à¬µ Ô„




    0
         1                   à´¥
                             Ô„                       à·¡
                                                     Ô„       Leverage: Ì´
                               )LJ$*OREDOFRQGLWLRQVQRWVDWLVILHGZLWKRXWFRVWRIGHYLDWLRQ
                    CASE A: Constraint binds with strong                   CASE B: Constraint slack with positive
                            precautionary motive                                   run probability

       ÉŽt(Ì´)                                                      ÉŽt(Ì´)




       ÉŽt(1)                                                      ÉŽt(1)

      ÉŽt(Ì´t)                                                     ÉŽt(Ì´t)

(1-Ê Ì´t)ÉŽt(1)                                              (1-Ê Ì´t)ÉŽt(1)




                1                             Ì´t= Ì´ICt                     1                            Ì´t   Ì´ICt
