                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE EQUILIBRIUM AND OPTIMAL
                             TIMING OF PRICE CHANGES




                                  Laurence Ball

                                   David Romer




                              Working Paper No. 2412




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 1987




We are grateful to Ben Berr,anke, Olivier Blanchard, Stephen Cecchetti, Stanley
Fischer, and participants in the May 1987 Conference on Dynamic Price—Setting
in Caesarea Israel for helpful comments and discussions. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2412
                                                  October 1987




             The Equilibrium and Optimal Timing of Price Changes




                                   ABSTRACT


     This paper studies the welfare properties of the equilibrium timing of

price changes. Staggered price-setting has the advantage that it permits

rapid adjustment to firm-specific shocks but the disadvantage that it causes

price level inertia and therefore increases aggregate fluctuations. Because

each firm ignores its contribution to inertia, staggering can be a stable

equilibrium even if it is highly inefficient. In addition, there can be

multiple equilibria in the timing of price changes; indeed, whenever there is

an inefficient staggered equilibrium, there is also an efficient equilibrium

with synchronized price-setting.




Laurence Ball                                      David Romer
Department of Economics                            National Bureau of
Graduate School of Business                          Economic Research
  Administration                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
New York University                                Cambridge, MA 02138
New York, NY 10006
                                 INTRODUCTION


     The timing of wage and price changes is crucial to the real effects of
nominal disturbances in an important set of recent Keynesian theories.
Taylor (1979, 1980) and Blanchard (1983, 1986) show that if firms change their
prices and wages often but different firms adjust at different times, the
aggregate price level responds slowly to nominal shocks: staggered
price—setting causes price level inertia. As a result, economic fluctuations
may be much larger, and welfare much lower, when price changes are
staggered rather than synchronized.
     These results raise a puzzle: why do firms choose to change prices at
different times if they would be better off under synchronization? One
possible answer is that firms' decisions to stagger are evidence that
staggering is in fact desirable. This paper investigates the alternative
possibility that synchronization is socially optimal but that some market
failure leads to staggering in a decentralized economy. This issue cannot be
addressed in the Taylor and l3lanchard models, because these authors treat
the timing of price changes as exogenous. The purpose of this paper is thus
to make the timing endogenous and then study the welfare properties of the
equilibrium timing.

                                       1
    In the Taylor and Blanchard models, firms are identical and all shocks
are aggregate, and so firms have no desire to change prices at different
times. As a result, if timing is made endogenous, the outcome is
synchronization-—the Taylor and Blanchard models cannot explain staggering.1
Therefore, in addition to making the timing of price changes endogenous, we
introduce an incentive for staggering. Specifically, we add to the Blanchard
model the most obvious reason that firms in actual economies do not change
prices simultaneously: shocks that alter profit—maximizing prices occur at
different times for different firms. For example, the gas station on the
corner changes prices at different times from the grocery store next door
because OPEC meetings occur at different times from weather changes in farm
areas. Using a model with both firm—specific and aggregate shocks, we
derive the condition that determines which of synchronization and staggering
is optimal and the conditions for each to be an equilibrium.
     Comparison of the equilibrium and optimal timing leads to two major
conclusions. First, inefficient staggering is indeed possible. If there are
firm-specific shocks of any size, then staggered price—setting, with each firm
changing its price when it receives shocks, is a stable equilibrium. But if
the variance of nominal shocks is large relative to the variance of
idiosyncratic shocks, synchronization is preferable to staggering——it limits
firms' ability to adjust to idiosyncratic shocks but, by eliminating price level
inertia, it reduces the size of aggregate fluctuations. Moreover, if the
variance of aggregate shocks is large, the increase in fluctuations and the
reduction in welfare caused by staggering can be large. The reason that
staggering can be an equilibrium despite being highly inefficient is that

    1. This result is a folk theorem among some economists. It is
demonstrated formally for the Blanchard model in this paper and in Ball and
Cecchetti (1987).

                                        2
firms' choices of the timing of their price changes have externalities. By
contributing to inertia, a firm's decision to adjust at different times than
others hurts all firms. In a large economy, each price—setter ignores this
effect, since it takes the behavior of the price level as given.2
     Our second principal conclusion is that there can be multiple equilibria
in the timing of price changes——synchronization can remain an equilibrium
even when firm-specific shocks make staggering an equilibrium. Intuitively,
adjusting its price at the same times as others allows a firm to reduce
fluctuations in its relative price. If price changes are bunched, this is a
strong force causing them to remain bunched. But if price changes are
staggered, there is no force to bring them together, and so they remain
staggered. The incentive to remain bunched is so strong that the condition
for synchronization to be an equilibrium is weaker than the condition for it
to be optimal. Thus, if staggering is an inefficient equilibrium, there must
be a superior synchronized equilibrium as well. In addition, inefficient
synchronization is possible.
     We demonstrate these results in Blanchard's model modified in the
simplest ways that allow us to address the subject of the paper.
Specifically, we follow Blanchard in assuming that prices are fixed for two
periods; thus a firm's only choice about timing is whether to change its price
every even period or every odd period. Similarly, we introduce idiosyncratic
shocks in the simplest way that gives firms incentives to change prices at



     2. Just as we show that choices of the timing of price changes have
externalities, recent analyses of "small menu cost" models (Mankiw, 1985,
Akerlof and Yellen, 1985, and Ball and Romer, 1987) and of long-term
contract models (Ball, 1986a, 1986b) show that choices of the frequency
of price changes have externalities: less frequent price changes increase
the variance of real aggregate demand, which harms all firms,


                                       3
different times: we assume that half of the firms in the economy receive
idiosyncratic shocks every even period and half every odd period. In the
conclusion, we discuss generalizations such as stochastic arrival of
firm—specific shocks and more complicated rules for when to change prices.
We argue that our results about the possibility of inefficient staggering and
the existence of multiple equilibria are likely to be robust.3
     The remainder of the paper consists of five sections. Section II
presents our model. In Section III, we solve for the behavior of the
aggregate price level under synchronization and under staggering. This
leads, in Section IV, to the condition that determines which regime is
optimal. Section V derives the conditions under which synchronization and


       3. Several previous authors present models of endogenous staggering.
The models closest to ours are those of Fethke and Policano (1984, 1986a),
who study the timing of wage negotiations, and Parkin (1986). (See also
Fethke and Policano [1986b, 19871 and Matsukawa [1986]. Maskin and Tirole
[1985] and Gertner [19851 study staggering that results from strategic
behavior within an oligopolistic industry.) Our analysis differs from this
previous work in three major respects. First, we address a different
question: while previous papers focus on the conditions under which
staggering and synchronization are equilibria, we focus on the welfare
properties of equilibria. (An exception in previous work is Fethke and
Policano [1986a], who compare equilibrium and optimal timing in their model.)
Second, the source of staggering in our model-—heterogeneous times of
firm—specific shocks——is clearly an important reason that firms in actual
economies change prices at different times. In previous models, by contrast,
staggering occurs only under unrealistic conditions. Fethke and Policano
(1986a) show that staggering arises in their models only if the economy
consists of a few large sectors containing firms that receive identical
shocks. In Parkin's model, staggering arises only under unusual assumptions
about monetary policy: an increase in the price level must lead to a
decrease in the money supply. Third, in previous models of endogenous
timing, staggering does not lead to price level inertia. In Fethke and
Policano, the reason is that wages, while "predetermined," are not "fixed":
firms set wages for several periods at once, but they can choose different
wages for different periods. In Parkin, the reason is simply that the model
contains no aggregate shocks. Without price level inertia, staggering does
not lead to large output fluctuations; thus previous models ignore what we
consider the key macroeconomic effect of staggering.



                                         4
staggering are stable Nash equilibria. Finally, in Section VI we discuss
robustness and offer conclusions.


                                II. THE MODEL

      Our model is a simple extension of Blanchard's (see the version in
Blanchard and Fischer, 1985, ch. 9). The economy contains a large number of
price—setters who adjust their prices every two periods. Blanchard studies
the behavior of the economy under two regimes: synchronization, in which
by assumption all firms change prices in even periods, and staggering, in
which half change in even periods and half in odd periods. As described
above, we depart from Blanchard's work by allowing firms to choose whether
to change prices in even or odd periods and by introducing idiosyncratic
productivity shocks.
      The specifics of the model are as follows. The economy consists of N
farmers, where N is a large number. Each farmer uses his own labor to
produce a differentiated product, then sells the product and purchases the
products of all other farmers.4 Farmers take each others' prices as given.
nitting time    subscripts, farmer i's   utility function is
                                                        N
(1)        U.      C.   —   — 1L?        C.      N -
            1       1           1   ,
                                             1     N
                                                       'J1

where C.. is farmer i's consumption of fanner j's product, C.
is an index of farmer i's total consumption,           is the elasticity of



     4. This is an inessential simplification of Blanchard's model,
which contains both goods and labor markets.




                                         5
substitution between goods (E > 1) ,                  L.   is farmer i's labor supply,

and 7 measures the extent of increasing marginal disutility of labor

(y > 1) .       The coefficient multiplying L. is chosen for convenience.

       Farmer i's production function is
                         L.
(2)



where Y. is farmer i's output and •.                       is   a productivity shock. Let

denote In            .   If    i is even, then 9. changes every even period;

otherwise, it changes every odd period. e.                   has mean zero and variance cr

In    periods in which it changes, 9.                is uncorrelated both with its own past

values and with 9. for all j                    i

       A transactions technology determines the relation between real money

balances    and total spending         on goods:5


(3)            Y

where
                              N P.Y.
               V    -1            __
                                  P
                          j1
                              N            1/(1—E)
               p         N.j1     p.   ]
                                   j


M is     the   money supply, P. the price of farmer j's                 product, and P

the price index corresponding to the consumption measure C. .                    Let m denote

In M .      m       follows a random walk; its innovations have mean zero and
                2
variance a
                m


     5. Our results would not change if, following Blanchard and Kiyotaki
(1985), we added money to the utility function rather than introducing money
as we do.


                                                      6
        The utility function determines the demand for farmer i's product

as a fraction of aggregate spending (see Blanchard and Fischer):


(4)
            —--           p

Combining (3) and (4) yields product demand:

(5)             j    Mi
                      p
                     pp
Finally, farmer i's consumption is determined by his real revenues:
                     P.Y.
(6)         C.

(again,   see Blanchard and Fischer).

       If farmer i set his price every period, he would choose the price

that maximizes utility, (1), subject to (2) —                     (6).   In logs, this price is

(7)         p        vm +         (i—v)p       +    wO.

where p tn P , and where

            v =     1 + E7 — E       , O<v<1,
            w
                    1 +       —     ,   O<w<1.
We    assume, however, that farmer i fixes his price for two periods. If he
sets a price at t ,         it is in effect at t and t +                 1

       Finally, for expositional simplicity we make two                      standard approxima-

tions in our analysis in the text. First, we approximate farmer i's

utility at t by                            .       Since we neglect discounting, this
means that when farmer i chooses a price for t and t + 1                             ,   he

minimizes the loss function


(8)         Z.
                    if            *2       +
                                                              *     2




                                                          7
Minimization of (8) implies a simple price—setting rule:


(9)
                      1*             *
                      (p1t+Etpt+i)

where x is the log of the price set by farmer i for t and t +                        1


       Our second approximation is


(10)        Pt                 pit


This is a first order approximation of (3), and it simplifies aggregation.

       Appenthx A shows that (8) - (10) are not essential for our qualitative

results by redoing our analysis without then. This exercise may be of more

general interest, because assumptions like (8) - (10) appear in many papers

and are often criticized as ad hoc (especially loss functions like (8)).6


                        III.    THE BEHAVIOR OF THE PRICE LEVEL


       This section   derives the behavior of the aggregate price level under

staggering and synchronization. This is the first step in determining

when each is optimal and when each is an equilibrium. Because the idio-

syncratic shocks that distinguish our model from Blanchard's average to

zero, the results of this section are similar to Blanchard's.

       A. Synchronization

       Suppose that all farmers (or "firms't) set prices in even periods. Sub-

stituting (7)    into   (9) yields the log price that firm i sets at an even



                                +              +
(11)                                 (l_v)pt       we.]
                                     1
                                +                  +                 +
                                     [vEmt+i           (1_v)Etpt+i       wEtO.t÷i1

     6. The usual defense that loss functions like (8) are second order
approximations to true objective functions is not valid (see Appendix A).



                                                       8
Since m follows a random walk, Etmt+i                     m.   .        Because   all prices set at
t   are in effect at t + 1         ,
                                       Etpt+i    Pt .      Thus (11) implies


(12)                   vm +       (lv)pt    +         0    + Ete.i1
For even firms (that is, firms that receive idiosyncratic shocks in

even periods),           =         ' so Ete.t+i 0                  .     For odd firms, 01t+l is
uncorrelated with previous shocks, so EtB.t+i = 0

       Aggregating (12) leads to


(13)
            Pt     vm +          (1—v           (t even)


The average of the firm—specific shocks is zero because the shocks are

uncorrelated across firms and the economy is large. (13) implies that

the price level in an even period is

(14)
            Pt     m (t even)

The price level in an odd period is the same                as         the price level in the preced—

in,g even period, when all prices were set. Thus if t is odd,


(15)
            Pt                   (t odd)


       B. Staggering

       Now suppose that each      firm changes its         price when it receives real

shocks. This implies that half of the firms change                        prices   in even periods

and half change in odd periods. Equation (11) again describes price-setting.

In the staggered   regime,       (11) reduces to



                             +
                                 1-v                           +
(16)
                                   2    't + EtPt+i1                   wO.1




                                                  9
The derivation of (16) uses Ee.+1 8j , because            8. does not change

in the period after firm i sets its price.              does not equal Pt

since half of the firms change prices at t + 1

       To solve for the price level, note that

                   1
(17)        Pt     (xt+xti)

where x is the mean of the log prices set at t .          Substituting   (17) into

(16), aggregating, and solving for x yields

(18)
                       2v        1-v             1-v
                              + 2(1+v)Xt_1 t 2(l+V)tXt+l
            X•t    1 + mt

The method of undetermined coefficients leads to a solution for x


(19)        x.     Xx1 + (1X)mt
                         V'
              X
                   1
                               0<X <1.
                   1 + v'


Finally,   substituting (19) into (17) yields

                               1—x
(20)        Pt     XPt_l +       2 (mt+mt_i)

       Equations (14) - (15) show that, under synchronization, the price level

adjusts fully to monetary shocks every two periods. Equation (20) shows that

staggering leads to price level inertia--the price level adjusts slowly to

shocks. The degree of inertia is greatest ( X is largest) when V is small.

v is small when E is large (firms face highly elastic product demand)

and when y is small (the marginal disutility of labor increases slowly).



                   IV. THE OPTIMAL TIMING OF PRICE CHANGES

       This section    compares firms' losses under synchronization and staggering

to determine which regime is socially optimal. Consider synchronization


                                           10
 first. If all firms set prices in even periods, then the price-setting rule,

 (12), and the equation for the price level, (14), imply


 (21)                   m + (O.t+Et9.ti)
where t is even. The deviation of firm                                   i's   price from the utility-

maximizing      level at t and t +                   1     can be derived from (21), (14), and

the formula for the utility-maximizing price, (7). The result is

                         *               w
(22)         x. —
                    —    *                                  +
                                                                     w
                                                 vAlnt+i             (et+Ete1t÷i_2et+i)
                             —
where Amt+i                      m   .       As noted above, Ete.t+i                           9    for
even firms and Ete.i = 0                      for odd finns. Substituting these formulas

and (22) into finn i's loss function and taking                                 expectations   yields


(23)
             SYNC        122
            ZE

            Z
             SYNC        122 +—wu
                         —v    322
             0           2       m           4      e



where ZESYNC and Z0
                  SYNC
                       are the expected losses under synchronization of an

even and an odd firm respectively. Even firms are better off, because they

change prices in the periods in which they receive idiosyncratic shocks.

        Now consider the staggered regime. Calculating Ept+i from (20),

substituting the result into the price-setting rule, (16), and simplifying

by using   the   definition of X                 leads     to


(24)                    s/Vm +               (1/V)pt             +


Combining this with (7) leads to expressions for                                    -      and




                                                            11
       -             as functions of real money:


(25)           x. —                       (/    —
                                                    v)(mt.-pt)
                       —
                           p1                 —('V —
                                                            v)(m—pt)
                                                                            —

Manipulating (20) leads to an expression for real money as a function of

current and        past innovations            in nominal money:


                                      1+x               X
                                                            i
(26)           nit —       Pt             2     •E
                                                i::0

Substituting (25) and (26) into the loss function and                                       taking expectations
yields

                STAG            1                   2
(27)           Z                    v'V (l+v)o'

where zSTAG is the loss for each fii,n in the staggered regime.                                             The loss   is

the same       for   odd and even firms,                since    both change prices in the periods                  in
which they receive shocks.

           We now ask which pattern of price changes                            is   socially optimal. We define

the optimal        regime       as the one that minimizes the average of the losses of odd

and    even    firms.      Our qualitative              results are      the         same   if we   adopt   other
reasonable definitions.7

           Equations (23) and (27) determine when synchronization is optimal:
                                                                        2

(28)            1(YNC           Z)        < zSTAG                                <
                                                                                      K1


                           2/V(1+v) - 4v2
                K1 —-                 2                         K1>0.
                                    3w

Thus synchronization is superior to staggering if the variance of



       7.  For example, we could define the optimal regime as the one that
minimizes the average of a convex function of the losses. This would place
value on equity between the cohorts.



                                                                 12
idiosyncratic shocks is sufficiently small compared to the variance of

monetary shocks.

     In the special case in which           0 --the Blanchard model-- (28)

shows that synchronization is always superior to staggering. In this case,

staggering reduces welfare for two reasons: it causes price level inertia,

and hence larger fluctuations in real aggregate demand; and it      causes
undesired   fluctuations in relative prices, because some prices are fixed when

others adjust. In the case of a>0 , staggering has these costs, but it

also has a benefit: it allows odd as well as even firms to adjust fully

to idiosyncratic shocks. If these shocks are large, the benefit outweighs

the costs, and staggering is superior to synchronization.



                V. THE EQUILIBRIUM TIMING OF PRICE CHANGES


    This section   derives the conditions under which synchronization arid

staggering are stable equilibria. Part A shows that synchronization is an

equilibrium if the variance of the idiosyncratic shocks is sufficiently

small compared to the variance of monetary shocks, and that this condition

is weaker than the condition for synchronization to be optimal. Part B

considers staggering. We first show that if          = 0   (Blanchard' s model),

then staggering is an equilibrium, but an unstable one. We then show that if

   > 0 (that is, if idiosyncratic shocks of any size exist), staggering

is a stable equilibrium. These results, along with those of the previous

section, imply that staggering can be a stable equilibrium even if it is

inefficient, but that synchronization is also an equilibrium in this

case. In addition, synchronization can be an inefficient equilibrium.




                                       13
       A. Is Synchronization an Equilibrium?

        Suppose that all firms change prices in even periods. Synchronization

is a Nash equilibrium if no firm, taking the behavior of others as given,

can    gain by   switching to odd periods. The incentive for switching is

greatest for odd firms, since switching would allow them to adjust fully

to idiosyncratic shocks. Thus, to see when synchronization is an equilibrium,

we compare the loss of an odd firm in the synchronized regime to its loss if

it switches.
                                                                      SYNC
        The loss of an odd firm in the synchronized regime is                (equation

(23)). To compute the firm's loss if it switches to odd periods, we first

derive its price—setting rule for this situation. Since the firm is small

relative to the economy, the behavior of the aggregate price level is the

same as in the synchronized regime. If t is an odd period, then Pt

and              mt+i (equations (14)—(15)).       Substituting these formulas into the

price-setting rule, (11), shows that the switcher, firm i ,           sets


(29)         x.         [(1_v)m1 + (l+v)m] + w9

The derivation of (29) uses the fact that 8.                9.    if t is odd and
                                                     it+1    it
firm i is an odd firm.

        Combining (29), (7), and the formulas for the aggregate price level

leads to


(30)                —
                        it
                         *


                         *
                                1-v
                                 2 mt
                                    1-vAInt
             xit —              —
                        pit+i        2        —    Am÷i

Substituting (30) into (8) and taking expectations yields firm i's loss

if it switches:




                                              14
               SWITCH       =       1 (1—v)             2
(31)          Z0                        2


       Firm    i chooses not to switch to odd periods, and hence synchronization
                       SWITCH    SYNC
is an equilibrium, if Z0      > Z0                           .    Comparing (23) and (31) shows that


                                                       2
               SWITCH           SYNC
(32)          Z0
                        >                  if f             < K

                            —          V
              K2 =                          ,     K2
                                                       > 0
                                3w

Switching to odd periods has the benefit for firm i that it makes possible

full adjustment to idiosyncratic shocks, but the drawback that, since the

firm now changes prices in different periods from other firms, it can

no longer adjust fully to changes in the aggregate price level. The losses

from switching outweigh the gains if the variance of 9.                             is small compared

to the variance of money, which determines the variance of the price level.

       The most important implication of (32) can be derived by comparing it

with (28). Straightforward algebra shows that

                                                                          > 0
(33)          K2 — K1           =
                                     _.(1/)2(3
                                     3w
                                                           + 4/ + 3v)


Thus
        K2
             > K :    the range of values of o/CT2                      for   which synchronization

is an equilibrium is larger than the range for which synchronization is

optimal.     Synchronization must be an equilibrium if it is                      optimal, and it   may
be   an equilibrium even if staggering is optimal.
       This result is surprising. Staggering leads to price level inertia, and
hence to large fluctuations in real aggregate demand, but each firm ignores
this negative macroeconomic effect in deciding when to change its price.
Intuitively,   this   suggests that synchronization is more likely to be socially

                                                            15
optimal than to be a decentralized equilibrium.
     To understand why we find the opposite, recall that synchronization is
optimal if firms' losses are smaller under synchronization than under
staggering, while synchronization is an equilibrium if each firm's loss is
smaller under synchronization than it is if the firm switches out of
synchronization.8 Thus our result that synchronization is more likely to be
an equilibrium than to be optimal means that a firm that switches from
synchronization is worse off than a firm in the staggered regime.
Equivalently, a switcher gains if half of the rest of the firms switch with
him. We now explain why this is so.
     If half the firms join the switcher, then price—setting is staggered and
the switcher is hurt by the resulting increase in aggregate demand
fluctuations. This is outweighed, however, by a gain to the switcher: his
relative price fluctuates less than it does if he switches alone. There are
two reasons. First, the switcher changes his price at the same times as half
the rest of the firms rather than by himself. Second, because of the price
level inertia, even the firms that change prices at different times from the
switcher do not deviate greatly from the prices set by the switcher's cohort;
in contrast, if all other firms changed prices at different times from the
switcher, they would respond fully to monetary shocks in periods in which
he could not respond. The smaller fluctuations in the switcher's
relative price that result when other finns   switch   with him lead to smaller
deviations   of the switcher's output from his utility-maximizing level.




     8. More precisely, optimaflty depends on the average of odd and even
firms' losses in the two regimes, while the losses of odd firms alone
determine whether synchronization is an equilibrium (see equations (28) arid
(32)). This distinction is unimportant for the explanation of our      results.


                                        16
       B. Is Staggering a Stable Equilibrium?
       We now ask when staggered price—setting is a stable equilibrium.9 The
algebra required for the answer is complicated. We therefore sketch our
arguments here and present the details in Appendix B.
      Consider   first the special case of no idiosyncratic shocks (o = 0).

Staggering is clearly a Nash equilibrium in this case. Since the economy

is   large, each firm takes the proportion of firms in each price—setting cohort
as fixed at a half. When there are no idiosyncratic shocks, this means that
each firm views the two cohorts as identical. Thus no firm has an incentive
to change its timing.
       Staggering is not stable, however. Our definition of stability follows
Blanchard and Fischer (1985, ch. 9): staggering is stable if, given a small
perturbation in the sizes of the cohorts, firms in the larger cohort have an
incentive to switch to the smaller one. To see whether staggering is stable
in the absence of idiosyncratic shocks, we calculate a firm's loss as a
function of the proportion in its cohort. The derivative of this function
evaluated at one half is negative. Thus if the sizes of the cohorts are
perturbed, the firms in the larger group suffer smaller losses than those in
the smaller group; all firms have an incentive to join the larger one.
       The intuition for this result is simple. A firm minimizes unintended
fluctuations in its relative price by changing its price along with as many
other finns   as possible. Thus a firm always wants to join the larger cohort.




    9. As throughout the paper, we consider only "uniform" staggering, that
is, a regime with half the firms in earth cohort. One can show that no unequal
division of firms between cohorts is ever a stable equilibrium.




                                        17
       In the case in which there are idiosyncratic shocks (o > 0)

however, staggering is stable. If each firm       changes    its price when it

receives real shocks, and   so   half the firms   are   in each cohort, then each

firm   strictly prefers to remain in its cohort rather than to switch. The
reason is simply that switching increases the losses from idiosyncratic shocks
while leaving the losses from monetary shocks unchanged. The loss of a firm
in a cohort is a continuous function of the proportion in the cohort. Thus if
a firm strictly prefers a cohort given that it contains half the firms, the firm
continues to strictly prefer the cohort for a small perturbation away from a
half. As a result, each firm will return to the cohort in which it can
respond fully to idiosyncratic shocks after a small perturbation away from
this equilibrium)-0
       Thus a small change in the Blanchard model--the addition o a small
idiosyncratic shock——is sufficient to make staggering a stable equilibrium.
Recall that the variance of the real shock must be large for staggering to be
socially   optimal. Thus for cT9/o
                                  22    positive but sufficiently small,

staggering is an inefficient stable equilibrium. Indeed, the welfare losses

from inefficient staggering can be arbitrarily large: staggering is a stable

equilibrium even if         is very large and           very small, which implies

large losses from the price level inertia caused by staggering and only small

offsetting gains from adjustment to real shocks. The source of this market

failure is the negative macroeconomic externality of price level inertia.




     10. Note that our definition of stability is local. The condition for
staggering to be globally stable—-that is, for each firm to return to the
cohort in which it can respond fully to real shocks after an arbitrarily
large perturbation——is the same as the condition for synchronization not
to be an equilibrium.



                                          18
Inertia would be reduced if      firms moved toward   synchronization, but

each firm    ignores   this in deciding whether to switch cohorts.

      Finally, recall that synchronization is an equilibrium if cr/cr2

is   sufficiently small. Thus, since staggering is a stable equilibrium as

long as o>O , there are multiple equilibria for a range of                   .   In
this range, if price-setters are bunched each firm remains with the bunch

to minimize fluctuations in its relative price. But if price—setting is

staggered,   there is no force to move firms toward synchronization——a bunch
does not attract firms unless it already exists. Thus both synchronization
and staggering can be self—sustaining. Indeed, our earlier result that
synchronization is an equilibrium whenever it is optimal implies that
whenever there is an inefficient staggered equilibrium, there is a superior
synchronized equilibrium as well.



                          VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

      A. Robustness
      Our analysis employs special assumptions about the timing of shocks and
the choices available to firms concerning the timing of price changes: time is
discrete, the timing of firm—specific shocks is deterministic, and firms can
choose only whether to change prices in odd or even periods. In this
section we discuss the effects of relaxing each of these assumptions. Our
main conclusions are robust to relaxation of the assumptions of discrete time
and of deterministic timing of shocks, and we believe that they are robust to
relaxation of our assumption concerning firms' choices. Staggering is an
inefficient equilibrium in a wide class of models because of the negative
externalities from price level inertia. The result that complete


                                          19
synchronization can be a second equilibrium is not robust, but more general
models possess equilibria with !near synchronization"---regular intervals at
which most though not all prices change simultaneously. Multiple equilibria
arise frequently because many models besides our simple one contain forces
keeping synchronized price—setters together but not bringing staggered
price—setters together.
     Continuous Time. Consider first the implications of moving our model
from discrete to continuous time. In the spirit of the discrete time
specification, we assume that the money supply follows a Wiener process and
that the idiosyncratic shocks affecting a given firm occur at a fixed
interval——for concreteness, at a fixed time every month. Similarly, we assume
that the time during the month that shocks arrive is distributed uniformly
across firms.   Finally, each firm changes its price at monthly intervals and
can choose only the time during the month that it makes decisions.
     Staggered price setting, with each firm changing its price when it
receives real shocks, can be an inefficient equilibrium in this model. As in
the discrete time model, staggering is a stable equilibrium as long as the
variance of idiosyncratic shocks is positive, but staggering is inefficient if
the variance of monetary shocks is sufficiently large relative to the variance
of idiosyncratic shocks.
     In contrast to the discrete time results, however, complete
synchronization is never an equilibrium. If, for example, all firms change
prices at noon on the first of each month, firms that receive shocks an
instant after noon on the first can gain by breaking from synchronization.
The cost to these firms of waiting until their shocks occur to change prices
is infinitesimal, because waiting puts them only slightly out of step with
other price setters, but the benefit from waiting——the ability to adjust to real


                                        20
shocks——is not infinitesimal,
     While perfect synchronization cannot be an equilibrium, "near
synchronization" can be. If price setters are bunched at noon on the first,
the ones who receive shocks shortly after this time will move, but the bunch
need not unravel entirely. To see this, suppose that firms whose shocks
arrive between noon and 6:00 P.M. on the first leave the bunch. For a firm
whose shock arrives after 6:00, the costs and benefits of leaving are of the
same order: the cost of being out of step with the bunch by a discrete
amount of time is not infinitesimal. As a result, for some parameter values
there is an equilibrium in which most though not all firms are bunched at
noon on the first. Since staggering is a stable equilibrium as long as there
are idiosyncratic shocks, there can be multiple equilibria. Unfortunately, it
is difficult to compare the condition for near synchronization to be an
equilibrium with the condition for near synchronization or complete
synchronization to be optimal.
     Stochastic Arrival of Idiosyncratic Shocks. We now alter the continuous
time version of our model by relaxing the assumption that firm—specific
shocks arrive deterministically. Specifically, let the arrival be a Poisson
process that is independent across firms, and let T    denote the mean time
between a firm's shocks. We continue to allow very limited choices for the
timing of price changes: a firm can change its price either at fixed intervals
of length T or whenever it receives an idiosyncratic shock. (Note that in
either case the average frequency of price changes is l/T .) If each firm
changes prices when it receives shocks, then price—setting is staggered,
since an equal proportion of firms receives shocks at every instant.
Synchronization arises if each firm adjusts at a fixed interval.



                                       21
     One can show that staggering is an equilibrium if the variance of firm—

specific   shocks is sufficiently large compared to the variance of monetary

shocks.'1 Synchronization is an equilibrium for             sufficiently

small, and, as in our main   model,   there are two equilibria for some values
    22 . Our
of O'm             intuition about the welfare properties of equilibria carries

over to this model (for example, negative externalities from price level

inertia should still produce inefficient staggering), but we have not

investigated welfare formally.

     More   Complicated Rules for When to Change Prices. In both our main
model and the generalizations discussed above, firms choose among a few
simple rules for when to change prices. We now speculate about the
implications   of allowing more complicated rules. Specifically,    in the
model with Poisson   arrival of idiosyncratic shocks, suppose that firms can
change prices whenever they wish by paying a fixed adjustment cost. (To
avoid   the extreme result of Caplin and Spulber, 1987, assume   that   the money

supply   can both rise and fall, so that price changes are "two—sided"; see
Blanchard and Fischer, ch. 9.) Although it is not possible to solve for the
behavior of this economy, we believe that staggering can be a stable
equilibrium. In the regime that we envision, each firm would follow
something like an Ss rule, and differences in shocks would cause firms to



     11. In contrast to the results for our main model, staggering is not
an equilibrium if the variance of idiosyncratic shocks is positive but very
small.  The reason is that breaking from staggering means changing prices
at fixed rather than random intervals, which allows better adjustment to
monetary shocks. This result is an artifact of our assumptions about firms'
choices concerning the timing of price changes. We believe that in more
general models with random arrival of idiosyncratic shocks, such as the
one discussed below, a positive variance for these shocks assures that
staggering is a stable equilibrium.



                                          22
reach their Ss bounds at different times. As in our other models, the
staggered regime could be inefficient because firms ignore their contributions
to price level inertia in deciding when to change prices.
     Complete synchronization would clearly not be an equilibrium; firms that
received large idiosyncratic shocks at times other than when all prices were
changed would adjust immediately, and firms whose desired adjustments were
small when prices were changed would choose not to pay the cost of
adjustment. But it appears plausible that once again near synchronization
could be an equilibrium: if most prices changed at certain times, each firm
would have a strong incentive to adjust its price at those times, and this
might sustain the equilibrium. As a realistic example of possible near
synchronization, consider labor contracts. It seems plausible to imagine an
equilibrium in which most wages are set simultaneously at three—year
intervals but in which each contract can be reopened at an irregular time if
a firm experiences an unusually large shock.


     B. Conclusions
     In Keynesian macroeconomic models, staggered price—setting creates
price level inertia, which increases cyclical fluctuations and reduces welfare.
We ask whether firms could choose to change prices at different times even
if staggering makes them worse off. More generally, we ask whether there is
some market failure that causes the equilibrium timing of price changes in a
decentralized economy to be inefficient. To address these issues, we alter
previous models of staggering by making the timing of price changes
endogenous, and by introducing an incentive for staggering: idiosyncratic
shocks that arrive at different times for different firms.

                                       23
     We find that staggering is a stable equilibrium as long as there are
firm—specific shocks of any size. Welfare is lower under staggering than
under synchronization if nominal shocks are sufficiently large compared to
the idiosyncratic shocks; if the nominal shocks are very large, welfare is
much lower. Thus staggering can be a stable equilibrium even if it is highly
inefficient.
      Synchronization can be an equilibrium even when firm—specific shocks
make staggering an equilibrium. Multiple equilibria are possible because
there is an incentive for synchronized price—setters to remain bunched, but
not for staggered price—setters to move toward synchronization. The
condition for synchronization to be an equilibrium is weaker than the
condition for it to be optimal. Thus if staggering is an inefficient
equilibrium, there is a superior synchronized equilibrium as well.
      The possibility of inefficient staggering suggests a role for government
regulation of price—setting. Welfare might be raised, for example, by a
requirement that firms sign labor contracts in the same years. The existence
of multiple equilibria implies that regulation could be temporary:
synchronization, once achieved, would be self—sustaining.




                                       24
                                              APPENDIX A

        Overview. In the text, following Gray (1978), Blanchard (1983, 1986),
Parkin (1986), Ball (1986a), and others, we make two important simplifying
assumptions. First, we assume that the reduction in individual i's
expected utility      in period         t   relative    to the situation in which all prices
are    flexible is proportional to                                We use this expression


both to evaluate welfare under different timings of price changes and to

derive individuals' price-setting rule,

IC           --   -
                  —    1
                                    r          )



Second, we assume that the log of the price index equals the average of

log prices; in other words, we assume


(10)
             Pt
                            N

                           1.   1
                                    t
        This Appendix relaxes these two assumptions. Our goal is to derive

results about the behavior of the economy and about welfare that are correct

up to second order. Since (10) is a first order approximation to the true

price   index (see equation (3)), we obviously must replace it with a second
order approximation. For more subtle reasons, we must also alter the
objective function and the price-setting rule. Quadratic loss functions like
ours are often defended on the grounds that they are second order
approximations to true objective functions (see, for example, Parkin). But
they do not in fact lead to results that are correct up to second order.
There are two difficulties.
        First, an individual's utility depends on more than how successful he is
in keeping his price close to the utility-maximizing level. Combining


                                                   25
equations (1) — (7) in the text, we can write individual i's utility as a
function of the real money stock, the ratio of his actual price to his
utility-maximizing price, and his technology shock 8
                                                                              —ty
                               y(i—v)                      l—
                          M                                      — 1
(A—i)        U
                 it
                      -
                      —                 w(1—i)
                                        it
                                                      it
                                                                7t
                                                                         it

                          Pt                          it                 it

where v and           w   are as defined in the text. Using _E[(pt_pt)2]

to measure welfare is thus equivalent to taking a second order approximation

of V(s) and then discarding some of the terms. As we show below, the

most important of the neglected terms are the ones involving the mean

and variance of real money; since the behavior of real money is different

under staggering and synchronization, using _E[(pt_p)2] to measure

utility leads to an inaccurate comparison of welfare in the two regimes,

        The second difficulty is that        assuming that agents maximize second
order    approximations to their objective functions, even if          the   right

approximation         is used, does not lead to correct second order approximations
to behavior. Instead, the first order condition for maximizing a second order
(i.e., quadratic) approximation to utility leads to a first order (linear)
approximation to agents' true price—setting rule. 'Thus results using the
price—setting rule in the text are accurate only up to first order——they do
not, for example, correctly describe the (second order) effects of changes in
the variances of shocks.
        We now redo our analysis in a way that avoids these problems. To
derive correct second order approximations to price—setting rules, we use
second order approximations to exact first order conditions, not first order



                                                 26
conditions for maximizing approximations to utility. To derive correct second
order approximations to welfare, we use a second order approximation to
(A—i) with no terms discarded. Finally, as mentioned above, we use a second
order rather than first order approximation to the true log price level.
Otherwise our analysis parallels that in the text. Our approach leads to
specific results, such as the condition that determines the optimal regime,
that differ from the ones in the text. We show, however, that our qualitative
conclusions are unchanged. (The complexity of the analysis that follows
makes clear why we employ the standard simplifying assumptions in the text
despite the problems discussed above——they simplify the presentation
dramatically.)

        Second Order Approximations. Because they will be useful at several
points below, we begin by taking second order approximations to the log
price level and to expected utility.
        Taking the log of the true price index (equation (3)) and approximating
around the mean of log prices yields

(A—2)       Pt
                        —
                            (—i) 1=1
                                 •
                                    N
                                        (_)2
where        is the mean of log prices. (A-2) shows that thspersion in

individual   prices   reduces the aggregate price index, making   consumers better
off. The benefit from price dispersion is increasing in           ,   the   elasticity

of substitution between goods.

        We approximate V() around (0,0,0)       (m-pp.-pO is the equilibrium

if all prices are flexible, and E[9]0 ).        Note that V2(m-p,O,9)O for all

rn—p    and 9 (p.—p0 is always optimal).        This implies that V2(0,O,O),

V12(O,0,0), and V23(O,O,0)      are all zero.   Note also that    8 has mean




                                         27
zero and is uncorrelated with m — p                         by our assumptions in the text.

Using these results, the Taylor approximation of V() simplifies to


                                                                         +
(A-3)
               E[U.t}
                                 V(0,0,0) +            ViE[mt_pt}            ViiE[(mt_pj]
                                                 +
                                                                                         V33E[8]
where all partial derivatives are evaluated at (0,0,0)


        V(0,0,0) and V33E{9t] are constant across regimes. Thus

our evaluation of welfare here departs from the analysis in the text by

     1-
Li 1LJ_Ut.LL[ i *tL1lJ. Lit .4-k
           - — -. .1-                          .,..-...4
                             LiL ii1O..LI OA 1.A.                             -....s,,
                                                   VOL L1LL '.J.L .4. -L-1 UI¼&          LI
ignore these terms in asking                   whether an individual chooses to set his

price in even or odd periods, because the choice of one agent does not

affect the behavior of real money. But we                           cannot     ignore these terms in

comparing welfare under synchronization and                           staggering, because     the

behavior of real money is different in the two regimes.

        Taking the appropriate derivatives of (A-i) and substituting into

(A-3) yields


                                                 +                       ! E[mt_pt]
(A—4)         E[U.t] —          [v(o,o,o)              V33a]
                      +
                                 i+     E7 —         E{(mt_pt)2]
                                                                       —


        Synchronization. We now derive the behavior of prices and the level

of welfare under synchronization. A farmer chooses his price for t and

t+i to maximize his expected                   utility      in these periods, Ut+EtUt+i

Manipulating (A-i), we can write this objective function as




                                                            28
                                                                           y(1—v)
                 1                                                                    (1—)w/2               (1-)w/2
(A—5)                 [U.t+EtU.t+i) =                                                jt                tit+1


                       1-E                                         —                   7/2                               (1—i)
                                            -                                                                   it                Mt+i
        2
                                                                                                  +    E
                                                                                                        t   2
                 it                                       it                                                        it             Mt



                                  —              1
                                                      V 7Mt+iy tit+1 y/2
                                                      'kit                                                  it+1
                                                                                                                     y

                                                                             Mt              it
                                                          it


where t°it+1 =                    exp{E8÷1}                    ,               exp(x.t),                   exp(x.j, and
                     + EtPt÷i                   (that is,                          is the expression for x. in

the text). The first order condition for X/X simplifies to


                      I
                           x       1+7—                    M
(A—6)           E
                                                                +1
                                                                 t
                           x.
                             it
                                                                                             7/2                7
                      .1          •it                 +
                                                                M
                                                                       t+1         t4'it+l            •it+1              --   0
                      2
                                tit+1                                  Mt              it             tit+1

Taking      a   second order approximation yields



                                                +
                                                      1+y—
                                                                   1               1(212 122 122
                                                     if i is odd (that                       is,      if farmer i will receive
(A-7)                                                an idiosyncratic shock in period                                t   + 1 );


                                                                                   11212
                                      X.
                                       it
                                                +
                                                      1+7—
                                                                       1
                                                                                   4
                                                                                  — 17
                                                                                                  m
                                                     i i is even.

(A-7) shows that the correct second order approximation to                                                                    is larger

than the formula in the text. Greater uncertainty (a larger value of



                                                                              29
      or c) leads to higher prices. (Uncertainty raises prices, and thus

lowers output, because the third derivative of utility with respect to

          is positive.)


        Equation (12) gives x.. .            Substituting      this into (A-7) and aggregating

across farmers yields the mean of log prices:

               —
                        '7t +                +
                                                        1        112 2
(A—8)
               Pt                  (l_v)pt       1 + ty — i j7 J°m
                                    3 22
                              + 1+y—16O 1




                    -       -  .     - SYNC
                        S'1fl * IVJp
Similarly,     we can substitute (12) into (A-7) and calculate the variance of

x.      across farmers:
 it


(A—9)
           1
                N
               i1
                          -   2522
                               = w 09
where we neglect terms of higher than second order. (To derive (A—9),

note that the coefficient on 8it in the expression for x is w/2 for

i odd and w for i even; see (12).)

        Substituting (A-8) and (A—9) into (A—2) and solving for the price

level yields

(A—b)
                              irsc
                        m + — [C       —     5.(—1)w22
            Pt

Rearranging (A-1O) and using          the    definition of C' , the log real money
stock in an even period is given by:

                                                                             2
(A—li) m —                = —1 5 (t—1)w22         —    (7+1)
                                                                1 2
                                                                 (7   —
                                                                                   3 2
                                                                          (y—1)   T 09
                              SYNC


Since no prices change in odd periods, the log real money stock in an

odd period equals the expression in (A—li) plus the innovation in log


                                                  30
nominal money in that period.

       We can now evaluate welfare under synchronization. We compute

the terms in (A-4), the approximation to an agent's expected utility,

averaging each term over odd and even periods. The mean of real money is

SYNC in all periods. In even periods, the square of real money is
    SYNC2
(p     ) , which equals                   zero to second order; in odd periods,              the expected
            SYNC2 2                        2
square is (p                   ) +u       °m
                                                •   Thus the average square of real money is
12
2m Note that the mean of real money differs from its level in the                                      text

(zero), but that the variance is the same to second order. Finally,
because (A-7) implies that x1. differs from (p +                                                only by
                                                                                     Etp*t+l)
second order terms, E                           -        2        differs from its value under the assump-

tion that firms use the simple rule (9) only by terms of fourth order and

higher. Thus, averaging over the two kinds of firms, E[(p.t -                                   *)2]
    1 SYNC                SYNC.       1 v2 o2       3 2 2
      (Z             +
                         Z0    )                    +w   09
                                                              •        Substituting these results into
(A—4) yields welfare under synchronization:


(A—12)                         - [V(O,O,O) +                                      +'
                         — 1                        122 3 w22
                          (—1)(1+y—)                [v °m +              crJ


      Staggering.              Under asynchronization, as under synchronization,

one can show that relaxing the simplifying assumptions in the text has

negligible effects on E[(p.t.p*t)2} and E[(mt_pt)2] ; thus E[(p1t_p)2]
•        •       •                 STAG              •                   2
is again given by Z                        (equation (27)), and E[(mt_pt) ]                equals
11+X         2
    T °m         (the variance of (26)). Thus to determine welfare under staggering

we need only find the mean of real money under staggering. To do this,

we begin by guessing




                                                                  31
                                  STAG           I                     STAG)         1+X
(A—13) m — Pt                             + Amt r't i-                      J
                                                                                +
                                                                                        2   Amt


where JJSTAG is the mean of real money under staggering. We now solve

for this term.

       Calculations similar to those used to derive (A-7) show that when

mt_Pt obeys (A—13), individual i's price—setting rule is:

                                              I1+X1                  STAG                             STAG
(A—14)                       m —       (l_v)t—--J(mt_pt—P
                                                                            +            + C1 — (1—v)p


                    C1 =     4   1 + 7E -       1[(1_
                                                                    1)(1+7)         +   v(722_(_1)2)]

  +           1-V)2(i-X)2(72E2--1)2) -
        [                                                (1_x)2(1_v)7(1_v)(1+Y_E)]
The variance of prices across farmers is approximately

                           _2 22   11—A 2
(A—15) E
               ii             w cr +
                                                     i    +   x


where       the first term reflects idiosyncratic shocks and the second the fact
that   different prices are set at different times.

       Aggregating (A-14) yields an expression for                              ,   and hence (using

   =            +
                    -)       ) for     j5 ;
                                              substituting this result and (A—15) into

(A-2) yields a formula for the aggregate price level:




                                                 1 +         A 1F          STAG                    STAG
(A—16) Pt
                     1
                         (m+mti) — (1-v)                 2        [(mt_pt—P
                                                                               ) +
                                                                                        (mt r1 i'
                                   +    C1 —     (1—v)p
                                                               STAG
                                                                      +   C2 + pSTAG


                        22 11—X2
                         1
               C2=_(_i)WTø+ii+AUm

                                                              32
 nipulating (A—16) and using the definition of A                         (equation       (19)),

 we obtain

                                 STAG                       STAG          1 + A
                                        +                            +
 (A—17)           m_ Pt                     X(m1_P1.                          2


                                  —   v(l+X)pT         —
                                                           (1+X)(C1+C2)
 Finally, combining (A-13) and (A-17) yields


                  STAG       —    c1+c2
 (A-iS)

                                                                                   STAG
       To find welfare under staggering, we now substitute p                                 for

E[m_p] ,          - f- a         for E[(m-.p)2] , and        zST for E[(p.t—pt)2} into

 (A—4):


 (A—19) E{USTAG} —                      +                    ,STAG
                            [v(o,o,o)

              +
                   1         1        11+ A2     —
                                                     1(—1)(1+y—)                    (1+v)o2
                  2t1+i—41—A in                      2                    4               m

       Equilibrium and optimal timing. As noted above, the formulas for

E[(p1t_pt) 2j in the text are correct to second order. In addition, since

an individual treats E{(m_p)] and E[(m_p)2] as given, it is correct
to   assume that an individual chooses whether to change prices in odd or
                                 *2] Thus the approach in the text
even periods to minimize E[(pt_pt)                     .



to analyzing individual choices of the timing of price changes is correct
to second     order.      As a   consequence, the results about the equilibrium
timing    are     correct: staggering       is stable if         > 0 and unstable if

      0   ,   and synchronization is an equilibrium if                            < K2

      The optimal timing is           determined by comparing welfare under


                                                  33
synchronization and   staggering--that   is, by determining which of (A—12)

and (A-19) is larger. Examination of (A-12) and (A—19) shows that

which regime is optimal depends on the ratio of cr to           ,   as in

the text, but that the critical ratio differs from the ratio in the

text, K1 (see equation (28)). Thus the condition for synchronization

to be optimal is different from the one in the text. Comparison of the

condition for synchronization to be optimal with the condition for it to

be an equilibrium is too complex to perform analytically. We therefore

proceed by evaluating (A-12), (A-19), and     (32) numerically for a wide
range of parameter values. We find that the result in the text that

whenever synchronization is efficient it is an equilibrium holds without

change.




                                         34
                                                APPENDIX B

        This Appendix shows that staggering is unstable in the absence of
idiosyncratic shocks but stable if idiosyncratic shocks of any size are
present. This requires that we solve for the behavior of the economy when
the proportions of firms setting prices in even and odd periods differ from
one half.
        We first solve for the behavior of the price level. Let it                    denote.   the
fraction of firms that set their prices in even periods. Letting t be an
even period, the price level is given by

(B—i)
                 E         E        .       0
              Pt          7rXt + (l_7T)xti

             0             E                0
                               + (i_rr)xt+i


where    (as in the text) x, is the average of prices set at t ,                      and where

E   and 0 superscripts denote               odd   and even    periods respectively.

Substituting         (B-i) into equation (ii)       and      aggregating, we obtain

                 E                  i-vt            0            E +           0
(B—2)
             x                 +
                                         2 [(i_r)xti         + 2t      (i_7r)Etxt+j



        As in the text, we solve for the behavior of x using                    the   method of

undetennined coefficients;              that is, we posit a      solution of' the form


(B—3)        x.E = XE0x1           + (1—A )mt
                                             B


            0         = XOEx+                0
                                          (1—A )mt+i     '

and   solve for xE and A0


                                                    35
         Calculating EtX+i from (B-3), substituting the result into

(B-2), and    rearranging terms                 yields


                                 I
                                         +
                                              1-v (mn)(1A 01
                                                           )jmt         +
                                                                             1-v          0
                                               2                              2    (l_n)xti
(B—4)          xEt
                                               1 —
                                                        -(2ii   +(1—7r)X°)



Comparing    (B-3)     and (B-4) shows that                   XE   equals the coefficient on
 0
x1 in (B—U:


                                         1-v(1—'T)
(B—5)
                                     1 -
                           1 -               V(2+(l)XO)

By syninetry, X° equals                  the    sane expression with )¼0 replaced by

and with n replaced by 1-n

                                          1-v      iT

(B—6)         x                           —
                                     1
                           1    —
                                              v(2(l      )+



(B—5) and (B—6) yield


(B-7)         XE                 -
                                         JK -
                     = KE                JKE-KE/KO,
where
                   -
                   —
                       1   -    (1-v)n
                       (1—v)(1—n)

                   —   1   —
                                (j—v)(1—ir)
                               (1-v)n


(As in the text, we have chosen the stable solutions:                             ixEi   < 1, IX°I < I .)

        As the first step toward computing firms' loss functions, one can



                                                              36
show that (B—3) implies


(B—8)         x -                        xExO(x2
                                                          —
                                                               x3)      + (1_AE)Amt + (1_AE)XOmti

               E               0             EOE                  0                             OE
              xt — Xt+i                  X A (xt2 —
                                                               xti)     —    (1—A   )m+i —   (1—A )A



Similarly, (B-i) and (B-3) imply


(B—9)     m —             p            AEAO(mpE) + (1_7r(1_XE))mt


                                                                   + (1_7r(l_AE))Xmti

                  —    0               E0             0
                                       X A (mt_i_Pt_i) + (1—(1—ir)(1—X ))Amt+i
                                                                                     0



                                                                   + (1_(1_rr)(1_X°))Xmt


Equations (7), (9), and (B—i) imply

           E                   *         E    —               —          E
(8—10)    x.. —               p..                 vmt              (i_v)pt
                                         B        E           E
                                        (xt —         — v(m —

                                                  E0                         E
                                         (l_?r)(xt_xtl) —             v(m_p)
          E
         x. —
                          *                       E0                          0
                                         (l_71)(xt_xt÷i)               v(m÷i_p+i)


where x is the price set by an even finn (at an even t ). Combining

(B—8)—(B—10) yields

(B—li)
              E       —            *
                                         A
                                             OE  E    *
                                              A (xt2_pt2) + c BAmt + A c


              E       —
                              P1t+i
                                   *
                                             AOEE     *
                                               A (xt2_pti) + dE Ami + A EE
                                                                         d




                                                              37
where

            c'           (lir)(1XE) - v(l_71(l_XE))


            dE           -   (l-7r)(i-X°)     -       v(l—(l—7r)(1-X0))

      Using (B-il), the expected loss of an even firm                      changing   prices in even

periods    is

  —              E            1 [l+(X0)2](cE)2 +               [1 + (XE)2}(dE)2   2
                                                      1 — (X X

By synnetry, the loss of an odd firm                    that   changes prices in odd periods

is


(B—13)          Z°(rr)       zE(l_r)

If an even fins switches to odd periods, its loss equals the loss of an

odd firm   that changes             in odd periods plus the loss from its inability to

adjust fully to idiosyncratic shocks. As in the text, this additional

loss is w2c (see (23)). Thus the total loss for an "even switcher' is


                 ESWITCH.                 E             3 2 2
(B—14)          Z            (7r)        Z (1—iT)      +w      c'•



The gain to an even firm from switching to odd periods (the reduction

in its loss) is therefore


(B—15)          GE(iT)        ZiT —                            zE(n - ZE(l_n) -

By symmetry, the gain to an odd firm from switching to even periods is

(B—16)          G°ir) = ZE(l_r — ZE(lT) -

Note that GE() = G0() -

      We   can now determine when staggering is a stable equilibrium. First

suppose that
                     2.is                         .
                                zero. In this case G () G () 0 .
                                                                 El       01           Thus, when



                                                         38
it         no   firm can gain by swithhing cohorts,        and   staggering is an
equilibrium. But one        can show that     GE       <   0 and G° ()       >   0•   It follows
that after a small perturbation away from it     firms in the larger cohort
are better off than firms in the smaller cohort. Since all firms have an
incentive       to join the larger cohort, the staggered equilibrium is unstable.

         Now suppose that          > 0 . In   this case             and G°() are
negative,       and so staggering is again an equilibrium. Since GE ()                arid

          are   continuous, there is a neighborhood of it               in   which GE(7r) and

G°(7r)    are negative.     Thus   if it   departs   slightly from one    half,   even

firms    still prefer the even cohort and odd firms the odd cohort.
Staggering       is therefore stable.




                                               39
                                      REFERENCES
Akerlof, George A. and Yellen, Janet L. "A Near-Rational Model of the
     Business Cycle, with Wage and Price Inertia." Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 100 (Supplement, 1985): 823—38.

Ball, Laurence. "Externalities from Contract Length." Minieo, New York
     University Graduate School of Business Administration, 1986.
     American Economic Review, forthcoming. (1986a)

______   "Is Equilibrium Indexation Efficient?" Mimeo, New York University
     Graduate School of Business Administration, 1986. (1986b)

_______ and Ceechetti, Stephen G. "Imperfect Information and Staggered
     Price Setting." Mimeo, New York University Graduate School of Business
     Administration, 1986.

______ and Romer, David. "Are Prices Too Sticky?" NBER Working Paper
    No. 2171, February 1987.

Blanchard, Olivier J. "Price Asynchronization and Price Level Inertia."
     In Rudiger Dornbusch and Mario Henrique Simonsen, eds., Inflation, Debt,
     and Indexation, pp. 3-24. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1983.
______   "The Wage Price Spiral." Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (August
     1986): 543—65.

          and Fischer, Stanley.     Macroeconomics. Mimeo, M.I.T.,    1985.


______ and Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro. "Monopolistic Competition, Aggregate
     Demand Externalities, and      Real Effects of Nominal Money." NBER Working
     Paper   No. 1770,   December   1985. American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Caplin,   Andrew and Spulber,   Daniel F. "Menu Costs and the Neutrality of
     Money." NBER Working Paper No. 2311, July 1987. Quarterly Journal
     of   Economics, forthcoming.
Fethke, Gary C. and Policano, Andrew J. "Wage Contingencies, the Pattern of
     Negotiation, and Aggregate Implications of Alternative Contract
     Structures."    Journal of     Monetary Economics 14 (1984): 151-71.

_______ and ________. "Will Wage Setters Ever Stagger Decisions?" Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 101 (November 1986): 867—77. (1986a)

_______ and _______. "Negotiation Patterns and the Efficiency of Employment-
     Contingent Wage Bargains." Mimeo, University of Iowa, 1986. (1986b)

______ and _______.        "Monetary Policy and the Timing of Wage Negotiations."
     Journal   of Monetaryconomics 19       (January 1987): 89-105.

Gertner, Robert. "Dynamic Duopoly with Price Inertia." Mimeo, M.I.T., 1985.




                                            40
Gray, Jo Anna. "On Indexation and Contract Length." Journal of Political
     Economy 86 (February 1978): 1-18.

Mankiw, N. Gregory.  'Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles." Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 100 (May 1985): 529—37.

Maskin, Eric S. and Tirole, Jean. "Models of Dynamic Oligopoly II:
     Competition through Prices." M.I.T. Department of Economics Working
     Paper No. 373, 1985.

Matsukawa, Shigeru. "The Equilibrium Distribution of Wage Settlements and
     Economic Stability." International Economic Review 27 (June 1986):
     4 15—37.

Parkin, Michael. "The Output-Inflation Tradeoff When Prices Are Costly to
     change." Journal of Political Economy 94 (February 1986): 200—224.

Taylor, John. "Staggered Wage Setting in a Macro Model." American Economic
     Review 69 (May 1979): 108—113.

______   "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts." Journal of Political
    Economy 88 (February 1980): 1-23.




                                     41
