                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE EFFECTS OF QUANTITATIVE EASING:
                      TAKING A CUE FROM TREASURY AUCTIONS

                                      Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                          Walker Ray

                                      Working Paper 24122
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24122


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 2017, Revised March 2018




We thank Michael Bauer, Rhys Bidder, Michael Fleming, Ed Knotek, Matteo Maggiori, Eric
Swanson, Michael Weber, and seminar participants at Berkeley, New York Fed, Cleveland Fed,
San Francisco Fed, ASU, CMC, and Northwestern for comments on an earlier version of the
paper. We are grateful to Maxime Sauzet for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Walker Ray. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Quantitative Easing: Taking a Cue from Treasury Auctions
Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Walker Ray
NBER Working Paper No. 24122
December 2017, Revised March 2018
JEL No. E43,E44,E52

                                         ABSTRACT

To understand the effects of large-scale asset purchase programs recently implemented by central
banks, we study how markets absorb large demand shocks for risk-free debt. Using high-
frequency identification, we exploit the structure of the primary market for U.S. Treasuries to
isolate demand shocks. These shocks are sizable, leading to large movements in Treasury yields
and impacting corporate borrowing rates. Informed by a preferred habitat model of the term
structure, we test for “local” demand effects and find evidence consistent with theoretical
predictions. Crucially, this local effect is strongest when financial markets are disrupted. Our
estimates are consistent with the view that quantitative easing worked mainly via market
segmentation, with a potentially limited role for other channels.


Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and IZA
and also NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu

Walker Ray
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
walkerdray@econ.berkeley.edu
1    Introduction
Demand for safe assets, and U.S. Treasuries in particular, plays a central role in the
macro-financial landscape. To offset the negative effects of the recent financial crisis,
central banks have implemented various large scale asset purchases, representing a sharp
increase in demand for these assets. The most salient of these is the quantitative easing
(QE) programs carried out by the Federal Reserve, which involved two trillion dollars of
Treasury security purchases. Apart from the massive scale of these purchases, the Federal
Reserve disproportionately bought long-term government debt, thus departing from the
practice of having the distribution of its portfolio close to the distribution of outstanding
debt (Figure 1).
    While evaluating the program, Ben Bernanke, the chair of the Fed at the time, ob-
served, “The problem with QE is it works in practice but it doesn’t work in theory.”
Indeed, QE was successful in reducing short- and long-term interest rates, but the mech-
anism behind this reaction is still not well understood. For example, standard macro-
financial models imply that the demand for assets such as Treasuries is determined solely
by economic agents’ intertemporal consumption decisions, which does not capture the
sources of demand shifts initiated by the Fed. Although the workhorse macroeconomic
models cannot readily explain the workings of the QE, several explanations have been put
forth. For instance, QE could be effective because it signaled to the markets that the Fed
is serious about keeping short-term interest rates low for a long time (forward guidance).
Or, perhaps the Fed exploited frictions (limited arbitrage and market segmentation) in
the financial markets by purchasing securities in a particular segment. Finally, by buying
assets on a massive scale, the Fed could signal a poor state of the economy which pushed
interest rates down (“Delphic” effect; see Campbell et al. (2012) for more details).
    Future deployment of unconventional tools such as QE requires policymakers to move
beyond the “heat of the moment” policies, and hence a central question for policymaking
and academic research is which of these theories is the key channel. But given the paucity
of QE events, it has proven remarkably hard to provide clear empirical evidence for
each theory, as well as to assess the relative contributions of the proposed channels.
Indeed, many channels were likely active during QE rounds and the reactions to QE were
observed in a particular state of the economy, which potentially confounds identification
and interpretation.
    The objective of this paper is to unbundle QE by focusing on one channel: market
segmentation and preferred habitat, which posits that certain investors have preferences
for specific maturities. Our approach is to identify shifts in private demand for Treasuries
that mimic QE, but are independent of the other channels discussed above. The key
mechanism through which market segmentation and preferred habitat forces operate is
not the source of demand shifts, but rather how marginal investors in the market for


                                             1
Treasury debt absorb these demand shocks. Therefore, the best way to isolate and study
the preferred habitat channel of QE is to identify unexpected demand shifts that are
unrelated to other channels of QE.
    In order to construct demand shocks with these properties, we utilize the structure and
timing of the primary market for Treasury securities. Similar to the empirical monetary
policy literature (e.g., Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), Gürkaynak et al. (2007), Gorod-
nichenko and Weber (2016)), we look at high-frequency (intraday) changes in prices of
Treasury futures in small windows around the close of Treasury auctions to identify un-
expected shocks to demand for Treasuries. The key for identification is that all of the
“supply” information (e.g. security characteristics such as the maturity, as well as the
amount of newly offered and outstanding securities) is known and priced in by the mar-
ket. For small enough windows around the close and release of the auction results, any
price changes are reactions to information regarding the demand for the Treasury securi-
ties from the given auction. We interpret these price changes as demand shocks. Utilizing
high-frequency changes in asset prices along with the timing of Treasury auctions in this
manner allows us to rule out confounding factors and identify unexpected shifts in demand
in a model-free way.
    Treasury auctions have a number of properties that can help us understand the work-
ings of QE. First, although the auctions are not as large as the QE rounds, the Treasury
sells about $150 billion in notes and bonds per month in recent years. Because the pri-
mary market for Treasuries is a convenient venue for investors who wish to purchase large
amounts of government securities, the release of Treasury auction results can reveal po-
tentially large shifts in demand for Treasuries. The surprise movements in the yields are
reasonably large: a typical (one standard deviation) shock is equivalent to a yield change
of roughly 2 basis points, which is much larger than similar changes on non-auction dates.
For comparison, Chodorow-Reich (2014) estimates that the first round of the QE pro-
gram in the U.S. cut Treasury rates (five-year maturity) by 9 basis points following the
announcement from Chairman Bernanke on December 1, 2008.
    Second, we document that demand shocks are driven by institutional investors such
as foreign monetary authorities, investment funds, insurance companies and the like.
Moreover, these shocks are not driven by changes in expectations about inflation, output,
or other broad market conditions. Therefore, variation during Treasury auctions can help
us to isolate the effect of idiosyncratic purchases in specific asset segments on the level
and shape of the yield curve, which is difficult to achieve by examining only QE events.
    Finally, in sharp contrast to QE events, Treasury auctions are frequent and information
is available back to 1979. This gives us an opportunity for crisper inference and to study
state-dependence in the effect of targeted purchases of assets (e.g., crisis vs. non-crisis
states). Because QE events were both infrequent and confounded with a massive financial
crisis, having a long time series is instrumental for understanding how QE-like programs


                                            2
can work in normal times.
    Importantly, because Treasury auctions for specific maturities are spread in time, we
can identify changes in demand for government debt of specific maturities. As a result,
we can trace how a shock in one part of the yield curve propagates to other parts of
the yield curve. In this sense, we have natural experiments which can mimic targeted
purchases of the Fed during QE programs. Hence, despite the apparent distance between
QE programs and unexpected movements in private demand during regular Treasury
auctions, this empirical strategy provides clean identification of demand shifts and allows
us to map out the impact of these shocks.
    Although we do not have a structural interpretation of unexpected changes in demand,
we can still use shocks in demand for specific maturities of government debt to investigate
how these shocks spread to other maturities. Specifically, we examine reactions across
maturities through the lens of a formal preferred habitat theory of the term structure.
Building on Vayanos and Vila (2009), we present a series of numerical simulations to
provide qualitative predictions about how the location of the shock in maturity space
affects the relative change in the term structure and how the reaction depends on the risk-
bearing capacity of marginal investors. Informed by theory, we test these predictions using
daily changes in spot rates for government debt in response to our measures of surprise
movements in private demand at particular maturities. We find evidence consistent with
our theoretical predictions.
    Our results suggest that QE programs can be effective in influencing interest rates
for debt at specific maturities when financial markets are disrupted. On the other hand,
QE programs are less likely to be effective at this task in normal times when risk-bearing
capacity of arbitrageurs is greater. In this case, demand shocks at a specific maturity
likely move the whole yield curve rather than a specific segment, and the response may
peak at a maturity other than the targeted maturity. Furthermore, if the Fed attempts to
use purchases of debt with specific maturities to shift down the whole yield curve during a
crisis, this exercise may be ineffective and the Fed should intervene at multiple maturities.
    Furthermore, our results provide a quantitative sense of how much QE programs could
influence interest rates through the preferred habitat channel. Specifically, using our
regression estimates, we show that the amount of government debt purchases during
the QE1 program should generate declines in yields similar to what was observed in
the data. In other words, given the reaction of yields to surprise movements in private
demand during Treasury auctions, we can account for most of the market reaction to
QE1 announcements. This result is consistent with the view that QE worked mainly via
market segmentation and preferred habit, and that the net effect of other channels was
small.
    Our study contributes to several strands of previous research. First, we provide new
evidence to the literature examining theoretically (e.g., Vayanos and Vila (2009)) and


                                             3
empirically (e.g., Greenwood and Vayanos (2014), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2012), Hamilton and Wu (2012)) determinants of demand for government debt. In par-
ticular, we add to the literature departing from the “expectations hypothesis” (e.g., Kut-
tner (2006)) of the term structure of interest rates, and provide evidence for alternative
explanations such as limited arbitrage and market segmentation. Our findings are com-
plementary to Lou et al. (2013) and Fleming and Liu (2016) who also utilize Treasury
auctions to explore how supply shocks interact with these forces. Second, we contribute
to the rapidly growing literature studying the effects of QE programs in the U.S. and
other countries (see Martin and Milas (2012) for a survey) and in particular the literature
studying how market segmentation interacts with QE programs (e.g. D’Amico and King
(2013)). While most of these studies focus on market movements around QE announce-
ments (e.g., Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), Chodorow-Reich (2014)), we
instead focus on market movements around Treasury auctions that can also give us an
opportunity to investigate market reactions to unexpected changes in demand for govern-
ment debt not only in crisis but also in normal times. Third, our paper is methodologically
related to earlier studies (e.g., Kuttner (2001), Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)) utilizing
high-frequency data to construct surprise movements in policy. Although we do not mea-
sure unexpected movements in policy, we construct shocks in private demand that inform
us about how markets can react to changes in policy.


2     Data and Institutional Details
In this section we describe the primary sources of our data and present basic statis-
tics. First, we describe the U.S. Treasury auctions for U.S. government notes and bonds
(coupon-bearing nominal securities). Second, we describe the details of futures contracts
for these Treasury securities.


2.1    Primary Market for Treasury Securities
The Treasury sells newly issued securities to the public on a regular basis through auctions.
Currently, 2-, 3-, 5- and 7-year notes are auctioned monthly. 10-year notes and 30-year
bonds are auctioned in February, May, August and November with reopenings in the other
8 months. The frequency of auctions evolved over time. For example, 30-year bonds were
not issued between 1999 and 2006 and were issued only twice a year between 1993 and
1999.
   There are two types of bids: noncompetitive and competitive. Noncompetitive bidders
agree to accept the terms settled at the auction, and are typically limited to $5 million per
bidder. Competitive bidders submit the amount they would like to purchase and the price
(the interest rate) at which they would like to make the purchase. For each competitive


                                             4
bidder, the submitted amount cannot be greater than 35% of the amount offered at the
auction.
    Auction participants include primary dealers, other non-primary brokers and dealers,
investment funds (for example, pension, hedge, mutual), insurance companies, depository
institutions, foreign and international entities (governmental and private), the Federal
Reserve (System Open Market Account), and individuals. These participants are classified
into three groups. The first group is Primary Dealers (brokers and banks) that trade on
their accounts with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. This group typically buys the
largest share of auctioned debt and is required to participate in every Treasury auction.
The second group is Direct Bidders: non-primary dealers submitting bids for their own
proprietary accounts. The third group is Indirect Bidders who submit competitive bids
via a direct submitter, including Foreign and International Monetary Authorities placing
bids through the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.1
    Additionally, the Treasury divides investors into the following classes: Investment
Funds (mutual funds, money market funds, hedge funds, money managers, and invest-
ment advisors); Pension and Retirement Funds and Insurance Companies (pension and
retirement funds, state and local pension funds, life insurance companies, casualty and
liability insurance companies, and other insurance companies); Depository Institutions
(banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions, and commercial bank investment
accounts); Individuals (individuals, partnerships, personal trusts, estates, non-profit and
tax-exempt organizations, and foundations); Dealers and Brokers (primary dealers, other
commercial bank dealer departments, and other non-bank dealers and brokers); Foreign
and International (private foreign entities, non-private foreign entities placing tenders ex-
ternal of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY), and official foreign entities
placing tenders through FRBNY); Federal Reserve System (the Federal Reserve Banks
System Open Market Account (SOMA)); Other (represents the residual from categories
not specified in investor class descriptions above). Fleming (2007) describes in greater
detail the breakdown by types and class of bidders.
    As detailed in Figure 2, there are four stages of a Treasury auction:2

1. Announcement: A few days before an auction, the Treasury releases all the pertinent
   information regarding the upcoming auction. An announcement includes security in-
   formation (maturity, CUSIP identifier, schedule of coupon payments, etc.) as well as
   1
      Additionally the Federal Reserve System purchases securities for its System Open Market Account
(SOMA). Starting in 1997, the SOMA amount was changed from being listed within the announced
offering amount to being additions to the announced offering amount. That is, if the Treasury auctions
$15 billion in bonds and the Federal Reserve would like to purchase $1 billion in the auction, the Treasury
issues $16 billion in bonds. This change was made so that the Treasury would be able to provide better
information to the market about the amount of securities actually available for sale to the public.
    2
      See Driessen (2016) for details on the design of Treasury auctions. Garbade (2007) provides historical
details regarding the manner in which the Treasury has conducted auctions.



                                                     5
   the amount offered, the bidding closing times, which class of bidders can participate,
   and other information describing the rules of the auction.
   Figure 3 presents a typical announcement. At this auction, the Treasury offers $16
   billion in 30-year bonds. This is a new auction (that is, the Treasury does not reopen a
   previous auction) with the maximum award (that is, maximum allocation to a bidder)
   of $5.6 billion.

2. Bidding: After the announcement, individuals and institutions may submit bids up
   until the closing times of the auction. The announcement in Figure 3 stipulated that
   non-competitive bids should be submitted by 12:00 p.m., while the deadline for com-
   petitive bids is 1:00 p.m.

3. Results: Most Treasury note and bond auctions close at 1:00 p.m. Competitive bids
   are accepted in ascending order (in terms of yields) after the auction closes until the
   quantity meets the amount offered minus the amount of non-competitive bids. All
   bidders receive the same yield as the highest accepted bid.3 Once the auction closes
   and the winning bids are determined, the information regarding the results is released
   immediately. Besides the winning yield, the Treasury announces various aggregate
   statistics regarding the bidding. Beginning in the early 2000s, auction results are
   released within minutes of the close of the auction (see Garbade and Ingber (2005)).
   Figure 4 presents a typical announcement about auction results, which corresponds
   to the auction announcement presented in Figure 3. The demand (tendered) for the
   security was $33.3 billion, most of the bids came from primary dealers ($23.7 billion),
   $489.9 million was bought by the Federal Reserve (SOMA), and a relatively low amount
   was bought via non-competitive bids ($14.8 million). The “bid-to-cover”, the ratio
   of all bids received to all bids accepted, was $33.3/$16.0=2.08. The interest rate,
   corresponding to the winning yield, was set at 3.75 percent per year.

4. Issuance: A few days after the close of an auction, the Treasury delivers the securities
   and charges the winning bidders for payment of the security. At this point the winning
   bidders can hold the security to maturity and receive coupon payments, or sell the
   security on the secondary market.

   Data from the announcements and results of every auction since late 1979 are available
from TreasuryDirect.gov. Data regarding amounts accepted and tendered by bidder type
(Primary Dealer, Direct, and Indirect) are available starting in 2003. Additionally, the
Treasury provides information regarding allotment by investor class (Investment Funds,
Individuals, etc) starting in 2000.
  3
   Between 1970 and 1992, Treasury did not charge a uniform price. Instead, allocation of bonds was
made at the individual yields stipulated by the bidders.


                                                6
2.2     Treasury Futures
We use Treasury futures prices in order to construct market-based measures of demand
surprises occurring during Treasury auctions. Treasury futures are standardized contracts
that obligate the seller to deliver a valid Treasury security to the buyer at a later date.
Futures contracts for 30-year Treasury bonds were introduced in 1977, followed later by
10-year, 5-year, and 2-year Treasury note futures. Treasury futures currently trade on the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), and intraday tick-level data are available starting
in 1995. The market for Treasury futures is deep: the average daily volume of trade in
2012 was more than 2 million contracts with more than $100 billion of notional value.
    The futures contracts close in March, June, September, and December. We focus on
the “closest” contract, i.e. the contract that closes within 1-3 months as these are by far
the most traded. For example, in February we use the March expiry, while in March we
use the June expiry. Although contracts that close in a given month can still be traded,
the volume of trades is substantially lower.
    Note that futures are not tied to any specific bond issue (CUSIP). Each futures contract
allows for a range of deliverable Treasury securities. 2-year futures contracts allow for
delivery of Treasury notes with remaining maturity between 1-year 9-months to 2 years;
5-year futures allow for remaining maturity between 4-year 2-months to 5-year 3-months;
10-year futures allow for remaining maturity between 6-year 6-months to 10-years; and
30-year futures allow for delivery of Treasury bonds with remaining maturity of at least
15 years.4 In principle any permissible Treasury security can be delivered into a futures
contract, but as explained in Lauszweski et al. (2014) in practice a so-called “cheapest to
deliver” (CTD) security emerges for a given futures contract. Although which Treasury
security is used for payment can vary over time, this variation happens at relatively low
frequencies (weekly or monthly) and therefore our analysis at high frequencies should not
be materially affected by this peculiarity of Treasury futures contracts.
    Because futures cannot be matched to a specific CUSIP, we link a given auction to
Treasury futures using the maturity offered in the auction. For example, if the Trea-
sury auctions 7-year notes, we use the 10-year futures contract which allows delivery of
securities maturing in at least 6.5 years years and no more than 10 years. While this
linking introduces a mismatch in terms of maturities, the difference between the matu-
rity of matched futures contracts and the maturity of the auctioned government debt is
relatively small.
   4
    The 30-year futures contract is also known as the “classic T-Bond” future. This contract originally
allowed for delivery of bonds with remaining maturity between 15 years and 30 years. In 2009, the CME
Group introduced “Ultra T-Bond Futures” which uses Treasury bonds with remaining maturity of at
least 25 years but no more than 30 years, and changed the range of deliverable maturities to the classic
contract to bonds with remaining maturity between 15 years and 25 years. While the “Ultra” futures
contract provides a better match for long maturities, the time series for the contract is relatively short
and the volume of trades is small relative to the other longer-running futures. For these reasons we use
the “Classic T-Bond Futures” to ensure consistency over time.


                                                    7
    We use Treasury futures prices for a number of reasons. First and foremost, Treasury
futures provide a natural market-based measure of unexpected shifts in Treasury prices.
Further, Treasury futures trade on a standardized exchange rather than over the counter.
Another option would be to use “when-issued” prices of the Treasury securities being
auctioned. Although this option has the benefit of matching perfectly the security being
auctioned, the downside is that the when-issued market systematically trades at lower
yields than the winning yield at the auction (see e.g. Fleming and Liu (2016)).5


2.3     Summary Statistics
In our analysis we focus on Treasury note and bond auctions. We exclude inflation
protected securities (TIPS), floating rate notes (FRNs), cash management bills (CMBs),
and callable bonds (the last of which was issued in 1984), because these securities have
different structural arrangements than simple coupon-bearing nominal securities. We also
exclude Treasury bills (zero-coupon securities with maturity one year or less) because the
QE programs mainly bought long-term nominal U.S. government debt.6 Further, Treasury
futures contracts exist for 2-year, 5-year, 10-year, and 30-year nominal Treasury notes and
bonds, but not for shorter term bills.
     Figure 5 plots the number of note and bond auctions per year in our sample, broken
up by term length. The number of auctions is relatively stable throughout the 1980s to
mid 1990s. In the face of declining government debt, the number of auctions temporarily
fell in the late 1990s and early 2000s, which also coincides with the termination of new
issuances of 30-year bonds. After the Great Recession, the number of auctions increased
significantly.
     Table 1 presents summary statistics for note and bond auctions between 1979 and
2015, and the subsample 1995-2015 for which we have intraday Treasury futures prices.
Since 1995, a typical offering is about $20 billion which generates more than $50 billion in
demand so that the bid-to-cover ratio is approximately 2.6. The largest source of demand
for Treasuries is primary dealers (their bid-to-cover ratio is ≈2) but other types of bidders
also account a large fraction of auction offerings. Primary dealers purchase approximately
60 percent of auctioned Treasuries with the rest split equally between investment funds
and foreign buyers.
     There is considerable variation in the offered amounts (standard deviation is ≈$9
billion) as well as the level and composition of demand (standard deviation for the bid-to-
cover ratio is ≈0.5 and the standard deviation of bid-to-cover ratio for primary dealers is
0.35). In our sample of Treasury note and bond auctions, the median maturity is 5 years.
   5
     In 2015, the U.S. Department of Justice launched a probe to investigate whether various financial
companies (most of them are primary dealers of U.S. Treasury securities) participated in a conspiracy to
manipulate the “when issued” market for Treasuries.
   6
     For example, between November 3, 2010 and June 29, 2011 (QE2), the Fed bought $750 billion in
Treasury securities, of which TIPS purchases were only approximately $26 billion.

                                                   8
The winning yield (“high yield”) is on average close to 3.2 percent per year with standard
deviation of 1.9 percentage points. The distribution of submitted bids tends to be fairly
compressed: the high-median yield spread is approximately 3 basis points with standard
deviation of 2 basis points. However, on some occasions the spread can be as high as 10
basis points.7


3     Quantifying Demand Shocks
In this section, we describe how we measure the surprise movements in prices of Treasure
futures around Treasury auctions and document properties of these surprises. Our key
assumption is that within small enough windows around the close and release of Treasury
auction results, shifts in the prices of Treasury futures reflect unexpected changes in
market beliefs about the demand for Treasuries with a specific maturity. Indeed, since the
Treasury announces an offered amount well before an auction happens thus fixing supply,
between the announcement and close of the auction futures prices should move only in
response to changes in demand conditions. By focusing our analysis on a narrow window
around the close time of an auction, we likely isolate variation only due to unexpected
shifts in demand for this specific auction. As a result, we can identify a demand shock
for a specific maturity and then use this shock to trace the reaction of Treasury futures
prices for the given maturity and for other maturities as well as reactions for other parts
of the financial market.


3.1     Shock Construction
      (m)    (m)
Let Pt,pre , Pt,post be the futures prices before and after the close of the auction on date t
with maturity m = 2, 5, 10, 30. We measure the surprise movements in the futures prices
as:
                                    (m)         (m)         (m)
                                  Dt = log Pt,post − log Pt,pre .                          (1)

These surprises are computed for all maturities at date t irrespective of what maturity is
                                                            (2Y )
being auctioned on date t. In other words, we compute Dt          (surprise movement in the
2-year Treasury futures) not only for auctions that offer 2-year government notes but also
for auctions that offer Treasuries with other maturities.
    For all auctions, Pt,pre is the last price observed 30 minutes before the close of the
auction. For auctions taking place between 1995 and 1999, Pt,post is the first price observed
1.5 hours after the close of the auction; after 2000, we use the first price observed 30
minutes after the close of the auction. The Treasury began releasing results much faster
   7
     Between 1999-2015 when the data is available, the Fed purchased Treasuries through SOMA in
approximately two thirds of auctions; when doing so they purchased an average of $2.3 billion (standard
deviation of $2 billion).



                                                  9
in the early 2000s, but in the 1990s auction results frequently took over an hour after the
close of the auction to be released. Unlike the close of the auction, the time at which the
results are released is not reported by the Treasury. However, wire reports from Bloomberg
allow for an upper bound on the release time. Note that we use small symmetric windows
around the events to eliminate predictable movements in prices identified in Lou et al.
(2013) and Fleming and Liu (2016). Indeed, Fleming and Liu (2016) show that these
predictable movements extend to the hours before and after the auction, but near the
close of the auction and release of the results the price movements are reactions to the
surprises regarding the demand observed at the auction. Hence, the use of small intraday
windows is key to identifying unanticipated demand shocks.
    Figure 6 plots the time series of our constructed shock measures, with summary statis-
                                                                                  (m)
tics presented in Table 2. Panel A of Table 2 reports summary statistics for Dt shocks
during auction dates (our main sample). The mean values of the shocks are close to zero
suggesting that surprises are not systematic and do not contain predictable movements.
                                (m)
The standard deviation of Dt increases in maturity m. To verify that these shocks are
not spurious we also report (Panel B of Table 2) movements in futures prices on non-
auction days (for days without auctions, the same “pre” and “post” windows are used as
auctions in the same year). In all cases, the variance of the shocks on auction dates is
larger than on non-auction dates. This pattern is consistent with auction results indeed
influencing futures prices.
    The table also reports moments for the zero lower bound (ZLB) and pre-ZLB periods.
The variability of surprises for short maturities is considerably smaller during the ZLB
period (December 2008 to the end of our sample) than outside the ZLB period (1995 to
December 2008). For longer maturities, the volatility is similar for ZLB and pre-ZLB
periods. However, these statistics mask important heterogeneity. As seen in Figure 6,
during the Great Recession the volatility of surprises was elevated but then we observe
strong compression for short maturities since the economy enters recovery. This finding is
consistent with Swanson and Williams (2014) documenting that while the Fed’s policies
during the Great Recession compressed fluctuations of short-term rates, the behavior of
long-term rates is still relatively normal.
    Note that the shocks are in terms of futures (log) prices. Although futures contracts
do not have a natural definition of yield, an approximate yield can be computed using
the Treasury securities delivered at the end of the contract. Using this approximation, a
one standard deviation change in the log price of each contract is equivalent to a 2.0 to
2.5 basis point change in yield for each contract.8
    Additionally, Table 2 documents that price changes of Treasury futures strongly co-
move across maturities, with the strongest correlations between adjacent maturities. For
  8
    For details on how to convert between Treasury futures prices and the yield on the corresponding
“cheapest-to-deliver” Treasury security, see Lauszweski et al. (2014).


                                                10
                                                         (10Y )       (30Y )
example, on auction dates the correlation between Dt           and Dt      is 0.922 while the
                        (2Y )       (30Y )
correlation between Dt        and Dt       is 0.672. Note that the correlations are generally
                              (2Y )
stronger between short (Dt ) and longer maturities during the non-ZLB period than
                                                                     (5Y )   (10Y )      (30Y )
during the ZLB period. At the same time, the comovement of Dt , Dt                  and Dt
does not appear to be materially influenced by the binding ZLB. These correlations sug-
gest that shocks to a given segment of the maturity spectrum generally affect not only
prices of that particular segment but also prices in other parts of the spectrum, but there
is heterogeneity across time in the strength of the correlation. This is a key result, which
we explore in detail in Section 4.


3.2    Narrative Evidence
To provide a better understanding of what forces are behind these surprise movements, we
plot the 30-year Treasury futures price during two 30-year Treasury bond auctions (Figure
7). The first is from an auction on August 11, 2011. Futures prices were relatively stable
in the lead up to the close of the auction, but after the close and release of the auction
results prices dropped sharply and immediately. The Financial Times wrote:

      “An auction of 30-year US Treasury bonds saw weak demand...bidders such as
      pension funds, insurers and foreign governments shied away. ‘There’s not too
      many ways you can slice this one, it was a very poorly bid auction.’ ”

    The second is from December 9, 2010. This auction was a reopening of previously
issued 30-year bonds from the month prior. Once again, the futures prices are relatively
stable in the lead up to the close of the auction. After the auction closes and results are
released, prices immediately spiked up. The Financial Times wrote:

      “Large domestic financial institutions and foreign central banks were big buyers
      at an auction of 30-year US Treasury bonds on Thursday. ‘Investors weren’t
      messing around...You don’t get the opportunity to buy large amounts of paper
      outside the auctions and ‘real money’ were aggressive buyers.’ ”

    We interpret the two example auctions as follows. Before the auction closes, the market
information set consists of all the supply information, both for outstanding securities as
well as the amount on offer for the current 30-year auction. The 30-year futures prices
reflect beliefs about the expected path of short-term interest rates, inflation expectations,
and demand for long-term Treasury securities. After the auction closes and the results
are released, the only update to the information set is the news regarding the bidding that
took place in the auction, which solely reflects demand for Treasury debt. The change in
the 30-year futures price reflects this unexpected shift in beliefs about Treasury demand.
The contemporaneous articles in the financial press further suggest that the important
driver of the demand shifts arise from foreign and domestic institutional investors. The

                                              11
last example also highlights why auctions can have important elements of price discovery:
when investors have to purchase large amounts of Treasuries to meet their needs, they
may prefer to use auctions rather than attempting to make substantial transactions on
the secondary market. As a result, auctions reveal new information about demand.9


3.3     Demand Determinants
                               (m)
Our assumption is that Dt captures unexpected shifts in the demand for Treasuries.
We further hypothesize that these shocks are particularly driven by demand shifts arising
from institutional investors. Figure 7 and the corresponding reporting in the financial
                                                                            (m)
press provided some narrative evidence in this direction. However, Dt is a market-
based measure and hence is an equilibrium response to the underlying shifts in demand.
Because the mapping from shifts in demand to changes in futures prices may be complex,
it is important to establish that the market interpretation of changes in demand is actually
related to observable movements in demand.
     One of the most commonly reported statistics in the financial press is the bid-to-
cover ratio. It is a natural measure of the demand at a given auction (the higher is the
bid-to-cover ratio, the higher is demand). The bin scatter plot in Figure 8 shows that
the bid-to-cover ratio (after controlling for its four own lags) is a strong predictor of our
measure of demand shocks. Table 3 presents more formal evidence by regressing our
shocks on measures of demand reported at the auction:

                                     (m)                   (m)      (m)
                                 Dt        = α(m) + β (m) Xt     + εt                              (2)

This specification is estimated separately for auctions corresponding to the Treasury fu-
tures maturity groups in columns (1)-(4). For example, column (1) restricts the sample
to include only auctions of 2-year notes and column (2) restricts the sample to include
only auctions of notes with (2,5] year maturity. Column (5) reports results when we pool
across maturities and impose that β (m) is the same across maturities m. To facilitate the
                                             (m)
comparison of the results, we standardize Dt in these regressions to have zero mean and
unit variance.
    Panel A of Table 3 estimates equation (2) using the current bid-to-cover ratio as well
as four lags of the bid-to-cover ratio (winsorized at the 1% level). These coefficients may
                                    (m)
be interpreted as the reaction of Dt surprises to an innovation in the bid-to-cover ratio,
and correspond to the slopes of the regression lines in Figure 8. The results show that
                                                        (m)
the bid-to-cover ratio is positively associated with Dt and the effect of an increase in
the bid-to-cover ratio is statistically and economically significant. For example, a one
   9
    We could not find any reference in the press about monetary policy (or leaked information about
future monetary policy) being a source of unexpected movements. Consistent with this observation, we
do not find any statistical power of surprise movements in Treasury futures around Treasury auctions to
predict future monetary policy.

                                                    12
standard deviation (0.5) increase in the bid-to-cover ratio (after controlling for its own
four lags) in a Treasury auction for 30-year bonds raises the price of the 30-year Treasury
futures by 2.119 × 0.5 = 1.06 standard deviations (this corresponds to a 0.26 log point
increase in the price of the Treasury futures or an approximate change of 2.5 basis points
in the yield).10
    Panel B repeats the regressions from Panel A, but explicitly decomposes the bid-to-
cover ratio into “expected” and “surprise” components. For these regressions, we first
estimate a univariate AR(4) model of the bid-to-cover ratio, separately for each maturity
group. We then construct the fitted (expected) and residual (surprise) values of the bid-
                               (m)
to-cover ratio, and regress Dt on these expected and surprise components. We find
that the variation in our demand shocks is determined by the surprise component of the
bid-to-cover ratio, and is unaffected by expected movements in the bid-to-cover ratio.
    In order to assess sensitivity of futures prices to changes in demand by bidder type,
Panel C reports estimates of equation (2) using the bid-to-cover ratio of Indirect Bid-
ders, Direct Bidders, and Primary Dealers. The sensitivity of surprises D to unexpected
demand of indirect bidders increases with maturity. For example, a unit increase in the
bid-to-cover ratio for indirect bidders raises the price of 2-year Treasury futures by 2.7
standard deviations and the price of 30-year Treasury futures by 8.5 standard devia-
tions. For direct bidders, the sensitivity is highest for short maturities. The sensitivity
to changes in the bid-to-cover ratio coming from primary dealers for 2- and 5-year Trea-
sury futures is smaller than the sensitivity for 10-year Treasury futures and greater than
the sensitivity for 30-year Treasury futures. When we pool across maturities, demand of
direct and especially indirect bidders generates ceteris paribus more variation in futures
prices than demand of primary dealers.
    Panel D uses additional investor allotment data from the Treasury to break down the
amount accepted by types of bidders: Investment Funds, Foreign, Dealers, and Miscel-
laneous. Since the fractions by group add up to one, we set Dealers as the leave-out
category. The estimated coefficients suggest that as the fraction accepted for investment
                                        (m)
funds and foreign buyers increases, Dt increases too. The coefficients for the Miscella-
neous category are generally smaller and less robust.
                                                                 (m)
    These results indicate that, indeed, a key determinant of Dt surprises is movements
in demand conditions as proxied by the bid-to-cover ratio. Furthermore, we observe
that the demand from institutional investors is important in accounting for variation in
  (m)                                                                                   (m)
Dt . In subsequent analyses, we will use this strong relationship to instrument Dt
with unexpected movements in the bid-to-cover ratio so that for our estimates we exploit
variation due to changes in demand rather than variation due to fluctuations in market
conditions.
  10
    We found that controlling for other variables (e.g., policy uncertainty constructed in Baker et al.
(2016)) in equation (2) does not materially change our estimates.



                                                  13
3.4    Comovement Across Markets
We now turn to analyzing how our demand shocks for Treasuries propagate across other
financial markets. Given the relatively high degree of correlation across our demand
                                                                      (m)
shocks, in the following analysis we will find it useful to compress Dt into a single
                                                       (m)
summary statistics: the first principal component of Dt . This time series captures the
general movement of the yield curve in response to demand shocks for government debt
with various maturities. The first principal component explains 88 percent of variation
in our shock measures. We denote the first principal component by Dt , which has zero
mean and unit variance.
    We measure the impact of demand shocks on other asset prices by running simple
bivariate regressions:
                                    yt = γ + φDt + ut                               (3)

where yt is the change in the price or yield of some asset on auction date t. Where available,
we use intraday changes within the same time window as our shocks Dt . However we also
examine changes at the daily frequency, partly due to data limitations but also because
daily changes may pick up responses in other asset markets that don’t occur immediately.
A strong correlation between Dt and yt signals either that Dt and yt have a common
determinant (e.g., changes in inflation expectations alter the behavior of bids in Treasury
auctions and change prices of inflation swaps) or that yt is a channel of propagation for
Dt shocks (e.g., unexpected prices in an auction result in repricing of Treasuries in the
secondary market). To preserve space, we focus on the OLS estimates of equation (3)
and report very similar instrumental variable estimates (using unexpected changes in the
bid-to-cover ratio as instrumental variables) in Appendix Table B1.
    Panel A of Table 4 reports results for debt markets. The dependent variable in the
first two rows are the intraday change in the Exchange Traded Funds (ETF) “TLT” and
“SHY”, which track Barclays Capital U.S. 20+ Year and 1-3 Year Treasury Bond indices,
respectively. The third row of the panel is the intraday change in the ETF “LQD”, which
tracks the iBoxx Liquid Investment Grade Index. The coefficient should be interpreted as
the impact in log points of a one standard deviation change in Dt . In all cases we observe
a strong reaction to the Treasury demand shock, accounting for more than 50 percent of
variation observed in these ETF prices during the short windows around the close and
release of the Treasury auction results.
    The final row reports the results for the daily change in corporate bond yields, as
measured by Moody’s Aaa corporate yields. Consistent with the intraday results, the
negative coefficient implies that an increase in the price of Treasury futures (which means
that the yield on Treasuries falls) is associated with a decrease in the Aaa bond yields.
Specifically, a one standard deviation shock to Dt decreases the Aaa bond rate by 2.3 basis
points. However, using daily rather than intraday changes as the dependent variable leads


                                             14
to a decline in R2 s, which underscore the benefits of using intraday data.
    As expected, yields in the secondary market react strongly to the demand shock. Fur-
thermore, this reaction is persistent in spite of the fact that our shocks are constructed
from intraday movements. Figure 9 plots the contemporaneous reaction of 10-year Trea-
sury spot rates (top panel) and the Aaa corporate bond yields (bottom panel) to our
shocks Dt , as well as the reactions up to 60 days in the future. The reaction remains
strongly statistically significant nearly 1 month later, while the point estimate is remark-
ably stable even 2 months later.
    Panel B of Table 4 reports results for equities. Rows 1 and 2 report the results for
the intraday change in ETFs tracking the S&P 500 and the Russell 2000 indices. Rows 3
and 4 are for the daily changes in these indices. Although the estimated slope is generally
negative, the quantitative significance of shocks on equities is small: these shocks account
for a tiny share of variation in equities.
    Panel C of Table 4 presents results for inflation expectations and commodities. Rows 1
and 2 report the results for the daily change in inflation expectations implied by inflation
swaps at the 10-year and 2-year horizon. We observe that demand shocks for Treasuries
do not generate significant movements in inflation expectations. To explore the robustness
of this finding, we examine price reactions of two additional assets which are often used
to hedge against inflation. The dependent variable in row 3 is the intraday change in the
ETF “GLD,” which tracks the price of Gold Bullion. Row 4 reports results for the daily
change in the S&P Total Commodity Index. For neither of these variables do we find a
significant correlation with Dt . To further explore sensitivity of inflation expectations to
demand shocks Dt , we plot reactions of inflation swap rates at all available maturities in
Appendix Figure B1. We find that the change in the inflation expectation “yield” curve
exhibits little reaction to Dt . We find a similar lack of sensitivity of inflation expectations
                          (m)
when we use specific Dt instead of summary series Dt . These results suggest that the
demand shocks we measure at auctions are not driven by some underlying change in
inflation expectations. Moreover, these shifts in demand do not propagate to changes
in inflation expectations. This result is intuitive, as changes in demand of institutional
investors or foreign monetary authorities are unlikely to generate future fluctuations in
the rate of U.S. inflation.
    Panel D of Table 4 reports results for various bond spreads and credit default swaps.
The first row reports results for the daily change in the Moody’s Baa-Aaa corporate yield
spread. Rows 2 and 3 use daily changes in two CDS indices from Credit Market Analysis
(CMA) that track the automotive industry (a highly cyclical industry) and banks (a
proxy for the financial sector). These three measures proxy for expectations about future
output and market conditions. We find that surprise movements Dt have no tangible
effect on these measures, consistent with the view that Dt shocks do not capture superior
information of Treasury auction bidders about future recessions and the like. In row 4, we


                                              15
document that Dt shocks are not associated with VIX (a measure of market perceptions
about future volatility). Hence, it is unlikely that there is a common force that moves Dt
and volatility or that Dt shocks propagate via volatility. Finally, we find (row 5) that Dt
shocks are not significantly related to the 3-month LIBOR-Overnight Index Swap (OIS)
spread (a measure of short-term liquidity risk) so that liquidity fluctuations are unlikely
channels or determinants of Dt . In short, as with the case of inflation expectations,
these null results suggest that our demand shocks are not being driven by changes in
expectations regarding output, liquidity, default risk, or volatility
     The results of Tables 3 and 4 allow for some broad observations. First, given our high-
frequency approach and the structure of Treasury auctions, we know that our constructed
shocks are only driven by new information regarding the demand side of the market.
Second, these shifts are largely driven by shifts in the demand that arises from institutional
investors. Third, as expected these demand shocks from the primary market propagate
not only to the secondary market, but also to the corporate debt market. Finally, these
demand shifts are not driven by some underlying shift in macroeconomic expectations
(flight to quality, inflation expectations, etc.) that may move demand for Treasuries at all
maturities. But it still remains the case that a variety of factors can generate movements
      (m)                                  (m)
in Dt and one should not interpret Dt as structural shocks.11 Despite this limitation,
                      (m)
the properties of Dt shocks allow us to study how unexpected demand interventions at
specific maturities propagate to other maturities.


4        Channels of Treasury Demand Shocks
                                  (m)
Although demand shocks Dt strongly comove with one another, the responses are not
uniform across maturities. To see the heterogeneity in reactions, we use daily changes
in zero-coupon spot rates as constructed in Gürkaynak et al. (2007), which provide more
granularity to the analysis (recall that we have only four maturities in Treasury futures
contracts while the yield curve utilizes information for many more maturities but is avail-
able only at the daily frequency). Figure 10 plots “responses” of changes in the yield curve
for auctions on two dates. On the first date (August 11, 2011), there was unexpectedly
weak demand (as measured by changes in futures prices) during an auction of 30-year
Treasuries. We observe that, although the whole yield curve shifted up, the strongest
reaction was at long maturities. On the second date (February 6, 2007), there was an
auction of 3-year government notes, and demand during this auction was unexpectedly
    11
    To highlight this caveat, we plot sensitivities for select asset prices estimated over rolling windows in
Figure B2. The sensitivity of LQD prices, Aaa interest rates, and Baa-Aaa spread is relatively stable over
time. On the other hand, the sensitivity of S&P500 flips sign from positive in the late 1990s to generally
negative since the early 2000s, which is consistent with Campbell et al. (2014). Although we do not have
long-time series of inflation expectations (or assets used for hedging against inflation), we observe that
during the Great Recession in the U.S., inflation expectations and Dt moved in opposite directions while
in normal time these two series are approximately uncorrelated.


                                                     16
strong. The whole yield curve shifted down, but the strongest reaction was at the 8-
year maturity. These two cases illustrate that the “propagation” of demand shocks across
maturities does not amount to simple upward or downward shifts.
    This raises the question: to what extent do Treasury demand shocks have local effects?
In other words, does the location of the demand shock in maturity space matter? And are
the impacts state-dependent? The two auctions in Figure 10 provide suggestive evidence
that the location can in fact matter. In order to better characterize the impact of these
demand shocks, we now examine the impact on the term structure of Treasury rates
through the lens of the preferred habitat model of investor demand. The key idea is the
existence of “clientèle” investors who have idiosyncratic demand for Treasuries of specific
maturities. The other side of the market are risk-averse arbitrageurs, who smooth out
these demand shocks. Using a version of the model from Vayanos and Vila (2009), we
create qualitative predictions of what happens to the term structure when hit with demand
shocks to various parts of the maturity space during different economic regimes.


4.1    Preferred Habitat – Numerical Exercise
In our numerical exercises, we consider a “three-factor” version of the Vayanos and Vila
(2009) model consisting of the instantaneous rate, and two demand factors that are oth-
erwise equivalent, but are located in the “short” and “long” ends of the maturity space.
We then solve the model and study the impact of each demand shock. A key element of
the model is the level of risk aversion of the arbitrageurs, hence we study the reactions as
risk aversion increases from very low to very high. We consider the case where the “short”
shock is concentrated at the 3-year maturity, while the “long” shock is at 20 years (cor-
responding to the average length of short-term and long-term auctions in our empirical
section). See Appendix A for details regarding the model and parameterization.
    Figure 11 shows the change of the term structure in response to the short (top panel)
and long (bottom panel) demand factors, as the risk aversion of arbitrageurs increases
from low (lighter lines) to high (darker lines). In the case of low risk aversion, the impact
is very similar: rates fall across the entire term structure, but the impact peaks at the
short end of the yield curve, then drops off as the maturity increases. The only difference
between the impacts of the short and long shocks is that the long shock has a larger
impact; but the shape of the response is nearly identical.
    However, as risk aversion increases, the responses become quite different depending on
the location of the demand shock. A shock to the short demand factor sharply decreases
short-term rates; but this impact dies off quickly and even turns slightly positive at the
long end of the term structure. On the other hand, the long demand factor decreases
both short and longer term rates, but the impact is much stronger in the long end of the
term structure.


                                             17
    These results confirm that some of the findings of Vayanos and Vila (2009) for the
limiting cases of no risk aversion and infinite risk aversion also hold for intermediate cases
of risk aversion. As they explain, the intuition for these results is as follows: when arbi-
trageurs are perfectly risk-neutral, demand shocks have no impact as the expected path
of the instantaneous rate is the only determinant of the term structure. As arbitrageurs
become somewhat risk averse, shocks to the instantaneous rate continue to be much more
influential than demand shocks. But now arbitrageurs are concerned about instantaneous
rate risk. Every bond is sensitive to instantaneous rate risk, and the market price of this
source of risk is determined in equilibrium by the portfolio allocations of arbitrageurs. Be-
cause demand shocks from preferred habitat investors cause changes in these portfolios,
even in cases of very low risk aversion these demand shocks do affect the term structure
by altering the price of instantaneous rate risk.
    What is the impact of the location of the demand shock? Consider an increase in
preferred habitat demand. Regardless of the location of the shift, this causes arbitrageurs
to sell bonds, reducing their exposure to instantaneous rate risk. Hence they require lower
expected returns to hold bonds, pushing down rates. The location of the demand shock
determines which bonds arbitrageurs sell; since these bonds have different sensitivity
to instantaneous rate risk, this determines the magnitude of the overall reduction in
rates. But regardless of the location of the demand shift, the bonds that respond the
most are those most sensitive to instantaneous rate risk, which depends only on the
stochastic properties of the instantaneous rate and demand shocks. In other words, when
arbitrageurs have low risk aversion, the relative impact of short and long demand shocks
to the term structure is roughly the same; only the overall size of the impact is affected
by the location of the demand shock. In our calibration, for low values of risk aversion
this leads to the peak impact occurring around m ≈ 4. This could be lower or higher
with different parameterizations, but remains largely independent of the location of the
shock in maturity space.
    As arbitrageur risk aversion increases, demand shocks become more prominent as
additional sources of risk. Arbitrageurs try to limit their exposure to these sources of
risk, leading to less propagation from the location of the demand shock to other parts of
the term structure. This implies that the term structure response is more localized to
each demand shock as arbitrageurs choose not to integrate bond markets across maturities.
For example, following a demand shock for short-term bonds, all else equal arbitrageurs
would like to buy longer term bonds to hedge the risk arising from the short demand
shock, leading to upward pressure on prices (and downward pressure on spot rates). But
this changes their exposure to the long demand shock as well, and this countervailing
force leads arbitrageurs to sell sufficiently long-term bonds. As seen in the top panel
of Figure 11, when risk aversion is sufficiently high this countervailing force can become
strong enough to lead to an increase in rates for very long-term bonds.


                                             18
    In summary, this illustrative exercise indicates several qualitative predictions. When
risk aversion is low, the impact of an increase in demand for either short-term or long-
term debt causes a decrease in rates everywhere. Moreover, while the magnitude may
differ, the response to both demand factors are similarly shaped, peaking at intermediate
maturities and declining for very long-term maturities. Conversely, when risk aversion is
high, demand factors have a stronger local component: increases in demand for short-term
debt will have a maximal impact on shorter-term maturities, while long-term shocks will
peak at long-term maturities. Additionally, the response of long-term (short-term) rates
to long (short) demand shocks increases as risk aversion increases, respectively. Finally,
although the magnitude of responses is more ambiguous, when risk aversion is high we
expect the response of short-term rates to short demand shocks will be larger than to long
demand shocks; and vice versa for responses of long-term rates.


4.2     Empirical Results
Comparing the theoretical results from Figure 11 with Figure 10 suggest that, at least
during the auction in Panel A, the preferred habitat model with relatively high risk
aversion does a good job explaining the response of the term structure; Panel B is more
ambiguous. We now take a more rigorous approach to testing the predictions of our
numerical exercise.
    A key variable is a measure of risk aversion of arbitrageurs. We proxy this using the
measure of financial crises in the United States from Romer and Romer (2017).12 The
crisis index is a continuous measure derived from narrative sources to identify periods
of financial distress (higher values correspond to periods of more extreme financial cri-
sis). Besides identifying financial distress during the recent financial crisis, the measure
also identifies periods of distress in 1986, the early 1990s, and 1998 (Figure B3 in the
Appendix).
    In order to measure the impact of demand shocks on the entire term structure, we
estimate the following regression equations
                                                                                 
           (m)                          (m0 )                                 (m0 )      (m)
       ∆Rt       = Ct α(m,H) + β (m,H) Dt       + (1 − Ct ) α(m,L) + β (m,L) Dt       + εt          (4)

                                              (m)
for each maturity m = 1, . . . , 30. ∆Rt is the daily change in the zero-coupon spot
rate for the given maturity as measured by Gürkaynak et al. (2007). Ct is an indicator
  12
    He and Krishnamurthy (2013), Kyle and Xiong (2001) and others show how risk aversion can be
endogenously higher in times of crises. Note that in contrast to other popular measures of financial
stress (e.g., the Federal Reserve Board staff’s Financial Stress Index), the Romer-Romer index does
not use yields on Treasuries (outcome variables in our excercise) to identify stress/non-stress periods.
Additionally, rather than using a narrative measure of financial distress, we used a market-based proxy
for arbitrageur risk aversion. We define high risk aversion periods as those in which the “intermediary
capital ratio” described in He et al. (2016) is low (Appendix Figure B4), and find similar results.



                                                    19
variable that is equal to 1 when the Romer and Romer (2017) measure of financial crisis is
                                                                            (m0 )
non-zero. The coefficients β (m,L) capture the impact of demand factor Dt         at maturity
   0
m (our normalized intraday futures price shocks) during periods of low risk aversion;
similarly β (m,H) capture the impact during periods of high risk aversion. While our shock
measure is constructed at a higher intraday frequency, in order to capture the full extent
of how markets absorb these shocks we prefer to use these daily estimates of the yield
curve. To the extent that shocks are absorbed completely within smaller windows than a
day, using daily changes as an outcome variable simply adds noise to our estimates, but
shouldn’t result in any bias.
     A straightforward way in which to test the predictions of the preferred habitat model
is to estimate equation (4) in two separate subsamples: i ) days with short auctions; ii )
days with long auctions. In our baseline regression we break up auctions into 2-7 years
and 10-30 years. We choose the 10-year cutoff for long vs. short rather than 30-year
in order to have a more balanced sample; the results are robust to choosing different
cutoffs.13 Breaking up the auctions in this manner allows us to more closely pinpoint the
location of the demand shock in the maturity space, and ties closely with the numerical
exercise above.
                                            (m0 )
     For our measure of demand shocks Dt          on the right-hand-side of equation (4), in
our baseline results we take the same approach above and match each auction with the
(normalized) futures surprises of closest maturity (e.g. for 5-year auctions, use the 5-year
futures surprise). The β coefficients should be interpreted as the response of spot rates
for maturity m to a one standard deviation demand shock at maturity m0 on the day
when maturity m0 is auctioned.
     Figure 12 plots the low and high coefficients from the two subsamples (Appendix
Figure B5 plots p-values testing for equality of the coefficients). During periods of low
risk aversion, the impact of short and long demand shocks on the term structure closely
mirror one another. Both shocks decrease spot rates across the entire term structure, and
are hump-shaped. But when risk aversion is high, the short and long demand shocks have
differential impacts. Both shocks exhibit stronger local effects. For the long shock, the
impact is no longer hump-shaped as the impact continues to remain large as the maturity
increases. The magnitude is also considerably larger than the corresponding responses
during periods of low risk aversion. The impact of the short demand shock peaks at
intermediate rates and then begins declining; further, the magnitude is larger than the
corresponding response in periods of low risk aversion. Finally, when risk aversion is high,
the response of short-term rates to short demand shocks is larger than their response to
long demand shocks; and vice versa for the response of long-term rates.14
  13
     Consistent with our exercise in Section 4.1, the average maturities of “short” and “long” auctions are
3 and 20 years respectively.
  14
     A downside of using the yield curve data from Gürkaynak et al. (2007) is that idiosyncratic changes
along portions of the yield curve may be smoothed out. To address this concern, we repeat our empirical


                                                    20
     These results confirm the key predictions of our numerical exercise: during periods of
low risk aversion, short and long demand shocks have relatively similar impacts; and these
impacts peak at short to intermediate maturities. During periods of high risk aversion, the
impacts are more localized: the impact of short demand shocks peak at short maturities,
while the impact of long demand shocks peaks at the long end of the term structure. This
local effect is particularly strong for long-term demand shocks. We also find that the peak
responses for both short and long demand shocks are larger during periods of high risk
aversion than during periods of low risk aversion.
                                           (m0 )
     As discussed above, the shocks Dt           are equilibrium reactions of market prices to
changes in demand for Treasuries. As a result, these reactions may depend on market
conditions (specifically on whether financial markets are disrupted) so that measured
responses combine reactions to changes in demand and to how futures prices react to
changes in demand. To isolate the effect of changes in demand for Treasuries, we employ
unexpected changes in the bid-to-cover ratios for Treasury auctions as instruments for
   (m0 )                                                   (m0 )               (m0 )
Dt in equation (4). That is, we instrument Ct × Dt and (1 − Ct ) × Dt with Ct × bst
and (1−Ct )×bst , where bst is the surprise movement in the bid-to-cover ratio for a Treasury
auction at date t (as in Panel B of Table 3). This approach permits state-dependent
mappings from demand shocks to futures prices. Consistent with our earlier results, we
find that the unexpected changes in the bid-to-cover ratios are strong instruments for Dt
(first-stage F-statistics above 10). The IV estimates of estimated reactions of spot rates
(Figure 13) are similar to the OLS estimates (if anything, the responses during periods
of financial distress are larger in magnitude, although confidence bands are wider) thus
reassuring that our shocks Dt are good measures of the underlying demand shifts and
hence the OLS estimates are capturing the response of the yield curve to these demand
shifts.
     As a robustness check, rather than use demand shocks as identified by intraday Trea-
sury futures changes, we can also use the surprise component of the bid-to-cover ratio
directly as a proxy of demand shocks from the auctions themselves. We re-estimate equa-
tion (4) using bst in place of our demand shocks. Although the surprise component of the
bid-to-cover ratio is not as clean a measure of demand shocks, this allows us to check
the robustness of our results, as well as to expand the sample period to 1979-2015. Ap-
pendix Figure B7 plots the results using the same sample 1995-2015 as in Figure 12, while
Appendix Figure B9 uses the entire sample 1979-2015 (p-values are in Appendix Figures
B8 and B10, respectively). As expected, the standard errors are a bit wider, but the
qualitative responses are generally similar.
exercise but use security-level yield changes in the secondary market for Treasuries. In place of the
Gürkaynak et al. (2007) rate changes, we use the daily changes in the yields for Treasury notes and bonds
in the secondary market from CRSP. We can no longer trace out changes to zero-coupon rates at all
points along the maturity space, but by grouping together Treasuries of similar maturities we can test
for local demand shocks more directly. Appendix Table B2 confirms the findings from Figure 12.


                                                   21
   We also tried a number of additional empirical exercises, and find our results are
robust to a variety of different specifications, including different cutoffs for short-term
and long-term auctions and using different subsamples.15


5        Implications for QE
The responses of the yield curve to unexpected movements in demand during Treasury
auctions offer several lessons for how one should understand the workings of QE programs
implemented by the Fed and other central banks. For example, if the Fed is trying to
decrease long-term Treasury rates relative to shorter-term rates, our results suggest that
QE policies that directly purchase long-term Treasuries should be highly effective during
financial crises. But if the Fed is trying to move the entire term structure of interest
rates, during periods of high financial distress the Fed will have to be active in purchasing
Treasuries throughout the yield curve. Thus, programs in spirit of “Operation Twist” may
be an option because a central bank actively intervenes in multiple segments of the yield
curve during a crisis.
    As we move away from the most recent crisis, there have been discussions (see Blinder
et al. (2016)) about whether central banks will continue to use unconventional policies
in the future. Our results suggest that the impact of QE-style policies during non-crisis
periods will likely differ greatly from those observed during the crisis. To the extent risk
aversion is low and debt markets are more integrated, QE-type programs that attempt to
move long-term rates relative to short-term rates may fail. During “normal” times of low
risk aversion, the overall response of interest rates is less tied to the location of the shifts
in demand. While we still expect targeted purchases of long-term Treasury debt from
the Fed to reduce long-term rates, the largest declines may be for shorter term maturities
that are not directly purchased by the Fed.
    Interestingly, our results suggest that the Fed may have a menu of options in terms
of where it can intervene in the maturity space to hit the yield at a target maturity.
For example, suppose the Fed wishes to decrease 30-year Treasury rates by purchasing
$30 billion of notes and bonds. What is the benefit to targeting purchases in the longer
    15
      Dropping auctions that occurred during the weeks of QE announcements leads to nearly identical
results. In a handful of cases, auctions occur on the same days as FOMC announcements. Although our
intraday windows do not overlap with the FOMC announcements, we also re-did our regressions dropping
these dates, which leaves our results unchanged.
   We additionally highlight one more robustness specification which more closely matches our numerical
exercise. We take the first two principal components of our intraday shocks, Dt` and Dts , rotated such
                                 (30Y )
that Dts is uncorrelated with Dt        and normalized to have zero mean and unit variance. The first two
principal components explain 97 percent of variation in our shocks. For long-term auctions the shock is
Dt` ; similarly short-term auctions use Dts . In this way we have two distinct “short” and “long” demand
factors, which more closely matches our numerical exercise. Appendix Figure B11 plots these results
(p-values in Appendix Figure B12), and finds very similar results as the baseline specification. The only
difference is the response of long-term rates to short demand shocks falls more closely to zero.



                                                   22
end of the term structure? If the economy is not in a crisis and financial markets are
healthy, the answer is not much. Given the size of a typical Treasury note auction in
recent years, these $30 billion purchases represent a unit increase in the bid-to-cover. Our
estimates imply that if the purchases were for short-term securities (2-7 years), we would
expect to see an increase in our normalized demand shocks of 1.43 (standard error 0.19)
and an ensuing decrease in secondary market 30-year rates of -1.84 basis points (0.36).
If instead these purchases were of long-term securities (10-30 years), we would expect
to see an increase in our normalized demand shocks of 1.90 (0.22) and a corresponding
decrease in secondary market 30-year rates of -3.03 basis points (0.48). However, if these
purchases took place in a period of financial turmoil, the purchases in the long end of the
term structure relative to the short end become more effective. In this case, short-term
security purchases lead to an increase in our normalized demand shocks of 1.39 (0.31) and
a decrease in secondary market 30-year rates of -2.78 basis points (0.75). But long-term
purchases lead to increase in our normalized demand shocks of 2.26 (0.38) and an ensuing
decrease in secondary market 30-year rates of -7.22 basis points (0.86).
    We can also use our results to assess what fraction of the market response to QE1
can be explained directly by shifts in demand for Treasury debt arising from the Fed.16
To summarize the timeline of the Fed’s actions, there were five announcements during
QE1, four of which mentioned purchasing long-term Treasury securities. November 25,
2008: the Fed announced purchases of $100 billion in GSE debt and $500 billion in
MBS. December 1, 2008: Chairman Bernanke stated that the Fed could purchase long-
term Treasuries. December 16: the FOMC announced possible purchases of long-term
Treasuries. January 28, 2009: the FOMC announced it is ready to expand agency debt
and MBS purchases, and to begin purchasing long-term Treasuries. March 18, 2009: the
FOMC announced it will purchase $300 billion in long-term Treasuries, along with an
additional $750 billion in agency MBS and $100 billion in agency debt.
    Using small intraday windows around the time of the four announcements which men-
tioned Treasury purchases, Chodorow-Reich (2014) estimates the 5-year Treasury rate
reacted by -9.2, -16.8, 3.1, and -22.8 basis points, respectively. For the same dates but
using larger 2-day windows to account for the possibility of slow responses due to liq-
uidity effects, Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) estimates the announcements
moved the 5-year Treasury rate by -28, -15, 28, and -26 basis points respectively; addi-
tionally, they find the 5-year rate moved by -23 basis points after the initial November
25 announcement.17 This gives a range of cumulative decline of between 45 and 74 basis
points. Note that, because QE1 set the stage for subsequent QE programs, this decline
could combine the promise to purchase $300 billion in Treasuries in QE1 with the possibil-
  16
   We focus on QE1 since the surprise component of QE2 and QE3 was likely smaller than that of QE1.
  17
   Chodorow-Reich (2014) drops the November 25, 2008, announcement because it occurred after trading
hours. In addition, the positive response to the January 28, 2009, announcement seems to be because
markets were expecting a concrete statement about purchases.


                                                23
ity of additional rounds of quantitative easing that would entail buying more government
debt. In other words, the 45-74 basis point decline could overstate the response of the
markets relative to a response one could have observed in the case when the Fed credibly
committed to spend only $300 billion to purchase government bonds during the entirety
of all its quantitative easing programs.
    With this caveat in mind, we can carry out a back-of-the-envelope calculation to assess
how much of the response of yields is due purely to the shift in demand for Treasuries from
the Fed. The large majority of the Fed Treasury purchases during QE1 were concentrated
in the 2-7 year range, and the magnitude of purchases would correspond to a ten-fold
increase in the bid-to-cover ratio observed during auctions over the same period. During
this period of financial distress, our estimates imply that we should expect a shock of this
size to decrease 5-year secondary market spot rates by 44 basis points (95% confidence
interval of 29–59 basis points). Our estimate is close to the estimates from D’Amico and
King (2013), reporting that Treasury purchases during QE1 reduced yields by about 30
basis points.
    Although this exercise represents a very large out-of-sample forecast for our data,
it shows that the actual market reaction to QE1 announcements is consistent with the
predictions of a preferred habitat model and the behavior of the market in response to
observed shifts in private demand for Treasuries. Since the mechanism for the market seg-
mentation channel is the same regardless of the source of demand shifts (recall that market
segmentation is about how private arbitrageurs absorb these shifts rather than the source
of the demand shocks), this finding implies that the net effect of other channels of QE
(e.g., inflation expectations, forward guidance, signaling) could be smaller than thought
before. Consistent with this observation, Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012)
document that there was little movement in 5-year inflation expectations in response to
QE1 announcements.


6    Concluding Remarks
Quantitative easing (QE) was a massive policy experiment which likely influenced the
economy via multiple channels. To understand how QE worked, we need to unbundle
these channels so that future policy can be designed to maximize the effectiveness of QE-
like tools in crisis and non-crisis times. In this paper, we focus on the “preferred habitat”
channel, which posits that, because of market segmentation and limited arbitrage, interest
rates for a given maturity range may be influenced by targeted buying or selling of assets
within this range. We utilize Treasury auctions of government debt to identify Treasury
demand shocks arising from changes in institutional investor demand to study how shocks
in one maturity segment propagate to other segments, and how this propagation is affected
by the condition of financial markets.

                                             24
    While these shocks do not have structural interpretation, they provide us with vari-
ation that is not related to some prominent theories of how QE works (inflation expec-
tations, forward guidance, signaling) and instead allow us to focus attention on the role
of preferred habitat mechanisms. Crucially, these mechanisms are dependent on how
private agents in the market for Treasury debt absorb these demand shocks, regardless
of the source of these shocks. Therefore, we can use this variation to examine whether
preferred habitat theory can rationalize responses of interest rates to unexpected changes
in demand for government debt with specific maturities during regular Treasury auctions
and, by extension, QE rounds.
    We find a strong local component of demand shocks (i.e., with some oversimplification,
purchases of assets in a particular segment move prices more strongly in that segment),
but the local concentration is decreasing in risk-bearing capacity. That is, local effects
are stronger when markets are segmented (e.g. due to a crisis) than when markets are
integrated. The magnitude of the responses during Treasury auctions is large enough to
account for a large part of interest rate movements in response to QE announcements,
consistent with the view that QE programs worked mainly via market segmentation.
Our analysis suggests that QE can be an effective policy tool in crises, but will be less
powerful in moving specific segments of the debt market in normal times. Finally, the
net contribution of other hypothesized channels of QE propagation may be quantitatively
less important than thought before.


References
Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., and Davis, S. J. (2016). Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4):1593–1636.

Bernanke, B. S. and Kuttner, K. N. (2005). What Explains the Stock Market’s Reaction
    to Federal Reserve Policy? Journal of Finance, 60(3):1221–1257.

Blinder, A. S., Ehrmann, M., de Haan, J., and Jansen, D.-J. (2016). Necessity as the
    mother of invention: Monetary policy after the crisis. Working Paper 22735, National
    Bureau of Economic Research.

Campbell, J. R., Evans, C. L., Fisher, J. D., and Justiniano, A. (2012). Macroeconomic
   Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance. Brookings Papers on Economic Activ-
   ity, 43(1 (Spring):1–80.

Campbell, J. Y., Pflueger, C., and Viceira, L. M. (2014). Monetary Policy Drivers of
   Bond and Equity Risks. NBER Working Papers 20070, National Bureau of Economic
   Research, Inc.

Chodorow-Reich, G. (2014). Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy on Financial
   Institutions. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 45(1 (Spring)):155–227.



                                           25
D’Amico, S. and King, T. B. (2013). Flow and stock effects of large-scale treasury pur-
   chases: Evidence on the importance of local supply. Journal of Financial Economics,
   108(2):425–448.

Driessen, G. A. (2016). How treasury issues debt. Congressional Research Service Report
    R40767.

Fleming, M. J. (2007). Who buys treasury securities at auction? Federal Reserve Bank
    of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 13(1).

Fleming, M. J. and Liu, W. (2016). Intraday pricing and liquidity effects of us treasury
    auctions.

Garbade, K. D. (2007). The Emergence of “Regular and Predictable” as a Treasury Debt
    Management Strategy. FRBNY Economic Policy Review, (March):53–71.

Garbade, K. D. and Ingber, J. F. (2005). The Treasury auction process: objectives, struc-
    ture, and recent acquisitions. Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 11(Feb).

Gorodnichenko, Y. and Weber, M. (2016). Are Sticky Prices Costly? Evidence from the
    Stock Market. American Economic Review, 106(1):165–199.

Greenwood, R. and Vayanos, D. (2014). Bond supply and excess bond returns. Review
    of Financial Studies, 27(3):663–713.

Gürkaynak, R. S., Sack, B., and Wright, J. H. (2007). The U.S. Treasury yield curve:
    1961 to the present. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(8):2291 – 2304.

Hamilton, J. D. and Wu, J. C. (2012). The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy
   Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
   44:3–46.

He, Z., Kelly, B., and Manela, A. (2016). Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from
    many asset classes. Working Paper 21920, National Bureau of Economic Research.

He, Z. and Krishnamurthy, A. (2013). Intermediary Asset Pricing. American Economic
    Review, 103(2):732–770.

Krishnamurthy, A. and Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2011). The effects of quantitative easing on
    interest rates: Channels and implications for policy. Brookings Papers on Economic
    Activity, (2 (Fall)):215–265.

Krishnamurthy, A. and Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2012). The aggregate demand for Treasury
    debt. Journal of Political Economy, 120(2):233–267.

Kuttner, K. (2006). Can central banks target bond prices?       Technical Report 12454,
    National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kuttner, K. N. (2001). Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the
    Fed funds futures market. Journal of Monetary Economics, 47(3):523–544.

Kyle, A. S. and Xiong, W. (2001). Contagion as a Wealth Effect. Journal of Finance,
    56(4):1401–1440.


                                           26
Lauszweski, J. W., Kamradt, M., and Gibbs, D. (2014). Understanding treasury futures.
    https://www.cmegroup.com/education/files/understanding-treasury-futures.pdf.

Lou, D., Yan, H., and Zhang, J. (2013). Anticipated and Repeated Shocks in Liquid
    Markets. Review of Financial Studies, 26(8):1891–1912.

Martin, C. and Milas, C. (2012). Quantitative easing: a sceptical survey. Oxford Review
    of Economic Policy, 28(4):750–764.

Ray, W. (2017). Monetary policy and preferred habitat. Working paper.

Romer, C. D. and Romer, D. H. (2017). New evidence on the aftermath of financial crises
   in advanced countries. American Economic Review, 107(10):3072–3118.

Swanson, E. T. and Williams, J. C. (2014). Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower
   Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates. American Economic Review,
   104(10):3154–3185.

Vayanos, D. and Vila, J.-L. (2009). A preferred-habitat model of the term structure of
    interest rates. Working Paper 15487, National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                          27
   Figure 1: Volume and composition of SOMA’s holdings of U.S. Government Debt



             Panel A. Volume of Treasury bond holdings by maturity
         2.5


                                       QE1(T)          QE2 OT       QE3(T)
                         10+ year
                         5-10 year
         2




                         1-5 year
                         < 1 year
         1.5
     $ tn
         1
         .5
         0




               2003   2005      2007        2009       2011        2013      2015       2017


             Panel B. Shares of Treasury bond holdings by maturity
         1




                                                                    QE3(T)
         .8




                                                       QE2
         .6




                                                              OT
     share




                                       QE1(T)
         .4
         .2
         0




               2003   2005      2007        2009       2011        2013      2015       2017


Notes: QE1(T) denotes time when the Fed announced its decision to buy U.S. Treasuries as a part of the
first round of quantitative easing. QE2 denotes the announcement of the second round of quantitative
easing. QE3(T) denotes the time when the Fed announced its purchases of U.S. Treasuries as a part
of the third round of quantitative easing. OT denotes the announcement of “Operation Twist”. Source:
FRED database.


                                                 28
                                       Figure 2: Auction Timing

                                  ≈ 5 days                   ≈ 3 days

                       T0                     T1     T2                    T3
                 Announcement                Close Results              Issuance
                 Bidding opens
                                                 < 30 min



                             Figure 3: Example of an Auction Announcement
Embargoed Until 09:00 A.M.                                                  CONTACT: Office of Financing
August 03, 2011                                                                      202-504-3550

                             TREASURY OFFERING ANNOUNCEMENT 1
Term and Type of Security                                                                30-Year Bond
Offering Amount                                                                        $16,000,000,000
Currently Outstanding                                                                               $0
CUSIP Number                                                                               912810QS0
Auction Date                                                                           August 11, 2011
Original Issue Date                                                                    August 15, 2011
Issue Date                                                                             August 15, 2011
Maturity Date                                                                          August 15, 2041
Dated Date                                                                             August 15, 2011
Series                                                                           Bonds of August 2041
Yield                                                                            Determined at Auction
Interest Rate                                                                    Determined at Auction
Interest Payment Dates                                                       February 15 and August 15
Accrued Interest from 08/15/2011 to 08/15/2011                                                   None
Premium or Discount                                                              Determined at Auction
Minimum Amount Required for STRIPS                                                                 $100
 Corpus CUSIP Number                                                                       912803DT7
 Additional TINT(s) Due Date(s) and                                                     August 15, 2041
 CUSIP Number(s)                                                                           912834KP2
Maximum Award                                                                            $5,600,000,000
Maximum Recognized Bid at a Single Yield                                                 $5,600,000,000
NLP Reporting Threshold                                                                  $5,600,000,000
NLP Exclusion Amount                                                                                 $0
Minimum Bid Amount and Multiples                                                                  $100
Competitive Bid Yield Increments 2                                                             0.001%
Maximum Noncompetitive Award                                                                $5,000,000
Eligible for Holding in Treasury Direct Systems                                                    Yes
Eligible for Holding in Legacy Treasury Direct                                                      No
Estimated Amount of Maturing Coupon Securities Held by the Public                      $24,430,000,000
Maturing Date                                                                          August 15, 2011
SOMA Holdings Maturing                                                                  $2,205,000,000
SOMA Amounts Included in Offering Amount                                                            No
FIMA Amounts Included in Offering Amount 3                                                         Yes

Noncompetitive Closing Time                                                              12:00 Noon ET
Competitive Closing Time                                                                   1:00 p.m. ET



                                                    29
                                       Figure 4: Example of an Auction Result Announcement
                  For Immediate Release                                                                               CONTACT: Office of Financing
                  August 11, 2011                                                                                              202-504-3550

                                                        TREASURY AUCTION RESULTS
                             Term and Type of Security                                                                30-Year Bond
                             CUSIP Number                                                                                912810QS0
                             Series                                                                            Bonds of August 2041

                             Interest Rate                                                                                      3-3/4%
                             High Yield1                                                                                        3.750%
                             Allotted at High                                                                                   41.74%
                             Price                                                                                          100.000000
                             Accrued Interest per $1,000                                                                          None

                             Median Yield2                                                                                       3.629%
                             Low Yield3                                                                                          3.537%

                             Issue Date                                                                               August 15, 2011
                             Maturity Date                                                                            August 15, 2041
                             Original Issue Date                                                                      August 15, 2011
                             Dated Date                                                                               August 15, 2011

                                                                                         Tendered                                  Accepted
                  Competitive                                                         $33,305,800,000                           $15,985,160,000
                  Noncompetitive                                                          $14,855,600                               $14,855,600
                  FIMA (Noncompetitive)                                                            $0                                        $0
                  Subtotal4                                                           $33,320,655,600                           $16,000,015,6005

                  SOMA                                                                     $489,928,400                              $489,928,400

                  Total                                                               $33,810,584,000                            $16,489,944,000

                                                                                         Tendered                                   Accepted
                  Primary Dealer6                                                     $23,734,000,000                            $10,921,532,000
                  Direct Bidder7                                                       $6,567,000,000                             $3,119,654,000
                  Indirect Bidder8                                                     $3,004,800,000                             $1,943,974,000
                  Total Competitive                                                   $33,305,800,000                            $15,985,160,000




1                                                                                      5
    All tenders at lower yields were accepted in full.                                   Awards to combined Treasury Direct systems = $5,358,600.
2                                                                                      6
    50% of the amount of accepted competitive tenders was tendered at or below           Primary dealers as submitters bidding for their own house accounts.
    that yield.                                                                        7
                                                                                         Non-Primary dealer submitters bidding for their own house accounts.
3                                                                                      8
  5% of the amount of accepted competitive tenders was tendered at or below              Customers placing competitive bids through a direct submitter, including
  that yield.                                                                    30      Foreign and International Monetary Authorities placing bids through the
4                                                                                        Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
  Bid-to-Cover Ratio: $33,320,655,600/$16,000,015,600 = 2.08
                                           Figure 5: Number of Auctions per Year




31
     Notes: Number of note and bond Treasury auctions per year by term length in our dataset. The number of auctions temporarily
     fell in the late 1990s and early 2000s, before increasing sharply after the Great Recession.
                                   Figure 6: Time series of surprises in Treasury futures


                          2-year futures price                                        5-year futures price




             .2
                                                                       .4




             .1
                                                                       .2




        0
                                                                   0




       Dt(2Y)
                                                                   Dt(5Y)




             -.1
                                                                       -.2




             -.2
                                                                       -.4
                   1995   2000      2005        2010        2015               1995   2000     2005        2010       2015




32
                          10-year futures price                                       30-year futures price




             1
                                                                       1.5
                                                                       1




             .5
                                                                          .5




       Dt(10Y)
                                                                    Dt(30Y)
                                                                   0




             0
                                                                       -.5
                                                                       -1




             -.5
                   1995   2000      2005        2010        2015               1995   2000     2005        2010       2015

     Notes: The figure plots times series of surprise movements in Treasury futures with maturities 2, 5, 10 and 30 years. The
     movements are reported in log points.
                        Figure 7: 30-year Auctions




Notes: 30-year Treasury futures prices on August 11, 2011. An auction for
30-year Treasury bonds closed at 1:00pm (first vertical line), and results were
released shortly after (second vertical line). Immediately following the release,
Treasury futures prices dropped sharply.




Notes: 30-year Treasury futures prices on December 9, 2010. An auction for
30-year Treasury bonds closed at 1:00pm (first vertical line), and results were
released shortly after (second vertical line). Immediately following the release,
Treasury futures prices rose sharply.




                                       33
                                                   Figure 8: Demand Shocks and Bid-to-Cover

                                    2-year futures price                                                         5-year futures price




                                                                                        .1




              .04
                                                                                               .05




      (2Y)
                                                                            (5Y)




                 .02
                                                                                         0




         0
       Surprise Dt
                                                                                   Surprise Dt
                                                                                -.05




              -.02
                                                                                        -.1
                        2              2.5                3              3.5                         2              2.5                3              3.5
                            Bid-to-Cover (residualized), 2 year auctions                                 Bid-to-Cover (residualized), 5 year auctions




34
                                    10-year futures price                                                       30-year futures price




              .2
                                                                                        .4




                   .1
                                                                                              .2




      (10Y)
                                                                            (30Y)




              0
                                                                                       0




       Surprise Dt
                                                                                  Surprise Dt




       -.1
                                                                                -.2




              -.2
                                                                                        -.4




                        2               2.5               3               3.5                        1.5         2          2.5           3           3.5
                            Bid-to-Cover (residualized), 10 year auctions                               Bid-to-Cover (residualized), 30 year auctions

     Notes: Bin scatter plot comparing demand shocks Dt and the bid-to-cover ratio from the auction (winsorized at 1% level).
     The bid-to-cover ratio is the fraction of dollar value of bids received to accepted at a given auction. Demand shocks Dt are
     reported in log points.
                         Figure 9: Long-Difference Responses to Shock Dt


                                      10-Year Treasury Rates
             2       0
    Coefficient (Dt)
          -2 -4
             -6




                         0               20                40                60
                                                 Days


                                              Aaa Yields
             2       0
    Coefficient (Dt)
          -2 -4
             -6




                         0               20                40                60
                                                 Days


Notes: responses of 10-year Treasury spot rates (top panel) and Moody’s Aaa
yields (bottom panel) to a unit shock in the first principal component Dt .
Spot rates come from Gürkaynak et al. (2007), estimated from daily prices
from the secondary market for Treasuries. The regressions are “long-difference”
regressions: on an auction date t, the dependent variable is Rt+h − Rt−1 , i.e.
the change (in terms of basis points) h days after the auction relative to the day
before the auction. We plot the coefficients from regressions for h = 0, . . . , 60.
The solid line plots the point estimates, while dashed lines plot two-standard
deviation (Newey-West) confidence bands.




                                               35
Figure 10: Changes in yield curves on select Treasury auction days


                                    Panel A: 30-year auction; Aug 11, 2011
               30
   Change in Spot Rate (b.p.)
       10      0    20




                                0             10               20            30
                                                    Maturity


                                     Panel B: 3-year auction; Feb 6, 2007
               -1
   Change in Spot Rate (b.p.)
     -4      -3-5     -2




                                0             10               20            30
                                                    Maturity


Notes: the figure plots changes in spot rates after 30-year auction on August 11,
2011 (top panel) and 3-year auction on February 6, 2007. The dashed vertical
line shows the “location” of the auction in the maturity space.




                                                   36
                              Figure 11: Numerical Exercise


                                   Short Demand Shock
              0      -1
    Rate Change (b.p.)
        -3   -2
              -4
              -5




                          0          10               20               30


                                    Long Demand Shock
              0
    Rate Change (b.p.)
       -4     -6  -2




                          0          10               20               30
                                           Maturity


Notes: Numerical exercise studying the change in term structure of spot rates
in response to one-standard deviation positive demand shocks, as risk aversion
increase from low (lighter) to high (darker). The top panel is the impact of
a short demand shock, and the bottom panel is the impact of a long demand
shock.




                                           37
                              Figure 12: Rate Responses (intraday Futures surprises)


                                          Short-Term Demand Shock
              0      -1
     Response (b.p.)
     -3     -2-4




                          0                     10                   20                    30

                                        Low Risk Aversion             High Risk Aversion



                                           Long-Term Demand Shock
              0      -1
       Response (b.p.)
     -3     -2-4




                          0                     10                   20                    30

                                        Low Risk Aversion             High Risk Aversion


                                                                          (m0 )
Notes: Plots of the regression coefficients on the demand shocks Dt       from regression equa-
                                                   (m0 )
tion (4). For each auction the demand shock Dt           is the normalized futures surprise that
most closely corresponds to the maturity of the auction (e.g. a 5-year auction corresponds to
  (5Y )
Dt ). Each curve is from the subsample combinations: short-term and long-term auctions;
and periods of high and low risk aversion. 2 standard error (Newey-West) confidence intervals
are included.




                                                       38
                              Figure 13: Rate Responses (IV specification)


                                     Short-Term Demand Shock
              0
     Response (b.p.)
       -4     -6 -2




                          0                10                   20                     30

                                   Low Risk Aversion             High Risk Aversion



                                      Long-Term Demand Shock
              2       0
       Response (b.p.)
     -4     -2-6




                          0                10                   20                     30

                                   Low Risk Aversion             High Risk Aversion


                                                                     (m0 )
Notes: Plots of the regression coefficients on the demand shocks Dt   from regression equation
(4), instrumented by the surprise component of the bid-to-cover ratio. Each curve is from the
subsample combinations: short-term and long-term auctions; and periods of high and low risk
aversion. The first-stage F-statistic for the short-term auctions is 10.16, while for the long-
term auctions the F-statistic is 17.58. 2 standard error (Newey-West) confidence intervals are
included.




                                                  39
                         Table 1: Auction Summary Statistics
                                   Panel A: 1979-2015


                                       Mean     Median      Std. Dev. Min Max
    Offering Amount (billions)         17.08     14.00        10.13   1.50 44.00
    Total Tendered (billions)          47.44     36.38        31.97   2.37 160.96
    Bid-to-Cover                        2.60     2.57          0.52   1.22 5.88
    Term (Years)                        7.46      5.00         8.08   2.00 30.25
    High Yield                          5.39      4.77         3.66   0.22 16.28
    High-Median Spread                  0.03     0.03          0.02   0.00 0.14


                                   Panel B: 1995-2015


                                      Mean      Median     Std. Dev.      Min      Max
   Offering Amount (billions)         22.03      21.00        9.36        5.00     44.00
   Total Tendered (billions)          61.46      52.98       32.04       11.35    160.96
   Term (Years)                        7.83       5.00        8.42        2.00     30.25
   High Yield                          3.26       3.20        1.91        0.22      7.79
   High-Median Spread                  0.03       0.03        0.02        0.00      0.13
   Bid-to-Cover                        2.62       2.60        0.49        1.22      4.07
   Bid-to-Cover by type]
      Direct Bidders                   0.24         0.25      0.18        0.00      0.84
      Indirect Bidders                 0.50         0.50      0.16        0.03      1.02
      Primary Dealers                  1.98         1.92      0.35        0.97      3.12
   Fraction Accepted†
      Depository Institutions          0.01         0.00      0.02        0.00      0.32
      Individuals                      0.01         0.00      0.02        0.00      0.19
      Dealers                          0.58         0.58      0.14        0.20      0.98
      Pensions                         0.00         0.00      0.01        0.00      0.21
      Investment Funds                 0.20         0.18      0.13        0.00      0.64
      Foreign                          0.20         0.19      0.09        0.00      0.61
   Other                               0.00         0.00      0.00        0.00      0.03

Notes: Summary statistics for Treasury note and bond auctions. † indicates that the moments
are computed for 2000-2015, the period for which these data are available. ] indicates that the
moments are computed for 2003-2015, the period for which these data are available.




                                               40
                Table 2: Treasury Futures Shocks Summary Statistics

                                                                        Correlations
                Mean       Med.       Std. Dev.         N      (2Y )     (5Y )  (10Y )         (30Y )
 Maturity                                                     Dt       Dt      Dt           Dt
                  (1)       (2)            (3)         (4)     (5)      (6)     (7)          (8)

 Panel A. Auction
  (2Y )
 Dt        -0.000          0.000        0.034          871    1.000
  (5Y )
 Dt         0.002          0.000        0.092          871    0.866     1.000
  (10Y )
 Dt         0.007          0.007        0.143          871    0.782     0.958     1.000
  (30Y )
 Dt         0.006          0.000        0.245          871    0.672     0.848     0.922      1.000

 Pabel B. No auction
  (2Y )
 Dt        -0.000 0.000                 0.031          4031   1.000
  (5Y )
 Dt        -0.001 0.000                 0.072          4096   0.862     1.000
  (10Y )
 Dt        -0.002 0.000                 0.107          4100   0.794     0.945     1.000
  (30Y )
 Dt        -0.005 0.000                 0.172          4099   0.674     0.830     0.905      1.000

 Panel C. Auction, non-ZLB period
  (2Y )
 Dt        -0.002 0.000   0.043                        424    1.000
  (5Y )
 Dt        -0.005 -0.007  0.099                        424    0.922     1.000
  (10Y )
 Dt        -0.005 0.000   0.143                        424    0.866     0.962     1.000
  (30Y )
 Dt        -0.016 -0.026  0.223                        424    0.778     0.878     0.933      1.000

 Panel D. Auction, ZLB period
  (2Y )
 Dt        0.002 0.000    0.022                        447    1.000
  (5Y )
 Dt        0.009 0.007    0.083                        447    0.811     1.000
  (10Y )
 Dt        0.018 0.014    0.143                        447    0.736     0.960     1.000
  (30Y )
 Dt        0.027 0.023    0.263                        447    0.642     0.840     0.918      1.000

                                     (m)         (m)           (m)
Notes: On auction dates, shocks Dt = log Pt,post − log Pt,pre are the log intraday change in
Treasury futures prices before and after the close of an auction, for each contract m = 2, 5, 10, 30
years. For non-auction dates, the shocks are the log intraday changes in Treasury futures prices
using the same window. Binding zero lower bound (ZLB) period covers 2008M12-2015M12.
Non-ZLB period covers 1995M1-2008M11. Statistics in columns (1)-(3) are reported in log
points.




                                                 41
                 Table 3: Demand Shocks and Measures of Demand
                          Panel A: Total bid-to-cover ratio
                      (1)               (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)
                       (2Y )             (5Y )        (10Y )       (30Y )
                     Dt                Dt           Dt           Dt          Pool Dt
      Bid-to-Cover 1.441***          1.399***      2.099***     2.119***     1.645***
                    (0.240)           (0.230)       (0.216)      (0.565)      (0.142)
      Observations    238               306           227          100          871
        2
      R              0.156             0.201         0.302        0.270        0.215

             Panel B: Expected and Unexpected bid-to-cover ratio
                                 (1)           (2)      (3)              (4)           (5)
                                  (2Y )         (5Y )    (10Y )          (30Y )
                                Dt           Dt        Dt             Dt           Pool Dt
 Bid-to-Cover (exp.)            0.031        -0.041   -0.454*          -1.374        -0.076
                               (0.113)      (0.120)   (0.239)         (1.654)       (0.081)
 Bid-to-Cover (unexp.)        1.382***     1.374*** 2.113***         2.157***      1.645***
                               (0.242)      (0.236)   (0.216)         (0.634)       (0.142)
 Observations                    238          306       227              100           871
 R2                             0.124        0.189     0.294            0.215         0.198

                Panel C: Total bid-to-cover ratio by bidder type

     Indirect Bidder      2.716***     3.664***     4.528*** 8.532*** 4.451***
                           (0.366)      (0.667)      (0.493)  (1.235)  (0.436)
     Direct Bidder         2.236**       1.026        0.295    1.145  1.173***
                           (1.034)      (0.702)      (0.956)  (0.951)  (0.448)
     Primary Dealer       0.831**       0.762**     1.517***   0.057  0.887***
                           (0.387)      (0.316)      (0.317)  (0.536)  (0.178)
     Observations            138          228          187       80      633
     R2                     0.350        0.309        0.383    0.650    0.370

                    Panel D: Fraction accepted by bidder type

   Investment Funds        4.800***     3.401*** 4.563*** 6.436*** 4.749***
                            (0.908)      (0.854)  (0.902)  (1.462)  (0.494)
   Foreign                  2.797**     3.604*** 5.173*** 7.974*** 4.393***
                            (1.162)      (0.847)  (1.220)  (2.404)  (0.676)
   Misc                      4.815*      2.506**   0.034    0.853   2.353**
                            (2.614)      (1.203)  (3.713)  (5.119)  (1.193)
   Observations                174         241      201       84      700
   R2                         0.214       0.128    0.287    0.391    0.191

                                        (m)
Notes: Regressions of demand shocks Dt on the bid-to-cover ratio, total and broken up by
bidder type (winsorized at 1% level). Four lags of bid-to-cover ratios (or fractions accepted)
are included but not reported. Column (1) restricts the sample to include only auctions of
2-year notes. Column (2) restricts the sample to include only auctions of notes with (2,5] year
maturity. Column (3) restricts the sample to include only auctions of notes with [7,10] year
maturity. Column (4) restricts the sample to include only auctions of bonds with (10,30] year
                    (m)
maturity. Shocks Dt     are standardized to have zero mean and unit variance. Newey-West
standard errors in parentheses.
                                              42
               Table 4: Reaction of market to surprises at Treasury auctions

                                              Estimate
                                                           N     R2      Sample
                   Dep.variable: asset type   (s.e.)
                                              (1)         (2)    (3)       (4)

                   Panel A. Debt
                   TLT                        0.312***    662   0.679   2002-2015
                                              (0.016)
                   SHY                        0.022***    662   0.528   2002-2015
                                              (0.001)
                   LQD                        0.110***    662   0.544   2002-2015
                                              (0.008)
                   Aaa†                       -2.295***   871   0.173   1995-2015
                                              (0.212)

                   Panel B. Equities
                   SPY                        -0.020      871   0.005   1995-2015
                                              (0.018)
                   IWM                        -0.081***   706   0.034   2000-2015
                                              (0.024)
                   SP500†                     -0.072      871   0.004   1995-2015
                                              (0.064)
                   Russell 2000†              -0.169**    871   0.013   1995-2015
                                              (0.069)

                   Panel C. Inflation expectations and commodities
                   10Y Inflation Swap†    -0.172     618 0.003 2004-2015
                                          (0.131)
                   2Y Inflation Swap†     0.044      618 0.000 2004-2015
                                          (0.229)
                   GLD                    0.021      595 0.004 2004-2015
                                          (0.015)
                   GSCI†                  0.008      871 0.000 1995-2015
                                          (0.056)

                   Panel D. Spreads and credit default swaps
                   Baa-Aaa†              -0.056     871 0.001           1995-2015
                                         (0.074)
                   Auto CDS†             -3.254     627 0.000           2004-2015
                                         (5.796)
                   Bank CDS†             0.426      627 0.004           2004-2015
                                         (0.450)
                   3-month LIBOR-OIS†    -0.002     630 0.006           2003-2015
                                         (0.002)
                   VIX†                  0.058      871 0.001           1995-2015
                                         (0.082)

Notes: The table reports estimates φ̂ from regression equation (3). Assets with † are measured at the
daily frequency; other price changes are measured over the intrady window corresponding to what we
use to construct surprises. The intraday changes are from ETFs that track various underlying securities
or indices: TLT (long-term Treasuries); SHY (short-term Treasuries); LQD (corporate debt); SPY (S&P
500); IWM (Russell 2000); GLD (gold bullion). For the daily series: Aaa and Baa (Moody’s corporate
debt yields); SP500 (daily equity index); Russell 2000 (daily equity index); GSCI (S&P Total Commodity
Index); Auto and Bank CDS (indsutry credit default swaps indices); LIBOR-OIS (3-month USD LIBOR-
Overnight Index Swap spread); VIX (daily implied volatility index). Newey-West standard errors in
parentheses.


                                                  43
Appendix A             Numerical Exercise Details
In this section we briefly describe the model and calibration of our numerical exercise.
For more details regarding the model setup, see Vayanos and Vila (2009).


A.1    Numerical Exercise Model
There is a continuum of zero-coupon bonds with maturities m ∈ (0, T ] in zero net supply.
A bond with maturity m has a time t price of Pt,m and pays $1 at time t + m. The spot
rate is Rt,m which is given by
                                             log Pt,m
                                   Rt,m = −
                                                m
    There are two types of investors: idiosyncratic/clientèle investors and arbitrageurs.
By assumption idiosyncratic demand takes the following form:

                              yt,m = α(m)m(Rt,m − βt,m )

where βt,m is a demand shifter which responds to K demand factors:

                                             K
                                             X
                               βt,m = β̄ +         θk (m)βk,m
                                             k=1


   Arbitrageurs choose how much of each bond to hold (denoted by xt,m ). Their budget
constraint is:               Z T                 Z T
                                                            dPt,m
                  dWt = Wt −       xt,m dm rt dt +     xt,m       dm
                               0                    0       Pt,m
where rt is the instantaneous rate: limm→0 Rt,m = rt . Arbitrageurs maximize an instan-
taneous mean-variance trade-off:

                                            a
                                max Et dWt − V art dWt
                                 x          2

where the parameter a governs the level of risk aversion. In equilibrium, we have yt,m =
−xt,m .
   We assume the instantaneous rate and demand factors are stacked in a K + 1 vector
Y which follows an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process:

                             dYt = −Γ(Yt − Y)dt + SdBt

where Bt is a vector of Brownian motions.
    It turns out that the above is consistent with bond prices that are affine in the Y
factors:
                             − log Pt,m = YtT A(m) + C(m)


                                             44
    We are interested in the response of the term structure to shocks to the demand
factors, and hence need to solve the model for the coefficient functions A(m). Using the
arbitrageur FOCs and taking into account the zero net supply condition, these functions
must satisfy the system of differential equations

                           A0 (m) + ΓT A(m) − e1 = aMA(m)

where e1 is the first coordinate vector (assuming rt is ordered first in Y), and
                        Z     T                              
                   M=              α(m) [mΘ(m) − A(m)] A(m) dm SST
                                                            T
                           0


    Solving the above differential equation is made more difficult by the presence of the
integral terms in M. Vayanos and Vila (2009) solves the model for the limiting case when
the risk aversion parameter a → 0 or a → ∞ (and the particular case when Γ and S are
diagonal), but for intermediate values a solution must be found numerically. For details
regarding the solution algorithm, see Ray (2017).


A.2     Numerical Exercise Calibration
For our numerical exercise, we take the number of demand factors to be K = 2. We will
interpret the first demand factor as a “short” demand factor denoted by βt,s . The second
factor is taken to be a “long” demand factor denoted by βt,` . We assume
                                                   
                                            κr 0 0
                                       Γ =  0 κs 0 
                                                   

                                             0 0 κ`

and set these mean reversion parameters to imply that shocks to the instantaneous rate
have a half-life of approximately one year, while shocks to the demand factors have a
half-life of 2.5 years.
    For simplicity we also assume uncorrelated shocks, and that the size of the innovations
for each factor is equal, i.e. S = σI. We set σ = .01.
    θs (m) and θ` (m) govern where the demand shocks are located in maturity space. Al-
though not realistic, we set these as Dirac delta functions, so that the short demand
shock is entirely concentrated at idiosyncratic investors whose habitat is at m = 3 years;
similarly for the long demand shock we choose m = 20 years. These maturities roughly
correspond to the average maturity of the short-term and long-term auctions in the em-
pirical counterpart. We could have instead assumed these functions have non-zero values
for a continuum of bonds, but still concentrated at the long and short end of the maturity
space. This complicates the numerical solution algorithm, but leads to largely similar


                                             45
results.
    α(m) governs the sensitivity of idiosyncratic investors to changes in the price of bonds
within their habitat. We don’t have priors for this parameter, and for simplicity assume
the function is constant. We set this value to match the following empirical counterpart: a
standard deviation increase in our demand shock Dt is associated with an increase of 0.15
in the bid-to-cover ratio during short-term auctions. Given our parameterization above,
a one-standard deviation positive short demand shock increases idiosyncratic demand by
3ασ. Equating these values implies α = 5.
    Finally, we let the risk aversion parameter vary from 0 to 500. The upper limit is ad-
hoc; the value was chosen as the response of spot rates at this point begins to stabilize.
    Appendix Table B3 summarizes the parameter calibration. The spirit of the numerical
exercise is not to match the data perfectly, but rather to gain some qualitative predictions
for intermediate levels of risk aversion. Finally, it is important to note that the parameters
a, α, and σ in this specification enter multiplicatively. Hence an appropriate rescaling of
these values will give numerically identical responses.




                                             46
Appendix B                     Additional Figures and Tables

                 Figure B1: Response of Inflation Swap Rates to Shock Dt

                1
                .5
       Coefficient on Dt
               0-.5
                -1




                           0           10                        20             30
                                        Inflation Swap rate, years

     Notes: the figure plots responses of inflation swap rates across different matu-
     rities to a shock in the first principal component Dt . The solid line plots the
     point estimates, while dashed lines plot two-standard deviation (Newey-West)
     confidence bands.




                                                47
                                                        Figure B2: Rolling Regressions

                                    LQD: Corporate Debt ETF                                                 SPY: SP500 ETF




         0 .1 .2 .3
       Coefficient on Dt
                                                                            Coefficient on Dt
                                                                         -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4




                 -.1
                             1995    2000       2005    2010      2015                           1995   2000      2005      2010     2015
                                            GLD: Gold ETF                                               10Y Inflation Swap (daily)




48
        -.2 0 .2 .4
       Coefficient on Dt
                                                                           Coefficient on Dt
                                                                         -3 -2 -1 0 1 2




                 -.4
                             1995    2000       2005    2010      2015                           1995   2000      2005      2010     2015
                                    Aaa Corporate Debt (daily)                                           Baa-Aaa spread (daily)

                                                                                        1    2




         Coefficient on Dt
                                                                           Coefficient on Dt




       -8 -6 -4 -2 0
                                                                         -2 -1 0




                             1995    2000       2005    2010      2015                           1995   2000      2005      2010     2015

     Notes: Coefficient estimates of rolling regressions; each data point is from estimating (3) for using the 60 most recent auctions.
     LQD, SPY, and GLD are intraday changes; 10-year inflation swap is daily change. Aaa Corporate Debt is the daily change in
     the interest rate for Aaa corporate bonds. Baa-Aaa Spread is the daily change in the spread between Baa and Aaa corporate
                                                                                       (2Y )   (5Y )   (10Y )        (30Y )
     bonds. The regressor is always intraday Dt , the first principal component in Dt , Dt , Dt               , and Dt      .
                   Figure B3: U.S. Financial Crises




Notes: Financial Crisis indicator for the United States from Romer and Romer
(2017).




                Figure B4: Intermediary Capital Ratio




Notes: Intermediary capital ratio from He et al. (2016).




                                     49
                          Figure B5: Rate Response P-Values


                              Short-Term Demand Shock
         1
         .8 .6
      P-value
     .4  .2
         0




                 0                    10                       20   30


                               Long-Term Demand Shock
         1
         .8 .6
      P-value
     .4  .2
         0




                 0                    10                       20   30


Notes: p-values testing equality of coefficients from Figure 12.




                                              50
                          Figure B6: Rate Response P-Values


                              Short-Term Demand Shock
         1
         .8 .6
      P-value
     .4  .2
         0




                 0                    10                       20   30


                               Long-Term Demand Shock
         1
         .8 .6
      P-value
     .4  .2
         0




                 0                    10                       20   30


Notes: p-values testing equality of coefficients from Figure 13.




                                              51
                              Figure B7: Rate Responses (Bid-to-Cover, 1995-2015)


                                         Short-Term Demand Shock
              5       0
       Response (b.p.)
     -10    -5-15




                          0                    10                  20                    30

                                       Low Risk Aversion            High Risk Aversion



                                          Long-Term Demand Shock
              5       0
       Response (b.p.)
     -10    -5-15




                          0                    10                  20                    30

                                       Low Risk Aversion            High Risk Aversion


Notes: Plots of the regression coefficient on the surprise component of the bid-to-cover ratio
from regression equation (4) for the sample 1995-2015. Each curve is from the subsample
combinations: short-term and long-term auctions; and periods of high and low risk aversion as
measured. 2 standard error (Newey-West) confidence intervals are included.




                                                      52
             Figure B8: Rate Response P-Values (Bid-to-Cover, 1995-2015)


                              Short-Term Demand Shock
         1
         .8 .6
      P-value
     .4  .2
         0




                 0                   10                       20           30


                              Long-Term Demand Shock
         1
         .8 .6
      P-value
     .4  .2
         0




                 0                   10                       20           30


Notes: p-values testing equality of coefficients from Figure B7.




                                              53
                             Figure B9: Rate Responses (Bid-to-Cover, 1979-2015)


                                        Short-Term Demand Shock
              2      0
     Response (b.p.)
     -4    -2 -6




                         0                    10                  20                    30

                                      Low Risk Aversion            High Risk Aversion



                                         Long-Term Demand Shock
              5
     Response (b.p.)
       -5     -100




                         0                    10                  20                    30

                                      Low Risk Aversion            High Risk Aversion


Notes: Plots of the regression coefficient on the surprise component of the bid-to-cover ratio
from regression equation (4) for the sample 1979-2015. Each curve is from the subsample
combinations: short-term and long-term auctions; and periods of high and low risk aversion as
measured. 2 standard error (Newey-West) confidence intervals are included.




                                                     54
            Figure B10: Rate Response P-Values (Bid-to-Cover, 1979-2015)


                              Short-Term Demand Shock
         1
         .8 .6
      P-value
     .4  .2
         0




                 0                   10                       20           30


                              Long-Term Demand Shock
         1
         .8 .6
      P-value
     .4  .2
         0




                 0                   10                       20           30


Notes: p-values testing equality of coefficients from Figure B9.




                                              55
                 Figure B11: Rate Responses (rotated intraday Futures surprises)


                                  Short-Term Demand Shock
              1       0
       Response (b.p.)
     -2     -1-3




                          0             10                     20                        30

                                Low Risk Aversion                High Risk Aversion



                                  Long-Term Demand Shock
              0      -1
       Response (b.p.)
     -3     -2-4




                          0             10                     20                        30

                                Low Risk Aversion                High Risk Aversion


Notes: Plots of the regression coefficients on the demand shocks Dti from regression equation
(4). The shocks are the first two principal components of our intraday shocks, Dt` and Dts ,
                                               (30Y )
rotated such that Dts is uncorrelated with Dt         . For long-term auctions the shock is Dt` ;
                                     s
similarly short-term auctions use Dt . Each curve is from the subsample combinations: short-
term and long-term auctions; and periods of high and low risk aversion. 2 standard error
(Newey-West) confidence intervals are included.




                                               56
   Figure B12: Rate Response P-Values (rotated intraday Futures surprises)


                              Short-Term Demand Shock
         1
         .8 .6
      P-value
     .4  .2
         0




                 0                   10                       20      30


                              Long-Term Demand Shock
         1
         .8 .6
      P-value
     .4  .2
         0




                 0                   10                       20      30


Notes: p-values testing equality of coefficients from Figure B11.




                                              57
Table B1: Reaction of market to surprises at Treasury auctions (IV specification)

                                         Estimate
                                                         N      F-stat       Sample
         Dep.variable: asset type        (s.e.)
                                         (1)            (2)       (3)              (4)

         Panel A. Debt
         TLT                             0.359*** 662            78.9      2002-2015
                                         (0.032)
         SHY                             0.024*** 662            78.9      2002-2015
                                         (0.002)
         LQD                             0.121*** 662            78.9      2002-2015
                                         (0.015)
         Aaa†                            -2.666*** 871          126.6      1995-2015
                                         (0.406)

         Panel B. Equities
         SPY                             0.016          871     126.6      1995-2015
                                         (0.027)
         IWM                             0.039          706      91.4      2000-2015
                                         (0.060)
         SP500†                          -0.111         871     126.6      1995-2015
                                         (0.113)
         Russell 2000†                   -0.191         871     126.6      1995-2015
                                         (0.119)

         Panel C. Inflation expectations and commodities
         10Y Inflation Swap†    -0.290    618   74.2  2004-2015
                                (0.331)
         2Y Inflation Swap†     -0.001    618   74.2  2004-2015
                                (0.669)
         GLD                    0.041     595   72.3  2004-2015
                                (0.030)
              †
         GSCI                   0.023     871  126.6  1995-2015
                                (0.107)

         Panel D. Spreads and credit default swaps
         Baa-Aaa†              -0.169    871   126.6                       1995-2015
                               (0.146)
         3-month LIBOR-OIS†    -0.006    630    77.3                       2003-2015
                               (0.004)
                  †
         Auto CDS              -9.793    627    77.0                       2004-2015
                               (7.458)
         Bank CDS†             1.269     627    77.0                       2004-2015
                               (0.800)
         VIX†                  -0.063    871   126.6                       1995-2015
                               (0.148)

                                                                           (m0 )
Notes: The table repeats the regressions from Table 4, but instruments Dt        with the surprise
component of the bid-to-cover ratio. First-stage F-statistics are reported in column (3). Newey-
West standard errors in parentheses.           58
                     Table B2: Secondary Market Rate Responses
                      Panel A: Short-Term (2-7 year) auctions
                 (1)      (2)                    (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                 0-2      2-5                    5-8         8-11         11-20        20-30
 Ct =0 × Dt   -1.32*** -2.16***               -2.48***     -1.97***     -2.46***     -1.79***
               (0.22)   (0.30)                 (0.33)       (0.30)       (0.29)       (0.24)
 Ct =1 × Dt   -1.44*** -2.61***               -3.09***     -3.02***     -2.72***     -2.09***
               (0.25)   (0.39)                 (0.46)       (0.45)       (0.44)       (0.45)
 Observations  35363    37304                  15644         7813         9733        11085
 Clusters        615      615                    615          615          615          615
 R2             0.136    0.217                  0.224        0.205        0.206        0.153
 P-Value        0.712    0.366                  0.274        0.053        0.625        0.561


                     Panel B: Long-Term (10-30 year) auctions
                 (1)      (2)                    (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                 0-2      2-5                    5-8         8-11         11-20        20-30
 Ct =0 × Dt   -0.56*** -1.07***               -1.55***     -1.83***     -2.21***     -2.13***
               (0.20)   (0.30)                 (0.40)       (0.33)       (0.39)       (0.26)
 Ct =1 × Dt   -1.04*** -1.96***               -2.49***     -2.95***     -3.00***     -3.15***
               (0.25)   (0.29)                 (0.30)       (0.33)       (0.34)       (0.38)
 Observations  15139    16525                   7264         3385         4161         4559
 Clusters        255      255                    255          255          255          255
   2
 R              0.152    0.216                  0.277        0.329        0.349        0.369
 P-Value        0.144    0.032                  0.064        0.017        0.136        0.028

Notes: The table reports results estimating equation (4), but using security-level changes in
yields as the dependent variable. Panel A reports the results for short-term auction dates
(2-7 years), while Panel B reports the results for long term auction dates (10-30 years). The
columns break up the securities into different baskets based on the remaining maturity: column
(1) contains all note and bonds with less than 2 years remaining before maturity; column (2) is
2-5 years; column, column (3) is 5-8 years; column (4) is 8-11 years; column (5) is 11-20 years;
and column (6) is 20-30 years. P-values testing equality of coefficients are reported in the final
row. Standard errors clustered at the auction level are in parentheses.


                       Table B3: Numerical Exercise Calibration

                                   Parameter    Value
                                   T              30
                                   σ             .01
                                   κr            0.7
                                   κs            0.3
                                   κ`            0.3
                                   α               5
                                   a           (0, 500)
                                   θs (m)     δ(m − 3)
                                   θ` (m)    δ(m − 20)


                                               59
