                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           EVOLUTION OF THE INFANT HEALTH PRODUCTION FUNCTION

                                        Hope Corman
                                       Dhaval M. Dave
                                      Nancy E. Reichman

                                      Working Paper 24131
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24131


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2017




First and foremost, this paper was a labor of love for our mentor, life coach, and friend, Michael
Grossman. We (and at least 115 others) had the rare mentor who is not only brilliant, but also has
a heart the size of Texas. Mike, we can't thank you enough for your extraordinary generosity with
time, advice, and anything else that was needed to keep us going and even thrive. Your impact on
our careers and our lives (and those of countless others) goes way beyond our product here. The
authors would also like to thank Grace Hillman and Erik Adamcik for extensive research
assistance in the preparation of this article. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Hope Corman, Dhaval M. Dave, and Nancy E. Reichman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Evolution of the Infant Health Production Function
Hope Corman, Dhaval M. Dave, and Nancy E. Reichman
NBER Working Paper No. 24131
December 2017
JEL No. I1

                                         ABSTRACT

Michael Grossman’s seminal publication on the demand for health and health production
(Grossman 1972) has spawned a substantial body of research focusing on the production of infant
health. This article provides a systematic review of the published literature to date on infant
health production and how it has evolved over the past 3-4 decades as data have become more
available, computing has improved, and econometric methods have become more sophisticated.
While empirical research in most fields has expanded in corresponding ways, the infant health
production research has become an important part of the broader and inherently multidisciplinary
literature on intergenerational health. The strongest and most robust findings are that policies
matter for infant health, particularly those affecting access to health care, and that prenatal
smoking and other chemical exposures substantially compromise infant health. Promising
directions for future research include elucidating relevant pathways, reconciling the largely
inconsistent estimated effects of nutrition and education, and exploring the roles of pre-
conceptional and lifetime health care, paternal factors, social support, housing, complementarity
and substitutability of inputs, factors that modify effects of inputs, and evolving medical
technologies.


Hope Corman                                     Nancy E. Reichman
Department of Economics                         Rutgers University
Rider University                                Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
2083 Lawrenceville Road                         Department of Pediatrics
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648                         Child Health Institute of New Jersey
and NBER                                        89 French St., Room 1348
corman@rider.edu                                New Brunswick, NJ 08903
                                                and University of Toronto
Dhaval M. Dave                                  reichmne@rutgers.edu
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu
Introduction

          Michael Grossman’s seminal publication on the demand for health and health production

(Grossman 1972) has spawned a substantial body of research focusing specifically on the production of

infant health, wherein maternal prenatal inputs affect the health of the next generation at the earliest

stage of the lifecourse. This work was pioneered by Grossman himself, with his first published piece on

the topic in 1981, and has led to a growing body of research across the globe. This increasingly

influential research in health economics has complemented studies of maternal and child health in other

disciplines and instilled methodological rigor into the broader and inherently interdisciplinary literature.

While it is difficult to link any one set of studies to the enactment of specific policy changes, the body of

research focusing on infant health that has been produced directly or indirectly by Michael Grossman

has contributed a rich portfolio of strong scientific evidence that has been available to policymakers,

program administrators, and advocates interested in maternal and child health. This research includes

evidence on direct effects of policy, such as Medicaid expansions, food stamps, the Special

Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC), and cigarette regulations, and

on the effects of factors such as pollution, education, and job loss that can be influenced by policy

levers.

          In this article, we describe the infant health production function framework and the various

ways that economic research on infant health production has evolved over the past 3 to 4 decades. Data

have become vastly richer and more available, computing power has improved enormously, and

econometric methods have become more sophisticated. Inputs considered have evolved substantially.

Early studies focused on the role of healthcare inputs, particularly prenatal care (and insurance

expansions that made prenatal care more available) and cigarette smoking. Subsequent studies

investigated the effects of inputs such as education, maternal employment, public programs that

provide income or material assistance, and healthcare technology, and very recent studies broadened


                                                                                                            2
the lens to consider the effects of in utero stress stemming from maternal exposure to pollution and

natural disasters while pregnant, based on the fetal origins hypothesis in the medical literature (Barker

1992). Outcomes considered have expanded beyond infant mortality to include measures of

birthweight, gestational age, fetal loss, and infant morbidity.

           The objective of this paper is to provide a review of the published literature to date on infant

health production—that by and inspired by Michael Grossman—from our unique vantage point as three

of Grossman’s former students and mentees. Owing to the sheer size of the relevant literature, we will

limit this review to infant health in high income countries as classified by the World Bank and highlight

salient examples rather than provide an exhaustive review. To the extent possible, we underscore work

by Grossman’s former students and protégés, whose research most directly stemmed from the source.

The origins of the infant health production function

           Grossman published his now-classic treatise on the concept of health capital and the demand

for health in 1972 that was based on his 1970 doctoral dissertation, which was written under the

tutelage of Gary Becker. The health production framework follows from Becker’s path-breaking work

from the 1960s on the concepts of household production and human capital. According to Grossman’s

own account (Grossman 2004, p.631), “…Gary suggested the topic of my dissertation. Originally it was

supposed to be a study of the effects of education on health, but along the way he encouraged me to

broaden it into a theoretical and empirical analysis of the demand for health.”

           While most of Grossman’s early studies on the production of health considered individuals’

production of their own health, in the 1980s he considered the production of health across generations

by investigating effects of maternal inputs on infant health outcomes. Since the first published paper

with this focus in the economics literature, Grossman and Jacobowitz*(1981) 1, research on infant health

production has grown substantially, expanding in both breadth of application and methodological


1
    Asterisks denote students or protégés of Michael Grossman.

                                                                                                              3
sophistication. Below we briefly describe the economic model of infant health production, then present

a systematic review and synthesis of the literature from the 1980s through 2016 and conclude by

discussing by new directions in this line of research.

Infant health production function model

           Following Corman, Joyce, and Grossman (1987) and the theoretical literature on which they

build, parents’ utility can be expressed as a function of consumption goods (C), infant health (Hi),

parents’ health (Hp), tastes, and any other relevant arguments as follows: 2

           (1)     U=U (C, Hi, Hp, tastes)

Infant health is a function of prenatal inputs (which can be positive, such as prenatal care, or negative,

such as smoking or drug use) as well as the health endowment of the mother (which reflects Hp and

may affect her reproductive efficiency), as shown in the infant health production function that follows:

           (2)     Hi = f (input1, input2, ….inputn, maternal health endowment)

The demand for each input can be expressed as follows:

           (3)     Inputi = gi (price and availability of inputi, prices and availability of substitute and

                   complementary inputs, income, maternal health endowment, tastes, wantedness)

           Thus, infant health is an argument in the parent's utility function (Equation 1), and the parents’

utility maximization is constrained by the process underlying the production of infant health (Equation

2). Wantedness reflects the relative importance of infant health versus other factors (e.g., own health)

in the parent's utility function and therefore impacts prenatal input use (Equation 3) and other

investments in infant health that may be unobserved. The maternal health endowment enters the infant

health production directly (through biological processes) and may also affect infant health indirectly

through the use of prenatal inputs (e.g., mothers with poor health endowments may attempt to offset

an expected unfavorable birth outcome by utilizing more healthy inputs). Maternal risk-taking and time


2
    The model description is borrowed from Reichman et al. (2009).

                                                                                                                4
preference (taste for risky behaviors) affect maternal engagement in risky behaviors (such as smoking

and drug use) and investments in own health, which in turn can impact infant health production directly

through the maternal health endowment (Equation 2) or indirectly through the maternal health

endowment or other inputs (Equation 3).

        Most empirical studies based on the infant health production function framework use reduced

form models, derived by substituting Equation 3 into Equation 2 (that is., these models include

measures of availability of inputs, rather than inputs themselves) or models that directly include the

inputs of interest (Equation 2). For example, for studies exploring the effects of prenatal care, reduced

form models may include availability of prenatal care services as the treatment of interest, while

structural production function models would include a direct measure of prenatal care use. Direct

estimation of Equation 2 may produce biased estimates owing to the potential endogeneity of input

demand and non-random selection into the use of positive or negative inputs (i.e., investment in a

specific input such as prenatal care may be correlated with other unobserved inputs or maternal

characteristics that are associated with infant health). For this reason, some studies use instrumental

variables for the treatment of interest in the attempt to obtain unbiased estimates. Continuing with the

example of prenatal care, some studies use two-stage models that estimate prenatal care use as a

function of availability of prenatal care services or other relevant factors (version of Equation 3) and

then use the predicted values of prenatal care to estimate the infant health outcome (Equation 2), and

some other studies use hybrid or quasi-reduced form models that include direct measures of some

inputs while using availability for others—substituting Equation 3 into Equation 2 for some inputs

(usually the input of interest) but not for others. Below, we provide a systematic literature review that

traces the evolution of the topics, data sources, and methods characterizing the economics literature to

date on infant health production.

Systematic literature review


                                                                                                            5
        We used EconLit to identify original published research articles from 1980 through 2016 that

met the following conditions:

        1. Published in economics journals (i.e., journals with the word “economic” or “economics” in

their titles, Journal of Human Resources, or Journal of Human Capital) or were explicitly based on the

economic health production framework.

        2. Focused on infant outcomes (as opposed to health of older children).

        3. Studied high income countries as designated by the World Bank (World Bank Group, 2017).

        4. Focused on health outcomes rather than health disparities.

        5. Based on data from the second half of the twentieth century or later, as opposed to more

historical data.

        We arrived at a list of 147 articles that met these criteria, all of which were directly or indirectly

influenced by Michael Grossman. These articles are summarized in Tables 1-4, which cover the 1980s,

1990s, 2000s, and 2010-2016, respectively. In subsequent sections, we synthesize each of these tables in

turn, highlighting prominent patterns.

1980s: Early studies

        Most of the studies in this formative decade used data at the county or state level; estimated

direct, reduced form, or 2-stage production functions; and considered infant mortality or birthweight-

related outcomes, as detailed in Table 1. In terms of inputs, most studies focused on prenatal care,

cigarette smoking, and/or availability of various inputs including prenatal care services, community

health centers, family planning and abortion services, prenatal nutrition programs, and neonatal

intensive care units. Fuchs (1986) and Joyce,* Grossman & Goldman* (1989) were prescient of

developments to come in that they focused on low level radiation exposures and pollution, respectively,

as inputs.




                                                                                                                 6
        The first study of infant health production in the economics literature, Grossman and

Jacobowitz* (1981), used county level data to explore determinants of neonatal mortality rates and

found that an increase in the legal abortion rate appeared to be the single most important factor,

dominating over schooling and poverty [1].3 A subsequent study by Rosenzweig and Schultz (1983) used

individual-level data from the 1967-69 National Natality Followback Survey, considered birthweight-

related outcomes rather than infant mortality, and highlighted and addressed (to the extent possible at

the time) the issue of endogeneity of prenatal inputs [2]. Rosenzweig and Schultz estimated that

prenatal cigarette smoking decreased birthweight by 260 grams and that 5 months of prenatal care

delay decreased birthweight by 230 grams, while Corman,* Joyce* and Grossman (1987) found small

estimated effects of prenatal care compared to those of smoking when focusing on a measure of early

prenatal care (first trimester care) [5]. A consistent finding across studies in this decade was that

abortion availability was strongly associated with favorable birth outcomes [1, 2, 5-7], the hypothesized

mechanism (i.e., argument in the production function, Equation 2 above) being wantedness. Another

consistent finding was that measures of access to health care—including community health centers,

Medicaid, and neonatal intensive care—appeared to be important.

        Overall, this formative decade in the economics of infant health production provided key

building blocks that set the stage for decades of research to come. Most of these early studies used

aggregate data, which can provide a sense of the importance of specific inputs at the population level,

but not of direct effects on individuals. The infant health production function research in this initial

decade, which came at the heels of the legalization of abortion after Roe v. Wade in 1973, strongly

suggested the importance of abortion availability for birth outcomes. This small and very new literature

also suggested the importance of prenatal cigarette smoking and access to health care.

1990s: Better data and heyday of IVs

3
 Numbers in square brackets refer to the study numbers in the first column of Table 1, 2, 3, or 4, where
abbreviated citations are used. Full citations are in the bibliography.

                                                                                                           7
        The 1990s saw substantial and widespread improvements in computing capabilities, which

allowed researchers to handle exponentially larger data sets, vastly increased the speed of data

manipulation, facilitated linkages between administrative datasets, and made it possible to geocode

individual-level data and attach area-level characteristics. This development advanced research on

infant health production in particular by allowing for analyses at the individual level, consideration of

previously unexplored inputs and outcomes, and—perhaps most notably—the use of instrumental

variables (IVs) to address the endogeneity of inputs. The majority of studies in the 1990s used

administrative data, including micro-level data from U.S. natality files (sometimes linked to infant

mortality files), state Medicaid files, and linked administrative datasets from various states. For example,

studies used linked birth and hospital discharge records from New Jersey [28] and linked Medicaid and

birth records from New York City [29, 36] and California [31]. A few studies used national survey data,

including the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) [16, 17] and National Maternal and

Infant Health Survey (NMIHS) [33, 37]. One article was based on data from a clinical study that took

place at large municipal hospitals [27]. The set of infant health outcomes investigated in the 1990s was

largely the same as in the previous decade, but a few studies now incorporated length of newborn

hospital stay and newborn hospitalization costs as proxies for infant morbidity [22, 28] and one study

considered sudden infant deaths instead of infant mortality more generally [19]. Two studies were

based on data from high income countries other than the U.S. (Australia, England, and Wales [19];

Canada [26]).

        A defining characteristic of the infant health production literature in the 1990s, reflecting a new

era of policy experimentation in the U.S., was that studies started focusing on policy changes or

variations related to input availability and prices (e.g., Medicaid expansions and healthcare delivery

systems; restriction on abortions under Medicaid; Medicaid fee schedules; and cigarette taxes). This

new crop of studies led to more broad-based attention to the infant health production literature, as it


                                                                                                            8
provided evidence on the effectiveness of policies of interest to legislators and program directors in

addition to providing information of interest to economists about the roles of various inputs. In addition,

researchers continued to study the prenatal inputs that were investigated in the 1980s, but extended

the set to include prenatal illicit drug use [22, 23, 27] in the aftermath of the crack epidemic in the U.S.,

as well as income-related inputs [12, 16, 17], and augmented Medicaid prenatal care services [28, 36].

Prenatal care (use, eligibility, scope) was a major focus in this decade.

        Along with better data, estimation methods evolved. Simultaneous equation models became

more prevalent and sophisticated, and the decade saw many studies utilizing instrumental variables (IV)-

based methods to address non-random selection into prenatal inputs. For instance, Grossman and

Joyce* [11] was the first study to address both the endogeneity of prenatal care in the birthweight

production function and the selection of pregnancies into those that result in live births within a

simultaneous three-equation framework that was identified by IVs and exclusion restrictions. This

embedding of the infant health production function within a Heckman selection model continued to

guide some research in this decade that focused on prenatal care and abortion services [30, 32]. As the

1990s progressed and witnessed an expansion in our understanding and application of IV methods (see,

for example, Angrist and Krueger (2001) for a history of instrumental variables), this evolution extended

to the literature on infant health production, particularly studies that came out in the latter half of the

decade. Many of these studies exploited state or local policy variation that was prevalent in the 1990s as

IVs. For example, one influential study constructed a simulated Medicaid eligibility instrument from

state program rules, capitalizing on the differential timing of the Medicaid expansions across states over

the late 1980s to early 1990s to estimate the causal effects of insurance access on infant health [25].

This innovation, of creating a simulated eligibility instrument that collapsed multi-dimensional program

rules into a single variable that plausibly reflected shifts in the program rules over time and was

orthogonal to the pregnant woman’s individual characteristics, has been used in many studies


                                                                                                                9
thereafter. Another study exploited state variation in cigarette excise taxes as IVs and was one of the

seminal studies quantifying the causal effects of prenatal smoking on birthweight [35]. Another

noteworthy study in this vein exploited state variation in AFDC program rules as IVs to estimate the

effects of welfare participation on birthweight [16].

        Whereas the majority of studies in 1980s considered multiple inputs, those in the 1990s (and

beyond) started focusing on one input with the goal of identifying causal effects. Studies generally found

smaller effect sizes for prenatal care than were found by Rosenzweig and Schultz for an earlier (pre-

Medicaid expansion) cohort, although comparisons across studies for this particular input are difficult

because (1) studies often used different measures of prenatal care, (2) studies using IV methods

addressed endogeneity but tended to produce estimates that were imprecise, and (3) it is plausible that

the effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes changed over time (i.e., as prenatal care became more

widely used as a result of the Medicaid eligibility expansions in the 1980s, the effects on birth outcomes

may have become smaller, as women most likely to benefit gained access to care). Child Trends (2015)

reported that about 8% of infants born in the U.S. in 1970 (close to the Rosenzweig and Schultz cohort)

had mothers who initiated prenatal care after the second trimester of pregnancy, while the

corresponding figure in 1999 was about 4%—representing a decrease of 50 percent. In addition,

measures of the timing of initiation of prenatal care do not speak to the quality of that care; one study

of augmented Medicaid prenatal care (versus standard Medicaid prenatal care), which included case

management services and referrals to other programs, found some evidence of improvements in birth

outcomes above and beyond what could plausibly be attributed to timing of care initiation [28]. Finally,

prenatal care may operate through indirect channels, wherein greater contact between expectant

mothers and physicians could lead to decreases (increases) in health-compromising (health-promoting)

behaviors such as smoking (better diet and nutrition). For example, if reductions in prenatal smoking are

a mechanism through which prenatal care improves birth outcomes, then studies that control for


                                                                                                          10
prenatal smoking would underestimate the effects of prenatal care on infant health outcomes. Thus,

some of the differences in the estimated effects of prenatal care across studies may reflect variations in

controls for other prenatal behaviors.

        Prenatal cigarette smoking was not frequently studied in this decade, although interest in this

input picked up in the subsequent decades with an increasing number of successful state lawsuits

against the tobacco industry; the main estimate from this decade—based on individual level natality

data and IV models—was that any prenatal smoking led to a reduction in birthweight of between 350

and 600 grams [35]; representing a 10-18% reduction compared to the mean birthweight of 3,365 grams

in the U.S. in 1990 (Martin et al., 2005).

        Key policy findings in this decade were that expanding Medicaid eligibility for pregnant women

led to reductions in infant mortality [25] and that augmented prenatal care programs for pregnant

women on Medicaid led to improvements in a number of different birth outcomes [28, 36]. The effects

of Medicaid eligibility and content of care on infant mortality could operate through birthweight-related

outcomes or through postnatal access to care or infant exposures. In regard to the latter, Reichman et

al. (2010), using a multi-pronged approach to address the potential endogeneity of the timing of

prenatal care, found that first trimester prenatal care leads to decreased maternal postpartum smoking,

increased use of well-baby care, and possibly increased breastfeeding.

2000s: Branching out with focus on plausible estimates

        Economic research on infant health production further evolved substantially in the aughts

decade. New focuses were on exposures to pollution [46, 57, 78, 84], sanitation interventions [65], and

weather events [79], with the last serving as a proxy for prenatal stress. The (by now) routine and

efficient practice of geocoding data greatly facilitated this research. These more “passive” exposures are

both policy relevant and arguably less endogenous to the infant health outcome compared to inputs

directly invested by the expectant mother. Research in this decade also focused on a broader range of


                                                                                                          11
policies including those related to malpractice liability [42], hospital discharge laws [71], tort reform [70]

immigration [45], welfare [38, 60, 73], smoking restrictions [75], minimum legal drinking age (MLDA)

laws [80], and parental leave [40, 63]. In terms of the health production model, the first three policies

(malpractice, tort, and discharge laws) may affect the quality of inputs in the production of health.

Smoking restrictions and MLDA laws may affect the demand for tobacco and alcohol. Welfare policy may

affect the demand for health inputs through income and time constraints, and potentially through

access to health insurance, or can have direct effects on infant health through prenatal stress. Policies

that restrict access to public insurance for immigrants may affect the demand for medical inputs among

both immigrants (through loss of public insurance) and non-immigrants (through less competition for

prenatal services). More generous parental leave policies allow greater postnatal parental time inputs

into the production of infant health.

        Again, compared to direct input use, laws are arguably less endogeneous to infant health

outcomes. Many studies continued to focus on the same inputs as in previous decades (e.g., Medicaid

availability/fees/managed care, wantedness, cigarette smoking, illicit drugs, cigarette taxes, and

nutrition policy), but with new data sources and methods. In addition, some studies focused specifically

on the role of education [47, 64], which had routinely been included in models in the past but generally

as a control variable, and other sources of human capital (e.g., maternal pre-pregnancy physical and

mental health endowment [83] and maternal prenatal depression [50]). Finally, some studies focused on

specific prenatal medical inputs (e.g., relevant prescription drugs [56]) and paternal factors such as

paternal education, race/ethnicity, and age [83].

        With increasingly rich data and an evolution of thought about the processes leading to infant

health, the outcomes in this decade expanded beyond infant mortality (the most extreme outcome) and

birthweight-related outcomes to include fetal deaths, birth length, infant malformations, newborn

hospital readmissions, Apgar scores, and specific infant morbidities. Although birthweight is a widely


                                                                                                            12
used and well measured index of subsequent morbidity and a valuable outcome in its own right, it is not

a direct measure of infant health. Low birthweight is a strong risk factor for infant mortality and

morbidity among survivors, but many low birthweight children (even the very lightest) have no serious

health problems (Reichman, 2005). Thus, using birthweight or low birthweight to proxy infant health can

lead to imprecise or biased estimates of the effects of inputs on infant health. The literature is mixed on

the associations between Apgar scores (an index assessing the clinical status of the infant immediately

after birth and the need for intervention to augment breathing) and subsequent morbidity and mortality

(e.g., AAP 2015); as such, that measure may lack precision and lead to biased estimates. One

noteworthy study included a very specific and well-measured indicator of whether the infant had any

serious abnormal health condition soon after birth (12% of their sample) and found that while similar

inferences could be made about the effects of prenatal drug use on infant health when using

birthweight-related outcomes and when using the direct measure of infant health, the same was not

true for prenatal smoking; specifically, the effect of smoking on low birthweight was large and positive

but on the direct measure of infant health was zero [83]. This study was the very last in our systematic

review that estimated single-equation production functions, but the authors were able to use very rich

data and incorporate theoretically important but typically unobserved factors into their models and the

findings underscore that estimates should be interpreted in the context of the specific outcomes that

are modeled.

        In addition to the data sources used in previous decades, studies in the aughts used data from a

randomized clinical trial of a prenatal smoking cessation program [44], the Pregnancy Risk Assessment

Monitoring System [54], the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing survey [83], restricted hospital data

from California [71], the Pregnancy Nutrition Surveillance System [72], and WIC records [81]. Although

most of the studies focused on U.S. settings, a few used data from other countries—specifically Canada

[56], Spain [69], and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries [63].


                                                                                                         13
        The methodologies employed in these studies continued to evolve, with a greater focus on

credible identification strategies and deriving plausible causal estimates. The growing importance placed

on internal validity necessitated that empirical studies of infant health production focus on a single input

and cleanly identify the causal effect of that input. Studies in this decade continued to apply IV-based

methods based on both program rules as well as other sources of variation. For example, one of the first

national studies on how medical malpractice premiums affect prenatal care use and infant health took

place in this decade [42]. In that study, the authors addressed the endogeneity of malpractice premiums

for obstetricians by using state laws related to tort reform and malpractice premiums for neurosurgeons

as IVs. Other influential studies exploited differential variation in the number of new 2- and 4-year

college openings across U.S. counties to identify the effects of maternal education [47], and declines in

total suspended particulates across counties (owing to the 1981-82 recession) to identify the effects of

pollution [46], on infant health outcomes. The use of panel data and fixed effects models (with area

fixed effects or maternal fixed effects) was also quite common in this decade, and studies further

exploited natural and/or policy experiments in conjunction with panel data to estimate difference-in-

differences (DD) models. For example, a noteworthy study brought new evidence to bear on the

question of how access to quality care and provider choice impact infant health, by exploiting an

exogenous policy change in California that raised Medicaid payments to hospitals and therefore raised

the incentives and willingness of hospitals to serve Medicaid patients [53]; the authors capitalized on

this natural experiment within a DD framework by comparing differences in birth outcomes for Medicaid

mothers (treatment group) to privately-insured mothers (control group) across areas that witnessed

larger declines in segregation (Medicaid births clustered at only public hospitals) vs. areas with little or

no decline in segregation from the change in Medicaid payments. Another study exploited differences in

the timing of WIC enrollment, comparing women who enrolled in WIC during the prenatal period across




                                                                                                           14
different trimesters (treated group) with women who did not enroll in WIC until postpartum (control

group) to assess how program participation affects infant health [72].

        The aughts also marked the beginnings of a shift from estimating just an average treatment

effect to assessing heterogeneity across relevant population subgroups. One of the earliest studies to

estimate heterogeneous effects of maternal inputs, specifically maternal education and prenatal care,

used quantile regression methods [41]. While that study did not address the endogeneity of maternal

inputs (rather, it included multiple inputs and treated them as exogenous), it underscored the important

point that the mean effect of any input may mask considerable heterogeneity across the birthweight

distribution. A study a few years later applied a finite mixture model to assess heterogeneity in the

causal effect of an input while treating the input as endogenous, necessitating a focus only on one input

(in this case, prenatal care) and omitting other maternal inputs and behaviors [55]. This study provided

one potential explanation for why some previous work had uncovered only weak effects of prenatal care

on infant health—specifically, that prenatal care has beneficial health effects for “normal” pregnancies

but may appear to be ineffective when a sample includes “complicated” pregnancies that may be

relatively unaffected by prenatal care.

        Overall, the literature in this decade marched on to include a broader range of inputs (although

there was no dominant focus in this regard), outcomes, data sources, and methods and produced an

olio of findings. There was increased attention to magnitudes and precision of estimates. Most of the

relevant studies in this decade found small estimated effects of prenatal care (measured various ways)

on birth outcomes. The estimated effect of prenatal smoking on birthweight, from a clinical trial of a

smoking cessation program, was a reduction of 350 grams [44], which is in the ballpark of the original

Rosenzweig and Schultz estimate. Although there had been no significant findings of unemployment on

birth outcomes prior to this decade, studies now found that recession-induced decreases in pollution led

to decreases in infant mortality [46] and that high unemployment rates led to more favorable birth


                                                                                                         15
outcomes [51]. The latter finding was consistent with the emerging broader literature indicating that

recessions can be good for your health (e.g., Ruhm, 2000a).

2010-2016: Infant health production meets lifecourse and intergenerational health research

        While empirical research in most fields within economics, and in the social sciences in general,

has expanded in similar and corresponding ways (e.g., better and more available data, computing

capabilities, and methodological techniques), the current decade of infant health production research is

experiencing a unique, and perhaps its most dramatic, evolution. Not only have the boundaries

continued to expand (e.g., in terms of scope and methods), but infant health production research has

been integrating with the broader literature on intergenerational health. Specifically, recent studies in

economics have focused on the mother’s pre-conceptional or early childhood health [106] and the

child’s in-utero exposures, including pollution [86, 96, 97, 108, 112, 125, 146], natural disasters [104,

105, 113], stressful events such as plant layoffs [129], and cortisol measurements of stress [141], as

inputs into the production of infant health. Another notable theme is that while most studies of infant

health production in earlier decades used U.S. data sources, those in the current decade (which have

explored a variety of different inputs, many old and many new) have been based on data from other

countries, including Taiwan, the UK, Canada, Chile, Germany, Denmark, Norway, Austria, the

Netherlands, and Spain. Thus, what started out as a small field has gotten much larger and has gone

global. For example, the number of studies that turned up in our search jumped from 10 in the 1980s, to

27 in the 1990s, 48 in the 2000s, and 62 in just the first 7 years of the current decade. When considering

the overall numbers, it is important to note that they are on the conservative side, as many articles

based on the infant health production function framework do not meet the relatively strict inclusion

criteria for our systematic literature review. For example, articles published in economics journals but

based on developing country settings, in which relevant inputs and production processes are quite

different than those in developed countries, are not included.


                                                                                                            16
        Aside from maternal pre-conceptional health and infant in-utero exposures, research on a

plethora of previously unstudied inputs and policies has been published in the current decade. Studies

have continued to focus on pollution, smoking, education, income, maternity stay laws, smoking bans in

workplaces and restaurants, the WIC program, and nutrition—in several cases using state-of-the-art

research designs, such as exploiting Ramadan as a natural experiment for prenatal nutrition [92, 135].

New policies that have been investigated include those that affect fertility and birth timing (e.g., a “baby

bonus” program [121] or tax benefits [126]), the federal food stamps program [94], the Earned Income

Tax Credit [133], changes in provisions the Hill-Burton Act of 1946 (which eliminated requirements for

private hospitals to admit charity care patients and therefore reduced access to care) [93], and laws

involving cigarette purchase age [127].

        Recent studies have investigated the roles of sunshine [147] and specific prenatal

recommendations such as bed rest [132], as well as maternal earnings [137], maternal employment

[140], marital status/divorce [123], domestic violence [90], and bereavement (mother recently lost a

parent) [142]. Several studies have looked at aspects of obstetric and neonatal technology beyond those

that were the focus of earlier studies, including Caesarian section delivery [134], electronic medical

records [101], home versus hospital birth [131], availability of birth control pills [107], and the quality of

neonatal care [87, 95]. Finally, studies have explored the roles of the built environment, including access

to fast food [99]. Advances in technology and exogenous stressful events may shift the production

function, while employment, earnings, and marital status can affect both the demand for inputs and the

time spent in the production of infant health.

        The most studied inputs in the current decade have been smoking and the physical

environment, but together, these inputs have been the focus of only about one quarter of the studies.

Income and employment became more of a focus. Maternal inputs, including smoking, nutrition and




                                                                                                            17
prenatal care continued to be of interest. The infant health outcomes considered have not changed at

all and a few new U.S. survey datasets have been employed.

        The research methods employed are another defining characteristic of the current decade. The

progression towards stronger emphasis on credible identification has continued, and has led studies

utilizing “big data” and rigorous quasi-experimental research designs such as regression discontinuity.

One of the early examples exploited hospital reimbursement rules in California to identify the causal

effect of postpartum hospital stay on hospital readmission and mortality rates [91]. In that study, the

authors capitalized on hospitals typically being reimbursed based on the number of days a patient

spends in the hospital, with days counted as midnights receiving care (i.e., an infant born just after

midnight would be covered for one additional night of care relative to an infant born just prior to

midnight). Another study used administrative data from Denmark coupled with an information shock to

obstetricians that discontinuously increased caesarean section (CS) rates for breech babies born at term

to assess how CS delivery affected the health of infants who are at the margin of having a CS vs. a

vaginal birth [134]. Yet another study applied an RD design to the question of how prenatal smoking

affects birthweight, a question previously studied through IV and other methods, by exploiting the

discontinuous shift in the cost of accessing cigarettes at the minimum legal purchase age [127]. Studies

have also continued to use longitudinal or panel data and quasi-experimental research designs from the

previous two decades including IV and DD methods, with many of these studies relying on multiple

strategies and identification checks. For example, one study used IV, DD, and maternal fixed effects

estimators, applied to population data from Norway, to explore how maternal stress during pregnancy

due to the death of one of her parents affects birth outcomes [142].

        Overall, the 2010s have been a period of great expansion of the infant health production

literature. The field has gone truly global, capitalized on big data and increasingly sophisticated research




                                                                                                          18
designs, and become an essential part of the broad and highly salient literature on intergenerational

health.

Conclusion

          Much has been learned about determinants of infant health since Michael Grossman developed

and introduced the infant health production framework almost four decades ago. His framework has

(conservatively) been applied in hundreds—and more likely thousands—of research studies, many of

which have been conducted by Grossman’s academic descendants. From this body of work, several

broad themes emerge.

          First, policies matter for infant health, particularly those affecting access to health care.

Healthcare access for pregnant women and children improved dramatically during the past 3-4 decades

and had positive effects on infant health. Although the estimated effects of prenatal care use on birth

outcomes have tended to be small in recent decades, late (or no) prenatal care initiation in the U.S.

decreased substantially during the 1990s and stood at less than 4% of all births in 2002 (no comparable

figures are available thereafter; see Child Trends Databank, 2015), leaving limited room for

improvements in this regard (although enhancements to the content and scope of prenatal care may be

promising strategies). Moreover, prenatal care may be “too little too late” to improve birth outcomes

for some women, who may enter pregnancy with a host of physical, mental, and psychosocial problems,

the effects of which cannot be addressed within the confines of a pregnancy. As found in a 2009 study

[85] and convincingly confirmed by recent studies linking maternal pre-conceptional and early childhood

health [106] and in-utero exposures [92, 96, 97, 104, 105, 108, 112, 141] to offspring birth outcomes,

women’s pre-pregnancy mental and physical health are important predictors of birth outcomes above

and beyond pregnancy-related health, suggesting that healthcare access and quality for young girls and

women of reproductive age is a promising strategy for improving infant health. The availability of




                                                                                                          19
abortion services stands out as an important predictor of infant health, suggesting the importance of

access to family planning services—ideally as part of comprehensive and multifaceted health care.

        Another theme that is obvious from this review is that prenatal smoking and other chemical

exposures compromise infant health. The most consistent metric for prenatal smoking is birthweight in

grams associated with any smoking during pregnancy, and the estimates have been in the “few hundred

grams” range (reductions in birthweight attributed to smoking) across four decades with evolving

methodological sophistication. Because there are (understandably) few randomized controlled trials of

the effects of prenatal smoking, the infant health production literature provides much of the evidence

base in this regard. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that estimates of the causal effect of prenatal

smoking on birthweight based on observational data and quasi-experimental evidence are close to

estimates derived from a randomized control trial of a smoking cessation intervention directed at

pregnant women [35]. Recent studies also provide strong evidence of the adverse effects of air

pollution on infant health, which may operate through fetal health or postnatal exposures. Sorting out

the various pathways underlying these effects is a potentially fruitful direction for future research, as is

explaining the largely inconsistent estimated effects of nutrition, education, and other less-studied

arguments in the infant health production function.

        Other potentially fruitful directions for further research include the effects of pre-conceptional

and lifetime health care on birth outcomes (for reasons elucidated above); the roles of paternal factors,

which have scarcely been studied by economists while findings from other fields (e.g., occupational

health, psychology, and sociology) suggest that paternal biological, economic, social, and behavioral

inputs are important for children’s health; the potential roles of grandparents and social support (which

relates to the growing literature on social capital and health); the potential role of housing stability and

characteristics (very few studies in this regard came up in our systematic review and there is increasing

interest in the role of housing as both a resource and an environment on health); the potential


                                                                                                           20
complementarity or substitutability of inputs (i.e., most studies consider inputs in isolation, while it is

possible that bundles of inputs are more important); and factors that may exacerbate or buffer the

effects of adverse exposures and enhance or mitigate the effects of favorable exposures. In addition, as

medical technology evolves (e.g., applications of genomics or targeted interventions), there will be

additional inputs to consider and possibly more precise measures of health in infancy. There is a lot of

work to do in coming decades, so Michael Grossman’s infant health production tree will undoubtedly

continue to branch out, fertilize new ideas, and have major impact.




                                                                                                              21
References

Abrevaya, J. (2001). The effects of demographics and maternal behavior on the distribution of birth
         outcomes. Empirical Economics, 26(1), 247-257.
Abrevaya, J., and Dahl, C. M. (2008). The effects of birth inputs on birthweight. Journal of Business and
         Economic Statistics, 26(4), 379-397.
Agarwal, N., Banternghansa, C., and Bui, L. M. (2010). Toxic exposure in America: estimating fetal and
         infant health outcomes from 14 years of TRI reporting. Journal of Health Economics, 29(4), 557-
         574. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2010.04.002
Aizer, A. (2011). Poverty, violence, and health: the impact of domestic violence during pregnancy on
         newborn health. Journal of Human Resources, 46(3), 518-538.
Aizer, A., Currie, J., and Moretti, E. (2007). Does managed care hurt health? evidence from Medicaid
         mothers. Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(3), 385-399.
Aizer, A., Lleras-Muney, A., and Stabile, M. (2005). Access to care, provider choice, and the infant health
         gradient. The American Economic Review, 95(2), 248-252.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/000282805774670248
Aizer, A., Stroud, L., & Buka, S. (2016). Maternal stress and child outcomes: Evidence from
         siblings. Journal of Human Resources, 51(3), 523-555.
Almond, D., and Doyle, J. J. (2011). After midnight: a regression discontinuity design in length of
         postpartum hospital stays. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(3), 1-34.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/pol.3.3.1
Almond, D., and Mazumder, B.A. (2011). Health capital and the prenatal environment: the effect of
         Ramadan observance during pregnancy. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(4),
         56-85. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/app.3.4.56
Almond, D., Currie, J., and Herrmann, M. (2012). From infant to mother: early disease environment and
         future maternal health. Labour Economics, 19(4), 475-483.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.labeco.2012.05.015
Almond, D., Currie, J., and Simeonova, E. (2011). Public vs. private provision of charity care? evidence
         from the expiration of hill-burton requirements in Florida. Journal of Health Economics, 30(1),
         189-199. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2010.11.004
Almond, D., Doyle Jr, J. J., Kowalski, A. E., and Williams, H. (2010). Estimating marginal returns to medical
         care: evidence from at-risk newborns. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2), 591-634.
Almond, D., Hoynes, H. W., and Schanzenbach, D. W. (2011). Inside the war on poverty: the impact of
         food stamps on birth outcomes. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2), 387-403.
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee (AAP) on Fetus and Newborn and American College of
         Obstetricians and Gynecologists Committee on Obstetric Practice. (2015). Pediatrics, 136, 819-
         822.
Amuedo-Dorantes, C., and Mundra, K. (2003). Impact of immigration on prenatal care use and birth
         weight: evidence from California in the 1990's. The American Economic Review, 93(2), 242-246.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/000282803321947128
Ananat, E. O., and Hungerman, D. M. (2012). The power of the pill for the next generation: oral
         contraception's effects on fertility, abortion, and maternal and child characteristics. Review of
         Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 37-51.
Angrist, J. D., & Krueger, A. B. (2001). Instrumental variables and the search for identification: from
         supply and demand to natural experiments. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(4), 69-85.
Bache, S. M., Dahl, C. M., and Kristensen, J. T. (2013). Headlights on tobacco road to low birthweight
         outcomes: evidence from a battery of quantile regression estimators and a heterogeneous
         panel. Empirical Economics, 44(3), 1593-1633. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00181-012-0570-8

                                                                                                          22
Barker D. Fetal and infant origins of adult disease. London: BMJ Publishing, 1992.
Barreca, A. I., Guldi, M., Lindo, J. M., and Waddell, G. R. (2011). Saving babies? Revisiting the effect of
         very low birth weight classification. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4), 2117-2123.
Barreca, A., and Page, M. (2015). A pint for a pound? Minimum drinking age laws and birth
         outcomes. Health Economics, 24(4), 400-418.
Bharadwaj, P., Johnsen, J. V., and Loken, K. V. (2014). Smoking bans, maternal smoking and birth
         outcomes. Journal of Public Economics, 115, 72-93.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2014.04.008
Bitler, M. P., and Currie, J. (2005). Does WIC work? The effects of WIC on pregnancy and birth
         outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 24(1), 73-91.
Black, S. E., Devereux, P. J., and Salvanes, K. G. (2016). Does grief transfer across generations?
         bereavements during pregnancy and child outcomes. American Economic Journal: Applied
         Economics, 8(1), 193-223. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/app.8.1.193
Borra, C., Gonzalez, L., and Sevilla, A. (2016). Birth timing and neonatal health. The American Economic
         Review, 106(5), 329-332. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.106.5.329
Brunner, B., and Kuhn, A. (2014). Announcement effects of health policy reforms: evidence from the
         abolition of Austria’s baby bonus. The European Journal of Health Economics, 15(4), 373-388.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10198-013-0481-4
Campbell, M. J. (1994). Time series regression for counts: an investigation into the relationship between
         Sudden Infant Death Syndrome and environmental temperature. Journal of the Royal Statistical
         Society. Series A (Statistics in Society), 191-208.
Cantarero, D., and Pascual, M. (2008). Analysing the impact of fiscal decentralization on health
         outcomes: empirical evidence from Spain. Applied Economics Letters, 15(2), 109-111.
Carlson, K. (2015). Fear itself: the effects of distressing economic news on birth outcomes. Journal of
         Health Economics, 41, 117-132.
Chay, K. Y., and Greenstone, M. (2003). The impact of air pollution on infant mortality: evidence from
         geographic variation in pollution shocks induced by a recession. The Quarterly Journal of
         Economics, 118(3), 1121-1167.
Cesarini, D., Lindqvist, E., Östling, R., and Wallace, B. (2016). Wealth, health, and child development:
         evidence from administrative data on Swedish lottery players. The Quarterly Journal of
         Economics, 131(2), 687-738.
Child Trends Databank. (2015). Late or no prenatal care. Available at:
         https://www.childtrends.org/?late-or-no-prenatal-care .
Choi, Y., Ha, H., Lim, J., and Lee, E. (2015). Revisit the effect of the prenatal medical care use on the birth
         outcome of newborn baby. Hitotsubashi Journal of Economics, 56(2), 155-175.
Chou, S. Y., Grossman, M., and Liu, J. T. (2014). The impact of national health insurance on birth
         outcomes: a natural experiment in Taiwan. Journal of Development Economics, 111, 75-91.
Chou, S. Y., Liu, J. T., Grossman, M., and Joyce, T. (2010). Parental education and child health: evidence
         from a natural experiment in Taiwan. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(1), 33-
         61. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/app.2.1.33
Coneus, K., and Spiess, C. K. (2012). Pollution exposure and child health: evidence for infants and
         toddlers in Germany. Journal of Health Economics, 31(1), 180-196.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2011.09.006
Conway, K. S., and Deb, P. (2005). Is prenatal care really ineffective? or, is the 'devil' in the
         distribution? Journal of Health Economics, 24(3), 489-513.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2004.09.012
Conway, K. S., and Kennedy, L. D. (2004). Maternal depression and the production of infant
         health. Southern Economic Journal, 71(2), 260-286.

                                                                                                            23
Corman, H., and Grossman, M. (1985). Determinants of neonatal mortality rates in the U.S.: a reduced
         form model. Journal of Health Economics, 4(3), 213-236.
Corman, H., Joyce, T. J., and Grossman, M. (1987). Birth outcome production function in the United
         States. Journal of Human Resources, 22(3), 339-360.
Corman, H., Joyce, T., and Grossman, M. (1988). A cost-effectiveness analysis of strategies to reduce
         infant mortality. Medical Care, 26(4), 348-360.
Cremieux, P. Y., Meilleur, M. C., Ouellette, P., Petit, P., Zelder, M., and Potvin, K. (2005). Public and
         private pharmaceutical spending as determinants of health outcomes in Canada. Health
         Economics, 14(2), 107-116.
Cremieux, P. Y., Ouellette, P., and Pilon, C. (1999). Health care spending as determinants of health
         outcomes. Health Economics, 8(7), 627-639.
Currie, J., and Cole, N. (1993). Welfare and child health: the link between AFDC participation and birth
         weight. The American Economic Review, 83(4), 971-985.
Currie, J., and Grogger, J. (2002). Medicaid expansions and welfare contractions: offsetting effects on
         prenatal care and infant health? Journal of Health Economics, 21(2), 313-335
Currie, J., and Gruber, J. (1996). Saving babies: the efficacy and cost of recent changes in the Medicaid
         eligibility of pregnant women. Journal of Political Economy, 104(6), 1263-1296.
Currie, J., and MacLeod, W. B. (2008). First do no harm? tort reform and birth outcomes. The Quarterly
         Journal of Economics, 123(2), 795-830.
Currie, J., and Moretti, E. (2003). Mother's education and the intergenerational transmission of human
         capital: evidence from college openings. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1495-1532.
Currie, J., and Neidell, M. (2005). Air pollution and infant health: what can we learn from California's
         recent experience? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 1003-1030.
Currie, J., and Schmieder, J. F. (2009). Fetal exposures to toxic releases and infant health. American
         Economic Review, 99(2), 177-183. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.99.2.177
Currie, J., and Walker, R. (2011). Traffic congestion and infant health: evidence from E-ZPass. American
         Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1), 65-90. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/app.3.1.65
Currie, J., Greenstone, M., and Moretti, E. (2011). Superfund cleanups and infant health. The American
         Economic Review, 101(3), 435-441. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.101.3.435
Currie, J., Gruber, J., and Fischer, M. (1995). Physician payments and infant mortality: evidence from
         Medicaid fee policy. American Economic Review, 85(2), 106-111.
Currie, J., Neidell, M., and Schmieder, J. F. (2009). Air pollution and infant health: lessons from New
         Jersey. Journal of Health Economics, 28(3), 688-703.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2009.02.001
Currie, J., Zivin, J. G., Meckel, K., Neidell, M. J., and Schlenker, W. (2013). Something in the water:
         contaminated drinking water and infant health. Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue
         canadienne e’economique, 46(3), 791-810.
Currie, J., and Rossin-Slater, M. (2013). “Weathering the storm: hurricanes and birth outcomes,” Journal
         of Health Economics. 32(3): 487-503.
Daysal, N. M., Trandafir, M., and Van Ewijk, R. (2015). Saving lives at birth: the impact of home births on
         infant outcomes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(3), 28-50.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/app.7.3.28
Dehejia, R., and Lleras-Muney, A. (2004). Booms, busts, and babies' health. The Quarterly Journal of
         Economics, 119(3), 1091-1130.
Deschenes, O., Greenstone, M., and Guryan, J. (2009). Climate change and birth weight. The American
         Economic Review, 99(2), 211-217. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.99.2.211
Dubay, L., Kaestner, R., and Waidmann, T. (2001). Medical malpractice liability and its effect on prenatal
         care utilization and infant health. Journal of Health Economics, 20(4), 591-611.

                                                                                                         24
Durrance, C. P., and Guldi, M. (2015). Maternal bed rest and infant health. American Journal of Health
         Economics, 1(3), 345-373.
Evans, W. N., and Lien, D. S. (2005). The benefits of prenatal care: evidence from the PAT bus
         strike. Journal of Econometrics, 125(1-2), 207-239.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2004.04.007
Currie, J., Nixon, L., and Cole, N. (1996). Restrictions on Medicaid funding of abortion: effects on
         pregnancy resolutions and birth weight. Journal of Human Resources, 159-188
Evans, W. N., and Ringel, J. S. (1999). Can higher cigarette taxes improve birth outcomes? Journal of
         Public Economics, 72(1), 135-154.
Evans, W. N., Garthwaite, C., and Wei, H. (2008). The impact of early discharge laws on the health of
         newborns. Journal of Health Economics, 27(4), 843-870.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2007.12.003
Fertig, A. R. (2010). Selection and the effect of prenatal smoking. Health Economics, 19(2), 209-226.
Fertig, A. R., and Watson, T. (2009). Minimum drinking age laws and infant health outcomes. Journal of
         Health Economics, 28(3), 737-747. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2009.02.006
Figlio, D., Hamersma, S., and Roth, J. (2009). Does prenatal WIC participation improve birth outcomes?
         new evidence from Florida. Journal of Public Economics, 93(1-2), 235-245.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2008.08.003
Frank, R. G. , Strobino, D. M., Salkever, D. S., & Jackson, C. A. (1992). Updated estimates of the impact of
         prenatal care on birthweight outcomes by race. Journal of Human Resources, 27(4), 629-642.
Frimmel, W., and Pruckner, G. J. (2014). Birth weight and family status revisited: evidence from Austrian
         register Data. Health Economics, 23(4), 426-445.
Fuchs, V. R. (1986). Low-Level radiation and infant mortality. In V. R. Fuchs (Ed.), The health
         economy (pp. 200-213). Cambridge, Mass., and London.
Gai, Y., and Feng, L. (2012). Effects of federal nutrition program on birth outcomes. Atlantic Economic
         Journal, 40(1), 61-83. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11293-011-9294-y
Goldman, F., and Grossman, M. (1988). The impact of public health policy: the case of community health
         centers. Eastern Economic Journal, 14(1), 63-72.
Gray, B. (2001). Do Medicaid physician fees for prenatal services affect birth outcomes? Journal of
         Health Economics, 20(4), 571-590.
Grossman, Michael. (1972). On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of
         Political Economy, 80(2), 223-255.
Grossman, M. (2004). The demand for health, 30 years later: a very personal retrospective and
         prospective reflection. Journal of Health Economics, 23(4), 629-636.
Grossman, M., and Jacobowitz, S. (1981). Variations in infant mortality rates among counties of the
         United States: the roles of public policies and programs. Demography, 18(4), 695-713.
Grossman, M., and Joyce, T. J. (1990). Unobservables, pregnancy resolutions, and birth weight
         production functions in New York City. Journal of Political Economy, 98(5), 983-1007.
Guindon, G. E., and Contoyannis, P. (2012). A second look at pharmaceutical spending as determinants
         of health outcomes in Canada. Health Economics, 21(12), 1477-1495.
Haeck, C., and Lefebvre, P. (2016). A simple recipe: the effect of a prenatal nutrition program on child
         health at birth. Labour Economics, 41, 77-89.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.labeco.2016.05.003
Hamilton, B. H. (2001). Estimating treatment effects in randomized clinical trials with non-compliance:
         the impact of maternal smoking on birthweight. Health Economics, 10(5), 399-410.
Hanratty, M. J. (1996). Canadian national health insurance and infant health. The American Economic
         Review, 86(1), 276-284.


                                                                                                         25
Hoynes, H., Miller, D., and Simon, D. (2015). Income, the earned income tax credit, and infant
        health. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1), 172-211.
        doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/pol.7.1.172
Hoynes, H., Page, M., and Stevens, A. H. (2011). Can targeted transfers improve birth outcomes?
        evidence from the introduction of the WIC program. Journal Of Public Economics, 95(7-8), 813-
        827. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2010.12.006
Jensen, V. M. (2014). Happy doctor makes happy baby? incentivizing physicians improves quality of
        prenatal care. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(5), 838-848.
Jensen, V. M., and Wust, M. (2015). Can caesarean section improve child and maternal health? the case
        of breech babies. Journal of Health Economics, 39, 289-302.
        doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2014.07.004
Jones, A. M. (1991). An econometric investigation of low birth weight in the United States. Journal of
        Health Economics, 10(1), 81-99.
Joyce, T. (1987). The impact of induced abortion on black and white birth outcomes in the United
        States. Demography, 24(2), 229-244.
Joyce, T. (1994). Self-Selection, prenatal care, and birthweight among Blacks, Whites, and Hispanics in
        New York City. Journal of Human Resources, 29(3), 762-794.
Joyce, T. (1999). Impact of augmented prenatal care on birth outcomes of Medicaid recipients in New
        York City. Journal of Health Economics, 18(1), 31-67.
Joyce, T. J. (1990). A time-series analysis of unemployment and health: the case of birth outcomes in
        New York City. Journal of Health Economics, 8(4), 419-436.
Joyce, T. J., Grossman, M., and Goldman, F. (1989). An assessment of the benefits of air pollution
        control: the case of infant health. Journal of Urban Economics, 25(1), 32-51.
Joyce, T. J., Kaestner, R., and Korenman, S. (2000). The effect of pregnancy intention on child
        development. Demography, 37(1), 83-94.
Joyce, T. Racine, A. D., McCalla, S. and Wehbeh, H. (1995). The impact of prenatal exposure to cocaine
        on newborn costs and length of stay. Health Services Research, 30(2), 341-359.
Joyce, T., and Grossman, M. (1990). The dynamic relationship between low birthweight and induced
        abortion in New York City: an aggregate time-series analysis. Journal of Health Economics, 9(3),
        273-288.
Joyce, T., and Mocan, N. (1993). Unemployment and infant health: time-series evidence from the state
        of Tennessee. Journal of Human Resources, 28(1), 185-203.
Joyce, T., Gibson, D., and Colman, S. (2005). The changing association between prenatal participation in
        WIC and birth outcomes in New York City. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 24(4),
        661-685.
Joyce, T., Racine, A., and Yunzal-Butler, C. (2008). Reassessing the WIC effect: evidence from the
        Pregnancy Nutrition Surveillance System. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27(2),
        277-303.
Kaestner, R. (1999). Health insurance, the quantity and quality of prenatal care, and infant
        health. Inquiry, 36(2), 162-175.
Kaestner, R., and Lee, W. C. (2005). The effect of welfare reform on prenatal care and birth
        weight. Health Economics, 14(5), 497-511.
Kaestner, R., Dubay, L., and Kenney, G. (2005). Managed care and infant health: an evaluation of
        Medicaid in the US. Social Science & Medicine, 60(8), 1815-1833.
Kaestner, R., Joyce, T., and Wehbeh, H. (1996). The effect of maternal drug use on birth weight:
        measurement error in binary variables. Economic Inquiry, 34(4), 617-629.



                                                                                                      26
Kemptner, D., and Marcus, J. (2013). Spillover effects of maternal education on child's health and health
          behavior. Review of Economics of The Household, 11(1), 29-52.
          doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11150-012-9161-x
King, C., Markowitz, S., and Ross, H. (2015). Tobacco control policies and Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
          in developed nations. Health Economics, 24(8), 1042-1048.
Knittel, C. R., Miller, D. L., and Sanders, N. J. (2016). Caution, drivers! children present: traffic, pollution,
          and infant health. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(2), 350-366.
Leonard, J., and Mas, A. (2008). Welfare reform, time limits, and infant health. Journal of Health
          Economics, 27(6), 1551-1566. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2008.05.013
Levinson, A., and Ullman, F. (1998). Medicaid managed care and infant health. Journal of Health
          Economics, 17(3), 351-368.
Lhila, A. (2011). Does access to fast food lead to super-sized pregnant women and whopper
          babies? Economics & Human Biology, 9(4), 364-380.
          doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ehb.2011.07.003
Lhila, A., and Simon, K. I. (2008). Prenatal health investment decisions: does the child's sex
          matter?. Demography, 45(4), 885-905.
Li, K., and Poirier, D. J. (2003a). An econometric model of birth inputs and outputs for Native
          Americans. Journal of Econometrics, 113(2), 337-361.
Li, K., and Poirier, D. J. (2003b). Bayesian analysis of an econometric model of birth inputs and
          outputs. Journal of Population Economics, 16(3), 597-625.
Lien, D. S., and Evans, W. N. (2005). Estimating the impact of large cigarette tax hikes: the case of
          maternal smoking and infant birth weight. Journal of Human Resources, 40(2), 373-392.
Lin, W. (2009). Why has the health inequality among infants in the US declined? accounting for the
          shrinking gap. Health Economics, 18(7), 823-841
Lindo, J. M. (2011). Parental job loss and infant health. Journal of Health Economics, 30(5), 869-879.
          doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2011.06.008
Liu, G. G. (1998). Birth outcomes and the effectiveness of prenatal care. Health Services Research, 32(6),
          805-823.
Luechinger, S. (2014). Air pollution and infant mortality: a natural experiment from power plant
          desulfurization. Journal of Health Economics, 37, 219-231.
          doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2014.06.009
Markowitz, S. (2008). The effectiveness of cigarette regulations in reducing cases of Sudden Infant Death
          Syndrome. Journal of Health Economics, 27(1), 106-133.
          doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2007.03.006
Markowitz, S., Adams, E. K., Dietz, P. M., Kannan, V., and Tong, V. T. (2013). Tobacco control policies,
          birth outcomes, and maternal human capital. Journal of Human Capital, 7(2), 130-160.
Martin, J. A., Hamilton, B. E., Sutton, P. D., et al. Births: Final data for 2003. (2005). National vital
          statistics reports, 54(2). Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
McCrary, J., and Royer, H. (2011). The effect of female education on fertility and infant health: evidence
          from school entry policies using exact date of birth. The American Economic Review, 101(1), 158-
          195.
Jurges, H. (2015). Ramadan fasting, sex-ratio at birth, and birth weight: no effects on Muslim infants
          born in Germany. Economics Letters, 137, 13-16.
          doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2015.10.015
Menclova, A. K. (2013). The effects of unemployment on prenatal care use and infant health. Journal of
          Family and Economic Issues, 34(4), 400-420. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10834-012-9339-7
Miller, A. R., and Tucker, C. E. (2011). Can health care information technology save babies? Journal of
          Political Economy, 119(2), 289-324.

                                                                                                              27
Mocan, H. N., and Topyan, K. (1995). Illicit drug use and health: analysis and projections of New York City
         birth outcomes using a Kalman Filter model. Southern Economic Journal, 62(1), 164-182.
Mocan, N., Raschke, C., and Unel, B. (2015). The impact of mothers' earnings on health inputs and infant
         health. Economics & Human Biology, 19, 204-223.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ehb.2015.08.008
Mukhopadhyay, S., Wendel, J., Lee, W., and Yang, W. (2008). Analyzing the impact of prenatal care on
         infant health: do we have useful input and output measures? Economics Bulletin, 9(22), 1-14.
Noonan, K., Reichman, N. E., Corman, H., and Dave, D. (2007). Prenatal drug use and the production of
         infant health. Health Economics, 16(4), 361-384.
Oleske, D. M., Branca, M. L., Schmidt, J. B., Ferguson, R., and Linn, E. S. (1998). A comparison of
         capitated and fee-for-service Medicaid reimbursement methods on pregnancy
         outcomes. Health Services Research, 33(1), 55-74.
Reichman, N. (2005). Low birth weight and school readiness. The Future of Children, 15(1), 91–116.
Reichman, N. E., and Florio, M. J. (1996). The effects of enriched prenatal care services on Medicaid birth
         outcomes in New Jersey. Journal of Health Economics, 15(4), 455-476.
Reichman, N. E., Corman, H., Noonan, K., and Dave, D. (2009). Infant health production functions: what a
         difference the data make. Health Economics, 18(7), 761-782.
Reichman, N., Corman, H., Noonan, K., Schwartz-Soicher, O. (2010). Effects of prenatal care on maternal
         postpartum behaviors. Review of Economics of the Household, 8(2): 171–197.
Rettenmaier, A. J., and Wang, Z. (2013). What determines health: a causal analysis using county level
         data. The European Journal of Health Economics, 14(5), 821-834.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10198-012-0429-0
Rosenzweig, M. R., and Schultz, T. P. (1983). Estimating a household production function: heterogeneity,
         the demand for health inputs, and their effects on birth weight. Journal of Political
         Economy, 91(5), 723-746.
Rossin, M. (2011). The effects of maternity leave on children's birth and infant health outcomes in the
         United States. Journal of Health Economics, 30(2), 221-239.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2011.01.005
Rous, J. J., Jewell, R. T., and Brown, R. W. (2004). The effect of prenatal care on birthweight: a full-
         information maximum likelihood approach. Health Economics, 13(3), 251-264.
Ruhm, C. J. (2000a). Are recessions good for your health? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(2),
         617-650.
Ruhm, C. J. (2000b). Parental leave and child health. Journal of Health Economics, 19(6), 931-960.
Salmasi, L., and Pieroni, L. (2015). Immigration policy and birth weight: positive externalities in Italian
         law. Journal of Health Economics, 43, 128-139.
Schulkind, L., and Shapiro, T. M. (2014). What a difference a day makes: quantifying the effects of birth
         timing manipulation on infant health. Journal of Health Economics, 33, 139-158.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2013.11.003
Sen, A., and Pierard, E. (2011). Estimating the effects of cigarette taxes on birth outcomes. Canadian
         Public Policy, 37(2), 257-276.
Simeonova, E. (2011). Out of sight, out of mind? natural disasters and pregnancy outcomes in the
         USA. CESifo Economic Studies, 57(3), 403-431.
Sneeringer, S. (2009). Does animal feeding operation pollution hurt public health? a national
         longitudinal study of health externalities identified by geographic shifts in livestock
         production. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 91(1), 124-137.
Sonchak, L. (2015). Medicaid reimbursement, prenatal care and infant health. Journal of Health
         Economics, 44, 10-24. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.08.008


                                                                                                        28
Tanaka, S. (2005). Parental leave and child health across OECD countries. The Economic Journal,
         115(501), F7-28.
Torche, F. (2011). The effect of maternal stress on birth outcomes: exploiting a natural
         experiment. Demography, 48(4), 1473-1491. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13524-011-0054-z
Trudeau, J., Conway, K. S., and Menclova, A. K. (2016). Soaking up the sun: the role of sunshine in the
         production of infant health. American Journal of Health Economics, 2(1), 1-40.
Walker, M. B., and Wallace, S. (1998). The implications of current policies on the production of infant
         health. Applied Economics, 30(9), 1177-1186.
Walker, M. B., Tekin, E., and Wallace, S. (2009). Teen smoking and birth outcomes. Southern Economic
         Journal, 75(3), 892-907.
Warner, G. (1998). Birthweight productivity of prenatal care. Southern Economic Journal, 65(1), 42-63.
Warner, G. L. (1995). Prenatal care demand and birthweight production of black mothers. The American
         Economic Review, 85(2), 132-137.
Watson, T. (2006). Public health investments and the infant mortality gap: evidence from federal
         sanitation interventions on U.S. Indian reservations. Journal of Public Economics, 90(8-9), 1537-
         1560. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2005.10.002
Wehby, G. L., Wilcox, A., and Lie, R. T. (2013). The impact of cigarette quitting during pregnancy on other
         prenatal health behaviors. Review of Economics of the Household, 11(2), 211-233.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11150-012-9163-8
World Bank Group (2017). DataBank. High Income. Accessed December 4, 2017 from:
         https://data.worldbank.org/income-level/high-income
Wust, M. (2015). Maternal employment during pregnancy and birth outcomes: evidence from Danish
         siblings. Health Economics, 24(6), 711-725.
Yamada, T., Yamada, T. and Chaloupka, F. (1989). Nutrition and infant health in Japan. The Journal of
         Human Resources, 24(4), 725-736.
Yan, J. (2013). Prenatal smoking cessation and infant health: evidence from sibling births. Southern
         Economic Journal, 80(2), 299-323.
Yan, J. (2014). The effects of a minimum cigarette purchase age of 21 on prenatal smoking and infant
         health. Eastern Economic Journal, 40(3), 289-308.




                                                                                                        29
    Table 1. 1980s: Early Studies

#   Article             Input/Policy/Exposure                  Outcome(s)            Data Source       Method(s)   Findings

1   Grossman, M.,       Multiple inputs including education    County-level          Natality and      OLS         Increase in legal abortion rate is single
    & Jacobowitz,       and availability of physicians,        neonatal mortality    mortality data,               most important factor associated with
    S.* (1981)          Medicaid, federal health centers,      rates (3-yr.          U.S., 1970-                   reductions in both white and nonwhite
                        and abortion                           average)              1972                          neonatal mortality rates; dominates over
                                                                                                                   schooling and poverty
2   Rosenzweig, M.      Multiple inputs including prenatal     Individual-level      National          IV          Effect of prenatal smoking on BW: 230
    R., & Schultz, T.   care, smoking                          BW and GA-            Natality                      grams; effect of 5-month increase in
    P. (1983)                                                  related outcomes      Followback                    prenatal care delay on BW: 260 grams;
                                                                                     Survey, 1967-                 no effect of maternal age; small effect of
                                                                                     69                            parity
3   Corman, H.,* &      Multiple inputs including education    County-level          Natality and      OLS         Neonatal intensive care, Medicaid, and
    Grossman, M.        and availability of Medicaid, family   neonatal mortality    mortality data,               abortion access (and WIC for whites) are
    (1985)              planning, federal health centers,      rates (3-yr.          U.S., 1976-                   associated with reduced mortality for
                        WIC, abortion, neonatal intensive      average)              1978                          both blacks and whites
                        care
4   Fuchs, V. R.        Pollution/radiation from 3 Mile        State-level infant,   Mortality data,   OLS         No effects of radiation from 3 Mile Island
    (1986)              Island                                 neonatal, and         1960-1970
                                                               post-neonatal
                                                               mortality rates
5   Corman, H.,*        Multiple inputs including smoking,     County-level          Natality and      IV          Increase of average number of cigarettes
    Joyce, T.,* &       prenatal care, abortion, family        neonatal              mortality data,               per capita in state by 1 unit increases
    Grossman, M.        planning, federal health centers,      mortality, LBW (3     U.S., 1976-                   neonatal mortality by 6% for blacks and
    (1987)              WIC, and neonatal intensive care       yr. average)          1978                          whites; increase of 1 percentage point in
                                                                                                                   women who receive first trimester
                                                                                                                   prenatal care reduces neonatal mortality
                                                                                                                   by 1% for both races
6   Joyce, T.*          Abortion rates                         County-level          Natality and      IV          Higher abortion rates decrease
    (1987)                                                     neonatal              mortality data,               unfavorable birth outcomes for blacks
                                                               mortality, LBW,       U.S., 1976-                   and whites
                                                               GA (3 yr. average)    1978




                                                                                                                                                          30
      Table 1. 1980s: Early Studies

 #    Article            Input/Policy/Exposure                Outcome(s)           Data Source       Method(s)   Findings

 7    Joyce, T.,*        Multiple inputs including prenatal   County-level         Natality and      IV          Detrimental effects of reduced spending
      Corman, H.,* &     care, smoking, abortion, family      neonatal mortality   mortality data,               levels for social programs may have been
      Grossman, M.       planning, federal health centers,    rates (3 yr.         U.S., 1976-                   more than offset by the continued
      (1988)             WIC, neonatal and intensive care     average)             1978                          growth in abortion availability, neonatal
                                                                                                                 intensive care availability, and female
                                                                                                                 schooling levels
 8    Goldman, F.,* &    Community Health Centers (CHCs)      Annual county-       Natality and      OLS         CHCs contributed ~2-4% reductions in
      Grossman, M.                                            level infant,        mortality data,               short run and 4-6% reductions in long
      (1988)                                                  neonatal, and        U.S., 1970-                   run; effects for blacks larger than for
                                                              post-neonatal        1978                          whites
                                                              mortality rates
 9    Joyce, T.,*       Pollution                             County-level         Natality and      IV          Higher sulfur dioxide levels significantly
      Grossman, M.,                                           neonatal mortality   mortality data,               increase neonatal mortality rates
      & Goldman, F.*                                          rates (3 yr.         U.S., 1976-
      (1989)                                                  average)             1978
 10 Yamada, T.,*        Nutrition                             Prefecture-level     Mortality data,   OLS, IV     Protein and vitamin A consumption
      Yamada, T.* &                                           neonatal & infant    prefectures in                positively related to neonatal and infant
      Chaloupka, F.*                                          death                Japan, 1980-                  mortality; calcium and iron consumption
      (1989)                                                                       1981                          negatively related to those outcomes
Note: See notes at bottom of Table 4




                                                                                                                                                          31
     Table 2. 1990s: Better Data and Heyday of IVs
#    Article           Input/Policy/Exposure          Outcome(s)             Data Source            Method(s)         Key Findings

11   Grossman, M.,     Prenatal care use              Individual-level BW    Birth records, NYC,    IV; sample        Each month prenatal care delay
     & Joyce, T.*                                                            1984                   selection         associated with 4-37 gram
     (1990)                                                                                         model             reduction in BW
12   Joyce, T.*        Unemployment rates             Monthly rates of LBW   Natality data, NYC,    Time-series       No effect of unemployment on LBW
     (1990)                                                                  1970-1986

13   Joyce, T.,* &     Abortion rates                 Monthly rates of LBW   Natality data, NYC,    Time series       Higher rates of abortion associated
     Grossman, M.                                                            1972-1988; induced                       with lower rates of LBW for blacks;
     (1990)                                                                  abortions                                no effect for whites; no effect of
                                                                                                                      early prenatal care on LBW
14   Jones, A.         Multiple inputs, including     State-level LBW        Children's Defense     OLS               Early (first trimester) prenatal has
     (1991)            rates of prenatal care,                               Fund publication,                        poorly determined small magnitude
                       abortion, public assistance,                          1984                                     negative association with LBW;
                       education                                                                                      economic factors have much larger
                                                                                                                      associations
15   Frank, R. G.,     Prenatal care                  County-level LBW       Natality data, U.S.,   FE (pooled,       Outcome elasticities of prenatal
     Strobino, D. ,                                                          1975-1984              time series,      care initiation (first trimester) are -
     Salkever, D..,                                                                                 cross-sectional   0.10 to -.011
     & Jackson, C.                                                                                  study)
     A. (1992)
16   Currie, J., &     AFDC participation             Individual-level BW,   NLSY79 births, 1979-   IV; maternal FE   Mothers who participate in AFDC
     Cole, N. (1993)                                  LBW                    1988                                     are most at risk of having LBW
                                                                                                                      infant, but relationship is not causal
17   Currie, J.,       Access to abortion             Individual-level BW,   NLSY79 births, 1980-   Random            Little indication that abortion
     Nixon, L., &                                     LBW                    1988                   effects           restrictions reduce average BW
     Cole, N. (1993)
18   Joyce, T.,* &     Unemployment rates             Monthly rates of LBW   Natality data,         Time series       No relationship between
     Mocan, H.*                                                              Tennessee, 1970-                         structural/cyclical unemployment
     (1993)                                                                  1988                                     and LBW for blacks; weak negative
                                                                                                                      relationship between structural
                                                                                                                      unemployment and LBW for whites




                                                                                                                                                          32
     Table 2. 1990s: Better Data and Heyday of IVs
#    Article          Input/Policy/Exposure          Outcome(s)               Data Source             Method(s)     Key Findings

19   Campbell, M.     Weather (temperature)e         Daily SIDS counts        Mortality data,         Time series   Strong relationship between a drop
     J. (1994)                                                                England & Wales,                      in temperatures & SIDS 2-5 days
                                                                              1979-83 and 1984-86;                  later
                                                                              Mortality data, New
                                                                              South Wales,
                                                                              Australia, 1981-85
20   Joyce, T.*       Prenatal care                  Individual-level BW      Birth records, NYC,     IV            Higher BW for women who receive
     (1994)                                                                   1984                                  intermediate rather than
                                                                                                                    inadequate prenatal care (Kessner
                                                                                                                    Index); more of an association than
                                                                                                                    from intermediate to adequate
                                                                                                                    prenatal care
21   Currie, J.,      Medicaid fee pollicy           State-level annual       Mortality data, U.S.,   FE            Increases in Medicaid fee ratio are
     Gruber, J., &                                   infant mortality rates   1979-1988, 1989-                      associated with small/significant
     Fischer, M.                                                              1992                                  declines in infant mortality rate;
     (1995)                                                                                                         raising the fee ratio by 10% lowers
                                                                                                                    infant mortality by 0.5-0.9%
22   Joyce, T.,*      Cocaine, other illicit drugs   Individual-level data    Large municipal         OLS           Infants exposed to cocaine or other
     Racine, A.,                                     on hospital costs,       hospital in NYC, Nov.                 illicit drugs stay approximately 7
     McCalla ,S. &                                   length of stay and       1991 and Apr. 1992                    days longer in hospital , with $7,731
     Wehbeh, H.                                      service intensity;                                             more costs
     (1995)                                          includes hospital
                                                     measures of drug use
23   Mocan, H.,* &    Illicit drug use               Monthly rates of LBW     Natality data, NYC,     Time series   Smoking during pregnancy, early
     Topyan, K.                                                               1963-1990                             initiation of prenatal care (first
     (1995)                                                                                                         trimester), illicit drug use during
                                                                                                                    pregnancy have no effects on rates
                                                                                                                    of LBW for whites; prenatal
                                                                                                                    smoking and drug use significantly
                                                                                                                    increase rates of LBW for blacks
24   Warner, G.*      Prenatal care                  Individual-level BW,     Birth records, NYC,     IV            PNC delay (days) significantly
     (1995)                                          gestational age          1980-1990                             associated with a 1 gram reduction
                                                                                                                    in BW for black mothers


                                                                                                                                                      33
     Table 2. 1990s: Better Data and Heyday of IVs
#    Article           Input/Policy/Exposure          Outcome(s)               Data Source               Method(s)        Key Findings

25   Currie, J., &     Increased access to            State-year rates of      Natality and mortality    IV               30 % point increase in fraction of
     Gruber, J.        Medicaid for pregnant          LBW and infant           data, U.S., 1979-1992                      women eligible for Medicaid during
     (1996)            women                          mortality                                                           pregnancy associated with
                                                                                                                          decrease in infant mortality of 8.5%
26   Hanratty, M.      Universal health care in       County-level rates of    Vital Statistics data,    FE               Implementation of national health
     (1996)            Canada                         LBW and infant           Canada, 1960-1975                          insurance associated with 4%
                                                      mortality                                                           decline in infant mortality and
                                                                                                                          8.9% decrease in LBW for single
                                                                                                                          parents
27   Kaestner, R.*,    illicit drug use               Individual-level BW      Large municipal           IV with          Underreporting of maternal drug
     Joyce, T.,* &                                                             hospital in NYC, Nov.     correction for   use results in overestimate by a
     Wehbeh, H.                                                                1991- Apr. 1992; birth    self-reported    magnitude of about 50% of actual
     (1996)                                                                    records from NYC          data             effect of drug use on BW
28   Reichman,         Enriched prenatal care for     Individual-level BW,     Linked birth/death        IV               Increased BW, lower newborn
     N.,* & Florio,    Medicaid recipients            LBW, VLBW, newborn       and hospital                               hospitalization costs and reduced
     M. (1996)                                        hospitalization costs,   discharge records,                         rates of LBW and VLBW for those
                                                      1989-1990                New Jersey, 1989 &                         receiving enriched care, for blacks;
                                                                               1990                                       no evidence that enriched care was
                                                                                                                          associated with improved birth
                                                                                                                          outcomes or lower costs for whites
29   Levinson, A., &   Medicaid managed care vs.      Individual-level BW      Birth records linked to   OLS              No significant associations between
     Ullman, F.        fee for service                                         Medicaid files,                            managed care and BW or LBW
     (1998)                                                                    Wisconsin, 1994
30   Liu, G.* (1998)   Prenatal care                  Individual-level BW      Birth and abortion        Selection & IV   Each Month of prenatal care delay
                                                                               records, Virginia,        models           results in 35-107 gram reduction in
                                                                               1984                                       BW
31   Oleske, D.        Medicaid fee for service vs.   Individual-level LBW     Birth records,            OLS "natural     Among Medi-Cal women, the
     (1998)            managed care                   for Medi-Cal births      California, 1993,         experiment"      likelihood of LBW was lower in
                                                                               selected counties                          capitated payment group than fee
                                                                               (plausibly exogenous                       for service group; OR=.62
                                                                               differences in
                                                                               assignment)



                                                                                                                                                           34
      Table 2. 1990s: Better Data and Heyday of IVs
 #    Article          Input/Policy/Exposure          Outcome(s)              Data Source              Method(s)   Key Findings

 32   Walker, M. &     Abortion availability          Individual-level LBW    Birth records, Georgia   Selection   Some evidence for "cost of
      Wallace, S.                                                             and New York, 1989-      model       abortion" model - assumes
      (1998)                                                                  1991                                 increasing full costs of abortion
                                                                                                                   associated with LBW
 33   Warner, G.*      Prenatal care                  Individual-level BW     NMIHS 1988 Survey        IV          Prenatal care increases BW through
      (1998)                                                                                                       visits, not timing of initiation
 34   Cremieux, P.,    Healthcare spending in         Province-level infant   Health Statistics        FE          Lower healthcare spending
      Ouellette, P.,   Canada                         mortality rates         Canada, Quebec,                      associated with increased infant
      & Pilon, C.                                                             1978-1992                            mortality rates
      (1999)
 35   Evans, W., &     Cigarette taxes                Individual-level BW,    Birth records, U.S.,     IV          Smoking during pregnancy reduces
      Ringel, J.                                      LBW, VLBW               1989-1992                            BW by 350-600 grams; increases
      (1999)                                                                                                       probability of LBW by 10-16 %
                                                                                                                   points; increases VLBW by 1-5 %
                                                                                                                   points
 36   Joyce, T.*       Augmented prenatal care        Individual-level BW,    Linked Medicaid          IV          Prenatal Care Assistant Program
      (1999)           for Medicaid recipients        LBW, VLBW               administrative files                 associated with increase in BW by
                                                                              and birth records,                   0-124 grams; decrease in LBW by 0-
                                                                              NYC, 1989-1991                       3.4 % points
 37   Kaestner, R.*    Payer source: Medicaid,        Individual-level BW,    NMIHS 1988               IV          No statistically significant
      (1999)           private, uninsured             LBW                     Survey                               relationship between insurance
                                                                                                                   status and BW
Note: See notes at bottom of Table 4




                                                                                                                                                    35
     Table 3. 2000s: Branching out with focus on plausible estimates
#    Article               Input/Policy/Exposure         Outcome(s)             Data Source             Method(s)      Key Findings

38   Currie, J., &         Medicaid income eligibility   Individual-level       Birth and fetal death   FE             Increases in income cut-off for
     Grogger, J. (2000)    threshold, welfare            fetal death, LBW,      records, U.S., 1990-                   Medicaid eligibility reduced fetal
                           participation rate            VLBW                   1996                                   deaths for blacks; reduced rates of
                                                                                                                       welfare participation increased
                                                                                                                       fetal deaths for blacks and whites;
                                                                                                                       no effects of either on BW-related
                                                                                                                       outcomes
39   Joyce, T.,*           Pregnancy intention           Individual-level       NLSY79 1979- 1992       FE             No significant effect of wantedness
     Kaestner, R.,* &      (wantedness)                  BW, LBW                                                       on LBW
     Korenman, S.
     (2000)
40   Ruhm, C. (2000b)      Parental leave                County-year rates      Aggregate data for      FE             Magnitudes of estimated effects
                                                         of LBW; infant,        16 countries, 1969-                    are substantial; stronger negative
                                                         perinatal, neonatal,   1994                                   relationship between leave
                                                         and post-neonatal                                             durations and post-neonatal than
                                                         mortality                                                     for perinatal mortality, neonatal
                                                                                                                       mortality, or LBW
41   Abrevaya, J. (2001)   Multiple inputs including     Individual-level BW    Birth records, U.S.,    Quantile       Race, education & trimester began
                           education, nutrition,                                1992 & 1996             regression     prenatal care have larger
                           prenatal care, smoking                                                                      associations at lower quantiles of
                                                                                                                       BW than higher quantiles; average
                                                                                                                       smoking effect on BW: 161 grams
42   Dubay, L.,            Malpractice liability         Individual-level       Birth records, U.S.,    IV             No effect of premiums on LBW,
     Kaestner, R.,* &      pressure (insurance rates)    LBW, Apgar scores      1990-1992                              Apgar scores
     Waidmann, T.
     (2001)
43   Gray, B. (2001)       Medicaid reimbursement        Individual-level       NMIHS 1988              DD             10% higher than average fee
                           rates                         BW- and GA-                                                   associated with 0.074% lower risk
                                                         related outcomes,                                             of LBW and 0.035% lower risk of
                                                         infant death                                                  VLBW among women on Medicaid
44   Hamilton, B.          Smoking                       Individual-level BW    Randomized clinical     Bayesian       Average treatment effect of
     (2001)                                                                     trial conducted in      Markov Chain   smoking cessation at 7 months
                                                                                early 1980s             Monte Carlo    gestation on BW: ~350 grams



                                                                                                                                                        36
     Table 3. 2000s: Branching out with focus on plausible estimates
#    Article                 Input/Policy/Exposure         Outcome(s)            Data Source             Method(s)         Key Findings

45   Amuedo-Dorantes,        Immigration policy            Individual-level BW   Birth records,          3SLS              10% increase in % immigrant in
     C., & Mundra, K.                                                            California, 1991 &                        mother's zip code results in 2%
     (2003)                                                                      2000                                      decline in prenatal care visits; 2%
                                                                                                                           increase in prenatal care visits
                                                                                                                           results in increase in BW of ~16
                                                                                                                           grams
46   Chay, K. Y., &          Recession- caused pollution   County-year rates     Natality and            FE, IV            Reduction in total suspended
     Greenstone, M.          shocks                        of neonatal and       mortality data, U.S.,                     particulates associated with fewer
     (2003)                                                infant mortality      1978-1984                                 infant deaths; elasticity of infant
                                                                                                                           death rate with respect to
                                                                                                                           particulates is ~0.35
47   Currie, J., &           Education                     Individual-level      Birth records, U.S.,    IV                Higher maternal education reduces
     Moretti, E. (2003)                                    BW-and GA-related     1970-1999 (10%                            LBW and preterm birth
                                                           outcomes              random sample of
                                                                                 first births)
48   Li, K., & Poirier, D.   Multiple inputs including     Individual-level      NLSY79 1979-1994        Simultaneous      Smoking has negative association
     (2003a)                 smoking, alcohol              BW- and GA-                                   equations         with GA; alcohol consumption and
                             consumption, prenatal         related outcomes,                             model with 7      first trimester prenatal care appear
                             care, nutrition               birth length for                              endogenous        to have no substantive effects on
                                                           Native Americans                              variables         GA, birth length, or BW; birth
                                                                                                                           length affected by inputs mainly
                                                                                                                           through weight gain; BW affected
                                                                                                                           by inputs through GA
49   Li, K., & Poirier, D.   Multiple inputs including     Individual-level      NLSY79 1979-1994        Simultaneous      Smoking, alcohol, and gestational
     (2003b)                 smoking, alcohol              BW- and GA-                                   equations         weight gain appear to affect birth
                             consumption, prenatal         related outcomes,                             model w/7         outcomes in expected directions
                             care, nutrition               birth length                                  endogenous        but early (first trimester) prenatal
                                                                                                         variables         care is the most important factor
50   Conway, K., &           Maternal depression           Individual-level      NMIHS 1988              IV                Maternal depression reduces BW
     Kennedy, L. (2004)                                    BW, LBW                                                         by 46-73 grams; increases LBW by
                                                                                                                           0-2 % points
51   Dehejia, R., &          Unemployment rates            State-year rates of   Natality and            FE, maternal FE   Infants conceived in times of high
     Lleras-Muney, A.                                      LBW, VLBW, low        Mortality data, U.S.,                     unemployment have reduced
     (2004)                                                (<=5) Apgar           1975-1998; vital                          incidence of LBW and VLBW, fewer

                                                                                                                                                             37
     Table 3. 2000s: Branching out with focus on plausible estimates
#    Article                 Input/Policy/Exposure          Outcome(s)            Data Source             Method(s)           Key Findings

                                                            scores; infant,       statistics data,                            congenital malformations, lower
                                                            neonatal, post-       California, 1990-                           rates post-neonatal mortality
                                                            neonatal mortality;   2000
                                                            congenital defects
52   Rous, J., Jewell, R.,   Prenatal care                  Individual-level BW   Birth records, Texas,   IV, selection, IV   Range of estimates of effects of
     & Brown, R. (2004)                                                           1993                    & selection         prenatal care (number of visits) on
                                                                                                                              BW, depending on specification
53   Aizer, A., Lleras-      California's                   County-year rates     Mortality data,         DD                  Black mothers benefited most, with
     Muney, A., &            Disproportionate Share         of neonatal           California, 1989-                           largest decline in neonatal
     Stabile, M. (2005)      program (encouraged            mortality             1995                                        mortality, but moved to better
                             hospitals to accept                                                                              hospitals at lower rates; all other
                             Medicaid patients)                                                                               Medicaid subgroups took
                                                                                                                              advantage of increased access
54   Bitler, M., &           WIC participation              Individual-level      Pregnancy Risk          FE, IV              WIC participation reduces
     Currie, J. (2005)                                      BW- and GA-           Assessment                                  probability that infant is LBW and
                                                            related outcomes,     Monitoring System,                          VLBW
                                                            nights infant in      19 states 1992-1999
                                                            hospital
55   Conway, K., & Deb,      Prenatal care                  Individual-level BW   NMIHS 1988              IV; finite          Prenatal care (weeks delay) has
     P. (2005)                                                                                            mixture models      substantial effect on 'normal'
                                                                                                                              pregnancies (using finite mixture
                                                                                                                              model)
56   Cremieux, P.,           Prescription drug spending     Province-year         Statistics Canada       FE                  Increased spending on
     Meilleur, M.,           (proxy for prescription drug   infant mortality      1981-2000                                   pharmaceuticals improves infant
     Ouellette, P., Petit,   availability/use)                                                                                mortality rates
     P., Zelder, M., &
     Potvin, K. (2005)
57   Currie, J., &           Pollution                      Individual-level      Linked birth and        FE                  Significant adverse effect of carbon
     Neidell, M. (2005)                                     infant mortality      death records,                              monoxide (CO) exposure on infant
                                                                                  California, 1989-                           mortality; reduction in CO over
                                                                                  2000                                        1990s saved about 1000 infant lives
                                                                                                                              in California




                                                                                                                                                                  38
     Table 3. 2000s: Branching out with focus on plausible estimates
#    Article               Input/Policy/Exposure        Outcome(s)              Data Source             Method(s)   Key Findings

58   Evans, W., & Lien,    Bus strike that may have     Individual-level BW     Birth records,          IV          Suggestive evidence that visits lost
     D. (2005)             limited access to prenatal   and GA-related          Allegheny County,                   early in pregnancy negatively affect
                           care                         outcomes                PA, 1990-1994                       BW and GA, but estimates are
                                                                                                                    imprecise
59   Joyce, T.,* Gibson,   WIC participation            Individual-level        Birth records, New      OLS         Few associations between prenatal
     D., & Colman, S.*                                  BW- and GA-             York City, 1988-2001                WIC participation and fetal growth
     (2005)                                             related outcomes                                            and other birth outcomes
60   Kaestner, R.*, &      Welfare                      Individual-level        Birth records, U.S.,    DD          50% reduction in welfare caseload
     Lee, W. (2005)        participation/welfare        BW- and GA-             1992-2000                           associated with 0-10% increase in
                           reform                       related outcomes                                            LBW
61   Kaestner, R.,*        Medicaid managed care        Individual-level        Birth records, U.S.,    DD          MMC associated with increased
     Dubay, L., &          (MMC)                        BW- and GA-             1990-1996                           preterm birth for non-HIspanic
     Kenney, G. (2005)                                  related outcomes                                            white women
62   Lien, D., & Evans,    Smoking/cigarette taxes      Individual-level BW     Birth records, U.S.,    IV, DD      Smoking doubles the likelihood of
     W. (2005)                                                                  1990-1997                           LBW
63   Tanaka, S. (2005)     Parental leave policies      Country-year rates      18 OECD countries,      FE          10-week extension in paid leave is
                                                        of infant, perinatal,   1969-2000                           predicted to decrease post
                                                        neonatal, post-                                             neonatal mortality rate by 4.1%;
                                                        neonatal mortality                                          significant favorable relationship
                                                        & LBW                                                       between paid leave and LBW
64   McCrary, J., &        Education/ school entry      Individual-level        1989-2001 (Texas)       IV          No effect of education on infant
     Royer, H. (2006)      date as proxy                BW- and GA-             and 1989-2002                       health
                                                        related outcomes,       (California) natality
                                                        infant mortality        data merged with
                                                                                1969-1988 natality
                                                                                data (to proxy
                                                                                mother's
                                                                                education); TX data
                                                                                linked to mortality
                                                                                data 1989-2002




                                                                                                                                                     39
     Table 3. 2000s: Branching out with focus on plausible estimates
#    Article                  Input/Policy/Exposure         Outcome(s)            Data Source             Method(s)         Key Findings

65   Watson, T. (2006)        Sanitation interventions in   County group/year     Mortality data          FE                10% increase in share of homes
                              U.S. Indian reservations      rates of infant       merged with public                        with sanitation improvements
                                                            mortality             health intervention                       reduced infant mortality by 0.51
                                                                                  locations and dates,                      per 1000 births
                                                                                  1968-1998
66   Aizer, A., Currie, J.,   Medicaid managed care         Individual BW- and    Linked birth and        FE                MMC increases LBW, preterm birth,
     & Moretti, E.            (MMC)                         GA-related            death records,                            & neonatal death
     (2007)                                                 outcomes,             California, 1990 &
                                                            neonatal death        2000
67   Noonan, K.,              Illicit drug use              Individual-level      FFCWB survey data       IV                Illicit drug use increases LBW by 4-
     Reichman, N.,*                                         LBW, abnormal         linked to medical                         6% and likelihood of abnormal
     Corman, H.,* &                                         infant conditions     records, 1998-2000                        infant health condition by 7-12%
     Dave, D.* (2007)
68   Abrevaya, J., &          Multiple inputs including     Individual-level BW   Birth records,          Quantile          Negative effect of smoking is
     Dahl, C. (2008)          prenatal care, smoking        (quantiles)           Washington State        regressions       largest in middle quantile (ranges
                                                                                  (1992-2002) &           using maternal    from 80 to 180 grams at 50th
                                                                                  Arizona (1993-          RE                percentile); prenatal care effects
                                                                                  2002), with links                         hard to interpret
                                                                                  between mothers’
                                                                                  first & second births
69   Cantarero, D., &         Income, decentralization of   Infant mortality      Panel of regions,       FE, RE            Decentralized healthcare negatively
     Pascual, M. (2008)       healthcare                    rates by              Spain, 1992-2003                          related to infant mortality
                                                            year/region
70   Currie, J., &            Tort reform                   Individual-level      Birth records, U.S.,    FE                No effect of tort reform on Apgar
     MacLeod, W.                                            Apgar scores,         1989-2001                                 scores; Rule of Joint and Several
     (2008)                                                 preventable birth                                               Liability associated with decline in
                                                            complications                                                   preventable complications
71   Evans, W.,               Postpartum discharge laws     Individual-level      Linked birth and        Interrupted       Discharge law reduced re-
     Garthwaite, C., &        that increased length of      infant readmission    hospital discharge      time series, IV   admission rates for privately
     Wei, H. (2008)           stay                          after newborn         records, California,                      insured c-section-delivered and
                                                            hospitalization       1/95-12/00                                Medicaid-insured vaginally-
                                                                                                                            delivered newborns




                                                                                                                                                               40
     Table 3. 2000s: Branching out with focus on plausible estimates
#    Article                Input/Policy/Exposure       Outcome(s)            Data Source              Method(s)     Key Findings

72   Joyce, T.,* Racine,    WIC participation           Individual-level      Pregnancy                DD            Modest favorable effects of WIC
     A., & Yunzal-                                      BW- and GA-           Nutritional                            participation on fetal growth
     Butler, C. (2008)                                  related outcomes      Surveillance System,
                                                                              9 states, 1995-2004
73   Leonard, J., & Mas,    Welfare reform – hitting    Individual-level      Linked birth and         FE            Significant increases in infant
     A. (2008)              time limits                 infant mortality      death records, U.S.,                   mortality when time limits become
                                                                              1995-2002                              binding in a state
74   Lhila, A., & Simon,    Knowing child sex (boy)     Individual-level      Birth records, U.S.,     DD            No evidence of gender bias
     K. (2008)                                          BW, LBW, Apgar        1989-2001
                                                        scores
75   Markowitz, S.*         Smoking/cigarette control   State-year counts     Mortality data, U.S.,    IV            Higher cigarette prices and taxes
     (2008)                 policies                    of SIDS               1973-2003                              associated with reductions in SIDS
                                                                                                                     cases; stronger smoking restrictions
                                                                                                                     in workplaces/restaurants/ child
                                                                                                                     care centers also associated with
                                                                                                                     reduced SIDS deaths
76   Mukhopadhyay, S.,      Prenatal care               Individual-level      Linked data from         OLS           Effect of PNC on infant health
     Wendel, J., Lee,                                   LBW, marginal cost    one U.S. hospital, its                 derived from birth certificates is
     W., & Yang, W.                                     of providing infant   subsidized prenatal                    problematic because self-reported
     (2008)                                             hospital care         care clinic, and birth                 PNC visits does not correlate with
                                                                              records                                provider-reported PNC visits and
                                                                                                                     LBW is a narrow measure of health
77   Currie, J., &          Pollution                   County-year BW-       Natality and             FE            Within-county variations in
     Schmieder, J.                                      and GA-related        mortality data, U.S.,                  reported toxic releases are related
     (2009)                                             outcomes, infant      1988-1999; linked                      to infant health outcomes - nearly
                                                        mortality             with data from EPA                     all estimates indicate adverse
                                                                              Toxics Release                         effects of exposures
                                                                              Inventory
78   Currie, J., Neidell,   Pollution                   Individual-level      Linked birth and         FE and        Consistent negative effects of
     M., & Schmieder, J.                                BW- and GA-           death records, New       maternal FE   carbon monoxide exposures before
     (2009)                                             related outcomes,     Jersey, 1989-2003                      and after birth (particularly for
                                                        infant mortality                                             smokers and older mothers)




                                                                                                                                                       41
     Table 3. 2000s: Branching out with focus on plausible estimates
#    Article              Input/Policy/Exposure         Outcome(s)            Data Source             Method(s)         Key Findings

79   Deschenes, O.,       Climate change                Individual-level      Birth records, U.S.,    FE                Exposure to extreme ambient
     Greenstone, M., &                                  BW, LBW               1972-1988.                                temperatures decreases BW and
     Guryan, J. (2009)                                                        Linked to National                        increases LBW; sensitivity of BW to
                                                                              Climatic Data Center                      temperature mostly in second and
                                                                              Temperature data                          third trimesters
80   Fertig, A., &        Minimum drinking age laws     Individual-level      Birth records, U.S.,    FE                Minimum legal drinking age of 18
     Watson, T. (2009)                                  BW- and GA-           1978-1989; NLSY79                         associated with adverse birth
                                                        related outcomes,                                               outcomes for young mothers
                                                        congenital
                                                        anomalies
81   Figlio, D.,          WIC participation             Individual-level      Birth records,          IV                WIC participation has no effect on
     Hamersma, S., &                                    BW- and GA-           Florida, 1997-2001,                       mean BW and GA but reduces
     Roth, J. (2009)                                    related outcomes      linked to WIC and                         likelihood of LBW and premature
                                                                              school records                            birth
82   Lin, W. (2009)       Multiple inputs including     Individual-level      Linked birth and        OLS, propensity   Most important factor in explaining
                          smoking, prenatal care,       Apgar scores,         death records, U.S.,    score weighting   infant health gaps (by maternal
                          nutrition                     neonatal and infant   1983-2000                                 education) appears to be access to
                                                        mortality                                                       medical care (prenatal care
                                                                                                                        adequacy) prenatal behaviors also
                                                                                                                        appear to be important
83   Reichman, N.,*       Multiple inputs including     Individual-level      FFCWB survey linked     OLS               Smoking reduces BW by 174 grams,
     Corman, H.,*         illicit drugs, smoking,       BW, LBW,              to medical records,                       increases LBW by 4 % points; illicit
     Noonan, K., &        prenatal care, wantedness,    abnormal infant       1998-2000                                 drugs significantly reduce BW and
     Dave, D.* (2009)     Medicaid, nutrition,          health conditions                                               increase LBW and abnormal
                          physical and mental health                                                                    conditions; pre-pregnancy physical
                                                                                                                        and mental health conditions are
                                                                                                                        strong predictors of birth outcomes
84   Sneeringer, S.       Pollution                     County-year rates     Natality and            FE                Doubling of livestock production
     (2009)                                             of neonatal and       mortality data linked                     leads to 7.4% increase in infant
                                                        infant mortality      to data on livestock                      mortality, driven by elevated levels
                                                                              numbers, U.S., 1980-                      of respiratory diseases
                                                                              1999




                                                                                                                                                         42
      Table 3. 2000s: Branching out with focus on plausible estimates
 #    Article              Input/Policy/Exposure         Outcome(s)         Data Source          Method(s)     Key Findings

 85   Walker, M., Tekin,   Smoking                       Individual-level   Birth records,       Matched       Large effects of smoking on BW;
      E., & Wallace, S.                                  LBW                Georgia, 1994-2002   sample,       effects vary with specification
      (2009)                                                                                     maternal FE
Note: See notes at bottom of Table 4




                                                                                                                                                 43
     Table 4. 2010-2016: Infant health production meets lifecourse and intergenerational health research
#    Article              Input/Policy/           Outcome(s)               Data Source                  Method(s)             Key Findings
                          Exposure
86   Agarwal, N.,         Pollution               County-year rates of     Mortality data, U.S.,        FE                    Higher infant mortality rates
     Banternghansa,                               infant and fetal         1989-2002, linked with                             with increasing concentrations
     C., & Bui, L.                                mortality                Toxic Release Inventory                            of toxic pollutants
     (2010)                                                                data from the EPA and
                                                                           county-level census data
87   Almond, D.,          Intensity of hospital   Individual-level         Linked birth and infant      RD                    VLBW infants have lower
     Doyle, J.,           care for LBW vs.        neonatal and infant      death records, U.S., 1983-                         mortality rate if receive more
     Kowalski, A., &      VLBW infants            mortality                1991 & 1995-2002;                                  intensive treatment; cost of
     Williams, H.                                                          California, 1991-2002                              saving life for newborn near
     (2010)                                                                natality data linked to                            1,500 grams is $550,000 (upper
                                                                           hospital discharge &                               bound of 1.2 mil) in 2006 $
                                                                           death certificates
88   Chou, S., Liu, J.,   Education               Individual-level LBW     Linked birth and infant      IV                    Increase in parental schooling
     Grossman, M., &                              and neonatal, post-      death records, Taiwan,                             decreases LBW and neonatal
     Joyce, T.* (2010)                            neonatal, and infant     1978-1999                                          and post-neonatal mortality
                                                  mortality
89   Fertig, A. (2010)    Smoking                 Individual-level BW-     1958 National Child          DD                    Effect of prenatal smoking on
                                                  and GA-related           Development Study, the                             LBW is significantly smaller in
                                                  outcomes, fetal          1970 British Cohort Study                          1958 than 2000; appears to
                                                  growth                                                                      reflect increased adverse
                                                                                                                              selection into smoking across
                                                                                                                              the cohorts
90   Aizer, A. (2011)     Prenatal assault        Individual-level BW-     Birth records linked with    Control function IV   Assault associated with ~150-
                          (exposure to            related outcomes and     maternal hospitalization     model, matching       200 grams lower BW and
                          violence)               fetal and infant death   records, California 1991-    estimates             increased risk of fetal and infant
                                                                           2002                                               mortality; BW association largest
                                                                                                                              in first trimester
91   Almond, D., &        Length of newborn       Individual-level         Hospital discharge           RD                    Infants born just after midnight
     Doyle, J. (2011)     hospital stay           neonatal, post-          records linked to birth                            stay .25 nights longer than those
                                                  neonatal, and infant     and infant death records,                          born just prior to midnight; no
                                                  mortality, readmission   California, 1991-2002                              differences in infant health
                                                  rate to hospital                                                            outcomes between the 2 groups




                                                                                                                                                               44
     Table 4. 2010-2016: Infant health production meets lifecourse and intergenerational health research
#    Article              Input/Policy/           Outcome(s)                Data Source                  Method(s)   Key Findings
                          Exposure
92   Almond, D., &        Nutrition/exposure      Individual-level BW       Birth records, Michigan,     DD          Fasting reduces BW by ~18
     Mazumder, B.         to Ramadan fasting                                1989-2006                                grams
     (2011)
93   Almond, D.,          Changes to Hill-        Individual-level infant   Florida linked birth and     FE, FE IV   No effects on birth outcomes
     Currie, J., &        Burton Provision of     mortality, BW- and        infant death records,
     Simeonova, E.        Charity Care            GA-related outcomes,      1989-2003, also linked
     (2011)               (elimination of         Apgar scores              with data on hospital of
                          requirements for                                  birth
                          private hospitals to
                          admit charity care
                          patients; reduced
                          access to care)
94   Almond, D.,          Nutrition/implemen      County-level rates of     Natality and mortality       DD          Implementation of food stamp
     Hoynes, H., &        tation of food          BW, LBW, neonatal         data, U.S., 1959-1977                    program led to 1-5 gram
     Schanzenbach, D.     stamps                  mortality                                                          increases in BW, .06 % point
     (2011)                                                                                                          reduction in LBW
95   Barreca, A.,         Intensity of hospital   Individual-level          Linked birth and infant      RD          < 1500 gram cutoff for VLBW
     Guldi, M., Lindo,    care for LBW infants    neonatal and infant       death records, U.S., 1983-               results in effect sizes 39-63 %
     J.., & Waddell, G.   (replication of         mortality                 1991 & 1995-2002; birth                  lower than found in article 87
     (2011)               Almond et al. 2010                                records linked to hospital
                          [87]                                              discharge & death files,
                                                                            California, 1991-2002
96   Currie, J., &        Pollution/ E-Z Pass     Individual-level GA-      Birth data, Pennsylvania,    DD          Adoption of EZ Pass associated
     Walker, R. (2011)    adoption                and BW-related            1997- 2002, and New                      with improvements in preterm
                                                  outcomes                  Jersey, 1994-2003                        birth and LBW in vicinity of toll
                                                                                                                     plazas
97   Currie, J.,          Pollution/Superfund     Individual-level BW-      Linked birth & death         DD          Superfund cleanups reduce
     Greenstone, M.,      cleanup                 and GA-related            records, 5 states, 1989-                 incidence of congenital
     & Moretti, E.                                outcomes, congenital      2003; linked to Superfund                anomalies by 20-25%
     (2011)                                       anomalies, infant         site data
                                                  mortality
98   Hoynes, H., Page,    Nutrition/WIC           County-year average       Natality data, U.S., 1974,   DD          Implementation of WIC led to
     M., & Stevens, A.    implementation          BW and rate of LBW        1975, 1978, 1979, 1989                   increases in average BW and
     (2011)                                                                                                          decreases in rates of LBW

                                                                                                                                                     45
      Table 4. 2010-2016: Infant health production meets lifecourse and intergenerational health research
#     Article              Input/Policy/         Outcome(s)               Data Source                  Method(s)         Key Findings
                           Exposure
99    Lhila, A. (2011)     Nutrition/fast food   Individual-level BW-     Birth data, U.S., 1998 and   FE                Greater access to fast food
                           access                and GA-related           2004, merged with fast                         restaurants is positively
                                                 outcomes, fetal          food data                                      associated with prenatal
                                                 growth, Apgar scores                                                    excessive weight gain but not
                                                                                                                         BW
100   Lindo, J. (2011)     Paternal job loss     Individual-level BW      Panel Study of Income        DD, maternal FE   Husbands' job loss reduces BW
                                                 and LBW                  Dynamics 1968-1997                             by 4.5%
101   Miller, A., &        Electronic medical    County-year rates of     Natality and mortality       FE, IV            10% increase in births that occur
      Tucker, C. (2011)    records (EMRs)        neonatal mortality,      data, U.S., 1995-2006,                         in hospitals with EMRs is
                                                 cause of death, death    merged with hospital                           associated with reduction in
                                                 rate first and seventh   information technology                         neonatal mortality by 16 deaths
                                                 days, stillbirths,       data                                           per 100,000 live births
                                                 preterm birth
102   Rossin, M. (2011)    Maternity             Monthly county-level     Natality and mortality       DDD               Maternity leave leads to small
                           Leave/1993 Family     BW- and GA-related       data, U.S., 1989-1997                          increase in BW, decrease in
                           & Medical Leave Act   outcomes, infant         merged w/county-level                          likelihood of preterm birth, and
                                                 mortality rate, Apgar    firm data (50+                                 substantial decrease in infant
                                                 scores                   employees)                                     mortality among college
                                                                                                                         educated and married mothers
                                                                                                                         (most able to take advantage of
                                                                                                                         unpaid leave)
103   Sen, A., &           Smoking/cigarette     Province-year rates of   Provincial data, Canada,     FE                Increase in cigarette taxes is
      Pierard, E. (2011)   taxes                 infant mortality, LBW,   1979-2004                                      significantly associated with
                                                 fetal death                                                             lower infant mortality rates;
                                                                                                                         some evidence of a counter-
                                                                                                                         intuitive positive association
                                                                                                                         between taxes and fetal deaths
104   Simeonova, E.        Natural disasters     County-month BW-         Natality data, U.S., 1968-   FE                Maternal exposure to plausibly
      (2011)               (weather events)      and GA-related           1988, merged with                              exogenous adverse weather
                                                 outcomes                 natural disaster data                          events decreases GA and BW;
                                                                                                                         effects strongest in second/early
                                                                                                                         third trimesters of pregnancy



                                                                                                                                                       46
      Table 4. 2010-2016: Infant health production meets lifecourse and intergenerational health research
#     Article               Input/Policy/         Outcome(s)                Data Source                   Method(s)               Key Findings
                            Exposure
105   Torche, F. (2011)     Natural disaster      Individual-level BW-      Birth records, Chile, 2004,   DD                      Maternal exposure to stress
                            (earthquake)          and GA-related            2005, and 2006                                        (proxied by earthquake) results
                                                  outcomes                                                                        decreases BW and increases
                                                                                                                                  LBW
106   Almond, D.,           Maternal childhood    LBW rates for mothers     Natality data, 1989-2006,     FE                      White mothers exposed to high
      Currie, J., &         exposure to disease   born in a given state-    merged with postnatal                                 postnatal mortality rates in early
      Herrmann, M.          (her postnatal        year and giving birth     mortality rates in the                                life have higher rate of LBW
      (2012)                mortality rate        in a given state-year     state-year of the                                     infants
                            environment)                                    mother's birth
107   Ananat, E., &         Contraception/        State-year rates of       Birth records, U.S., 1968-    DDD                     Access to the pill leads to
      Hungerman, D.         access to the pill    LBW                       1980                                                  reduction in LBW
      (2012)
108   Coneus, K., &         Pollution             Individual-level length   Socio-Economic Panel,         FE, maternal FE         Carbon monoxide adversely
      Spiess, C. (2012)                           and weight at birth;      2002-2007; German                                     affects fetal growth and BW;
                                                  fetal growth; disorder    Federal Environment                                   ozone adversely affects birth
                                                  in first year of life     Agency                                                length and fetal growth

109   Gai, Y., & Feng, L.   WIC participation     Individual-level BW-      Early Childhood               IV, bivariate probit    WIC does not affect average BW
      (2012)                                      and GA-related            Longitudinal Study—Birth                              or GA, but reduces probability
                                                  outcomes                  Cohort, U.S., 2001                                    of very preterm birth and VLBW;
                                                                                                                                  thus, more effective for births
                                                                                                                                  that are at high risk
110   Guindon, G.., &       Rx spending at        Province-year infant      Statistics Canada and         Feasible                No discernable association
      Contoyannis, P.       government level as   mortality                 Canadian Institute for        Generalized Least       between spending on private or
      (2012)                proxy for                                       Health Information, 1981-     Squares methods         public pharmaceutical products
                            pharmaceutical                                  2003                          w/ correction for       and infant mortality
                            input                                                                         panel-specific first-
                            availability/use                                                              order
                                                                                                          autocorellation
                                                                                                          and cross-panel
                                                                                                          heteroscedasticity




                                                                                                                                                                  47
      Table 4. 2010-2016: Infant health production meets lifecourse and intergenerational health research
#     Article              Input/Policy/        Outcome(s)              Data Source                  Method(s)         Key Findings
                           Exposure
111   Bache, S., Dahl,     Smoking              Individual-level LBW    Aarhus University            Quantile          Prenatal smoking has adverse
      C., & Kristensen,                                                 Hospital Skejby),            regression with   effects on BW; no significant
      J. (2013)                                                         Denmark, 1992-2005           panel data        effect of pre-pregnancy smoking
                                                                                                                       on BW
112   Currie, J., Zivin,   Pollution            Individual-level BW-    Birth records, New Jersey,   Maternal FE, IV   Living in a water district with
      J., Meckel, K.,                           and GA-related          1997-2007, linked to                           contaminated water during
      Neidell, M., &                            outcomes                records of drinking water                      pregnancy is associated with
      Schlenker, W.                                                     violations                                     increase in LBW by 14.55%
      (2013)                                                                                                           among less educated mothers;
                                                                                                                       potential exposure to
                                                                                                                       contaminated water increases
                                                                                                                       incidence of preterm term by
                                                                                                                       10.3% among less educated
                                                                                                                       mothers
113   Currie, J., &        Stressful            Individual-level BW-    Birth records, Texas,        Maternal FE, IV   Exposure to hurricane during
      Rossin-Slater, M.    events/hurricanes    and GA-related          1996-2008, linked to data                      pregnancy increases probability
      (2013)                                    outcomes, abnormal      on hurricanes                                  of abnormal newborn
                                                newborn conditions                                                     conditions; effects on BW and
                                                                                                                       GA sensitive to specification
114   Kemptner, D., &      Education            Individual-level BW-    German Socio-Economic        IV probit         An additional year of education
      Marcus, J. (2013)                         and GA-related          Panel Study of children                        decreases preterm birth by 1-4
                                                outcomes                born. 2002-2010                                percentage points; effects on
                                                                                                                       LBW differ by specification
115   Markowitz, S.,*      Cigarette control    Individual-level BW-    Prenatal Risk Assessment     FE                Smoking policies limited in
      Adams, E., Dietz,    policies             and GA-related          Monitoring System data                         effectiveness; largest
      P., Kannan, V., &                         outcomes                from 29 states and NYC,                        improvements in birth outcomes
      Tong, V. (2013)                                                   1996-2008                                      from higher cigarette prices are
                                                                                                                       for women who have the least
                                                                                                                       human capital
116   Menclova, A.         Unemployment         County-year rates of    Natality data, U.S., 1989-   FE                Overall effects of unemployment
      (2013)               rates                LBW, VLBW               1999                                           are favorable; reflect, at least to
                                                                                                                       some extent, increased
                                                                                                                       eligibility for Medicaid


                                                                                                                                                       48
      Table 4. 2010-2016: Infant health production meets lifecourse and intergenerational health research
#     Article              Input/Policy/           Outcome(s)              Data Source               Method(s)              Key Findings
                           Exposure
117   Rettenmaier, A.,     Multiple inputs         County-year rates of    U.S. "County Health       Directed acyclic       Chlamydia rate, community
      & Wang, Z.           including smoking,      LBW                     Ratings" 2000-2006        graphs                 safety, and liquor store density
      (2013)               nutrition, alcohol,                                                                              associated with LBW
                           STDs, access to care,
                           quality of care
118   Wehby, G.,           Quitting smoking        Individual-level BW-    Population-based study,   IV, bivariate probit   Some evidence that cigarette
      Wilcox, A., & Lie,                           related outcomes        Norway, 1996-2001                                quitting during pregnancy
      R. (2013)                                                                                                             increases multivitamin use and
                                                                                                                            caloric intake and reduces
                                                                                                                            caffeine consumption; evidence
                                                                                                                            that multivitamin use reduces
                                                                                                                            LBW and caffeine reduces BW
119   Yan, J. (2013)       Smoking                 Individual-level BW-    Birth records,            Maternal FE            Smoking cessation in first
                                                   and GA-related          Washington State, 2003-                          trimester has a negligible effect
                                                   outcomes                2006; matched panel of                           on infant health but cessation as
                                                                           sibling births,                                  late as second trimester or
                                                                           Pennsylvania, 2003-2006                          smoking throughout pregnancy
                                                                                                                            is associated with substantially
                                                                                                                            increased BW and risk of LBW;
                                                                                                                            2/3 of total detrimental smoking
                                                                                                                            impact on birth outcomes occurs
                                                                                                                            in 2nd trimester
120   Bharadwaj, P.,       Smoking bans            Individual-level BW-    Birth registry data,      DD                     After law change, for mothers
      Johnsen, J., &                               and GA-related          Norway, 1967-2010                                working in affected places:
      Loken, K. (2014)                             outcomes, Apgar                                                          VLBW decreased; mothers 15%
                                                   scores, birth defects                                                    more likely to quit smoking; for
                                                                                                                            mothers that quit, large
                                                                                                                            favorable effects on BW preterm
                                                                                                                            birth




                                                                                                                                                           49
      Table 4. 2010-2016: Infant health production meets lifecourse and intergenerational health research
#     Article              Input/Policy/           Outcome(s)                Data Source                  Method(s)             Key Findings
                           Exposure
121   Brunner, B., &       Timing of birth due     Monthly aggregates:       Natality data, Austria,      Time-series           8% more babies born in
      Kuhn, A. (2014)      to cancellation of a    BW- and GA-related        1992.11-2006.12                                    December of 1996 (month
                           benefits program at     outcomes,                                                                    before cancellation of benefit)
                           the end of              Apgar scores, short                                                          than predicted. significant
                           December                birth length                                                                 increase in birth complications;
                                                                                                                                no adverse immediate impact on
                                                                                                                                infant health
122   Chou, S.,            Introduction of         Annual county-group-      Annual linked birth and      DD                    Introduction of NHI led to drop
      Grossman, M., &      National Health         year level rates of       infant death records,                              in post neonatal mortality of 8-
      Liu, J. (2014)       Insurance (NHI)         post-neonatal             Taiwan, 1990-2001                                  16%, for farm households but
                                                   mortality                                                                    not private sector households
123   Frimmel, W., &       Marital status          Individual-level BW-      Registry data, Austria,      Maternal FE, IV,      babies born to single mothers
      Pruckner, G.                                 and GA-related            1984-2007, matched with      quantile regression   are about 40 grams lighter
      (2014)                                       outcomes                  divorce registry
124   Jensen, V. (2014)    Capitation v. fee for   Individual-level BW-      Administrative data,         DD                    First born infants exposed in
                           service                 and GA-related            Copenhagen City and                                utero to care to general
                                                   outcomes                  County, October 1981 -                             practitioners with capitation
                                                                             September 1990                                     contracts have poorer infant
                                                                                                                                health outcomes than those
                                                                                                                                whose practitioners have fee for
                                                                                                                                service contracts
125   Luechinger, S.       Pollution: sulfur       County-year-gender-       Natality and mortality       FE, IV                No evidence of effects of SO2 on
      (2014)               dioxide (SO2)           wedlock status rates      data, Germany, 1985-                               neonatal mortality, but LBW
                                                   of infant mortality, 1-   2003, linked to                                    increased and birth length with
                                                   day mortality,            environmental data                                 exposure
                                                   neonatal mortality,
                                                   stillbirth, length, and
                                                   BW- and GA-related
                                                   outcomes
126   Schulkind, L., &     Birth timing            Individual-level BW-      Natality data, U.S., 1990-   FE, DD                Increase in tax benefits
      Shapiro, T. (2014)   (differential tax       and GA-related            2001 (December &                                   associated with lower BW,
                           benefits)               outcomes, Apgar           January; October &                                 higher likelihood of LBW, and
                                                   scores, assisted          November)                                          lower Apgar scores
                                                   ventilation

                                                                                                                                                                50
      Table 4. 2010-2016: Infant health production meets lifecourse and intergenerational health research
#     Article              Input/Policy/          Outcome(s)                Data Source                   Method(s)        Key Findings
                           Exposure
127   Yan, J. (2014)       Minimum cigarette      Individual-level BW-      Birth records,                RD               Minimum cigarette purchase
                           purchase age           and GA-related            Pennsylvania, 1992-2002                        age of 21 decreases daily
                                                  outcomes, Apgar           (restricted to mothers                         prenatal smoking by 15% and
                                                  scores                    ages 19-21)                                    LBW by 19%
128   Barreca, A., &       Minimum legal          State-year-age BW-        Natality data, U.S., 1968-    DDD              Limited evidence that MLDA
      Page, M. (2015)      drinking age (MLDA)    and GA-related            1989                                           policies affect birth outcomes
                                                  outcomes, Apgar
                                                  scores, congenital
                                                  anomalies
129   Carlson, K. (2015)   Stress /anticipatory   County-month panel        Natality data, 1999-2008,     FE, IV           Announcement of impending
                           news of plant          data on BW, GA            4 U.S. states, linked with                     job losses leads to a transient
                           layoffs                                          data on plant closures                         decrease in mean BW within
                                                                                                                           firm's county 1-4 months before
                                                                                                                           job losses; 500 jobs lost leads to
                                                                                                                           decrease of 15-20 grams in
                                                                                                                           average BW & 16% increase in
                                                                                                                           LBW; announcements later in
                                                                                                                           pregnancy have stronger effects
130   Choi, Y., Ha, H.,    Prenatal care          Individual-level BW,      Birth records, U.S., 1995-    Heckman sample   Marginal impact of visits on
      Lim, J., & Lee, E.                          Apgar scores              2002                          selection, IV    birth outcomes declines with
      (2015)                                                                                              estimation       number of visits
131   Daysal, N.,          Home birth             Individual-level 7- and   Prenatal registry data, the   IV               Giving birth in a hospital (vs. at
      Trandafir, M., &                            28-day mortality,         Netherlands, 2000-2008;                        home) substantially reduces
      van Ewijk, R.                               Apgar scores              limited to low-risk first                      newborn mortality
      (2015)                                                                births
132   Durrance, C., &      Recommended bed        Individual-level BW-      Pregnancy Risk                FE, matching     Positive relationship between
      Guldi, M. (2015)     rest                   and GA-related            Assessment Monitoring         methods          bed rest and likelihood of LBW
                                                  outcomes                  System, U.S., 2000-2008;                       and prematurity; but bed rest
                                                                            sample limited to those                        decreases VLBW, very preterm
                                                                            with pregnancy problems                        birth, and infant death
133   Hoynes, H.,          Earned Income Tax      BW-related outcomes       Natality data, U.S., 1983-    DD               EITC reduces LBW and increases
      Miller, D., &        Credit (EITC)          across groups by          1999                                           BW; $1000 treatment on the
      Simon, D. (2015)                            parity/age                                                               treated leads to 2-3% decline in
                                                  group/race/ethnicity/                                                    LBW

                                                                                                                                                            51
      Table 4. 2010-2016: Infant health production meets lifecourse and intergenerational health research
#     Article              Input/Policy/          Outcome(s)               Data Source                   Method(s)          Key Findings
                           Exposure
                                                  state/year, other
134   Jensen, V., &        Caesarean-section      Individual-level Apgar   Registry data, Denmark,       RD, IV             Caesarean section improves
      Wust, M. (2015)      (for breech infants)   scores, infant           Aug. 1997 - Apr. 2004;                           Apgar scores, reduces number
                                                  hospitalizations,        breech and second or                             of family doctor visits in year 1;
                                                  serious morbidity        higher-order births                              no significant effects for severe
                                                                                                                            neonatal morbidity,
                                                                                                                            hospitalizations, or post-birth
                                                                                                                            complications
135   Jurges, H. (2015)    Ramadan (fasting)      Individual-level BW      Birth records, Germany,       DD                 No effect of Ramadan exposure
                                                                           1996-2010; Muslim
                                                                           mothers
136   King, C.,            Tobacco control        Country-year counts      WHO data, 23 countries,       FE                 Higher cigarette prices result in
      Markowitz, S., &     policies and taxes     of SIDS deaths           1990-2009, linked with                           lower prevalence of SIDS; no
      Ross, H. (2015)                                                      data on tobacco control                          effects of smoke-free policies
                                                                           policies
137   Mocan, N.,*          Earnings               Individual-level BW-     Natality data, U.S., 1989-    Two-sample IV      Among mothers with low skills
      Raschke, C., &                              and GA-related           2004, merged with                                and not likely to be on Medicaid,
      Unel, B. (2015)                             outcomes                 Current Population                               Increase in weekly earnings has
                                                                           Survey demographic data                          small positive effects on BW and
                                                                                                                            GA; doubling of those mothers’
                                                                                                                            earnings increases BW by 100g
                                                                                                                            and GA by 0.7 weeks; no effects
                                                                                                                            for high skill mothers
138   Salmasi, L., &       Immigration policy     Individual-level LBW     Birth sample survey, Italy,   Propensity score   Regularizing immigration
      Pieroni, L. (2015)   (granting “foreign                              wave 1 2000-2001 &            matching within    reduces LBW
                           national” status for                            wave 2 2003                   DD model
                           650,000 illegal
                           immigrant workers)
139   Sonchak, L.          Medicaid               Individual-level BW      Birth records, U.S., 2001-    IV                 Medicaid reimbursement rates
      (2015)               reimbursement                                   2010                                             increase number of prenatal
                           rates                                                                                            visits; additional visits increase
                                                                                                                            BW for white disadvantaged
                                                                                                                            mothers


                                                                                                                                                             52
      Table 4. 2010-2016: Infant health production meets lifecourse and intergenerational health research
#     Article                Input/Policy/            Outcome(s)               Data Source                  Method(s)          Key Findings
                             Exposure
140   Wust, M. (2015)        Maternal                 Individual-level BW-     Survey and administrative    Maternal FE        Mothers who work during first
                             employment               and GA-related           data, Denmark, 1998-                            trimester have lower risk of
                                                      outcomes                 2003                                            preterm birth; no effects on
                                                                                                                               small size for gestational age
141   Aizer, A., Stroud,     Stress/cortisol levels   Individual-level BW-     National Collaborative       Maternal FE        Higher cortisol levels result in
      L., & Buka, S.                                  and GA-related           Perinatal Project, Boston,                      ~1-2% decrease in BW (29-66
      (2016)                                          outcomes                 MA & Providence, RI,                            grams)
                                                                               1959-1965
142   Black, S.,             Bereavement (death       Individual BW- and       Birth registry, Norway,      DD, maternal FE,   Maternal bereavement has small
      Devereux, P., &        of a mother's parent     GA-related outcomes,     1967-2009, linked to         IV                 but significant adverse effects
      Salvanes, K.           during the               Apgar scores, birth      relevant years of death                         on birth outcomes
      (2016)                 pregnancy)               length, infant in NICU   registry data
143   Borra, C.,             Income benefits          Individual-level         Spanish birth data           DD                 Infants born close to benefit
      Gonzalez, L., &        program                  neonatal                 National Statistical                            cancellation date had higher
      Sevilla, A. (2016)     cancellation             hospitalization          Institute 2000-2012                             post-birth hospitalization rates;
                                                                               linked with Hospital                            no effects on medical conditions
                                                                               Morbidity Survey                                at birth or during the week after,
                                                                                                                               increase started 2 weeks after
                                                                                                                               birth
144   Cesarini, D.,          Wealth shock             Individual-level BW-     Birth registry, Sweden,      OLS models with    No effect of wealth on BW, LBW,
      Lindqvist, E.,         (Swedish lottery)        and GA-related           1973-2007 (children born     conditional        or preterm birth
      Östling, R., &                                  outcomes                 to female players post-      random
      Wallace, B.                                                              lottery)                     assignment in
      (2016)                                                                                                lottery winnings
145   Haeck, C., &           Canadian eggs-milk-      Individual-level BW-     Birth registry data,         DD                 Program significantly increased
      Lefebvre, P.           orange nutrition         and GA-related           Quebec Province, 1986-                          BW of treated children , reduced
      (2016)                 program (similar to      outcomes                 2008                                            LBW by 3.6%; reduced preterm
                             WIC)                                                                                              birth by 2.2%, and increased GA
                                                                                                                               but GA effects not significant
146   Knittel, C., Miller,   Pollution                Weekly infant            Linked birth and infant      FE, IV             Large effects of particulate
      D., & Sanders, N.                               mortality rates in       death data, California,                         matter on infant mortality rates
      (2016)                                          postal codes             2000-2007                                       (for preterm or LBW infants);
                                                                                                                               large adverse effects of carbon


                                                                                                                                                              53
      Table 4. 2010-2016: Infant health production meets lifecourse and intergenerational health research
#     Article             Input/Policy/         Outcome(s)               Data Source                 Method(s)             Key Findings
                          Exposure
                                                                                                                              monoxide
147 Trudeau, J.,            Sunshine (vitamin     Monthly county-level     Natality data, U.S., 1989-  FE                     Sunshine has positive but
       Conway, K., &        D)                    BW                       2004, linked to weather                            diminishing effect on BW for
       Menclova, A.                                                        data                                               blacks and adverse effect for
       (2016)                                                                                                                 whites
Notes: Asterisks denote doctoral students of Michael Grossman; 3SLS = Three-stage Least Squares; Apgar = 10 point scale to assess newborn health; BW =
Birthweight (grams); DD = Difference in Differences ; DDD = Difference in Differences with a comparison group; FE = Fixed Effects model based on
area/time(maternal FE = Fixed Effects model comparing different children to the same mother); FFCWB = Fragile Families & Child Wellbeing Survey; GA =
Gestational Age; IV = Instrumental Variables; LBW = Low Birthweight (< 2500 grams); NLSY9 = National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979; NMIHS = National
Maternal & Infant Health Survey; OLS = Ordinary Least Squares; Preterm birth = < 37 completed weeks GA.; RD = Regression Discontinuity Design; RE = Random
Effects; SIDS = Sudden Infant Death Syndrome; VLBW = Very Low Birthweight (< 1500 grams);WIC = The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women,
Infants, and Children.




                                                                                                                                                        54
