NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MAKING DISCRETION IN MONETARY POLICY MORE RULE-LIKE
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper 24135
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24135

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017

This paper was being presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Annual Conference, “Are
Rules Made to Be Broken? Discretion and Monetary Policy,” October 13-14, 2017. It’s original
title was “Improving the Use of Discretion in Monetary Policy.” I thank participants in the macro
lunch seminar at Columbia University for their helpful comments. The views expressed here are
my own and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Columbia
University or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Disclosure of my outside compensated
activities can be found on my website at http://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/fmishkin/. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Making Discretion in Monetary Policy More Rule-Like
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 24135
December 2017
JEL No. E5,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that the rules versus discretion debate has been miscast because a central bank
does not have to choose only between adopting a policy rule versus pure discretion, both of which
have serious shortcomings. Rather it can choose a constrained discretionary regime that has rulelike attributes. Monetary policy discretion can be made more rule-like, by 1) adopting a nominal
anchor such as an inflation target, and 2) communication of a monetary policy reaction process,
especially through data-based forward guidance, in which the monetary policy authorities
describe how the future policy path will change as economic circumstances change.

Frederic S. Mishkin
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 817
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu

1

INTRODUCTION
The debate on whether a central bank should have a rule to set its policy instruments or

alternatively to conduct monetary policy with discretion has heated up in recent years with
proposed legislation in Congress, which has been passed by the House, to require the Federal
Reserve to report on a “directive” rule similar to a Taylor (1993) rule for its policy instruments.
In this paper, I discuss where I think the rules versus discretion debate is currently and argue that
in a sense, this debate has been miscast, because a central bank does not have to choose only
between adopting a policy rule versus pure discretion. Instead it can choose to adopt a
discretionary regime that has rule-like attributes, a regime that Ben Bernanke and I referred to as
“constrained discretion” in Bernanke and Mishkin (1997).

However, how can be discretion be

constrained so it avoids the disadvantages of pure discretion? The answer I provide here is that
monetary policy discretion can be made more rule-like by pursuing monetary policy
communication that not only constrains discretion, but also has additional benefits in enabling
the markets to respond to shocks to the economy so both inflation and output are stabilized.

2

2

THE RULES VERSUS DISCRETION DEBATE

First, let’s define our terms. A rule requires that monetary policy is essentially automatic: it
involves a precise prescription for how monetary policy should react to a set of economic
circumstances. One example of a monetary policy rule is the constant-money-growth rule
advocated by Milton Friedman, in which the money supply is set by the central bank to grow at a
constant rate. A more recent alternative is the classic Taylor (1993) rule in which the policy
interest rate, the federal funds rate, is set to be a weighted average of an output gap (actual output
minus potential output) and an inflation gap (actual inflation minus the target inflation rate.) The
polar opposite of a monetary policy rule, according to the traditional classification of policy
regimes is based on discretion. Discretion, in its purist form, involves monetary policymakers
setting their policy instruments on a day-to-day basis as economic events unfold, with no public
commitments about its objectives or actions.

2.1 The Case for Rules
There are two basic arguments for monetary policy rules. First is that monetary policy makers
making discretionary decisions cannot be trusted. In their classic study of monetary policy
history, Friedman and Schwartz (1963) document many instances where Federal Reserve
policies led to sharp contractions in economic activity, as does Meltzer (2004, 2014) . Overly
expansionary monetary policy that followed the period discussed by Friedman and Schwartz and
Meltzer, led to the Great Inflation that lasted from the late 1960s to 1979, until actions by the
Federal Reserve under the chairmanship of Paul Volcker led to a low inflation period since the
early 1980s. Monetarists such as Friedman, Schwartz and Meltzer have argued that if the
Federal Reserve had pursued a constant-money-growth rule these episodes of severe economic
contractions and high inflation would have been avoided.
The second, and I would argue more powerful, argument for monetary policy rules
results from the literature on the time-inconsistency problem described by Kydland and Prescott
(1977), Calvo (1978) and Barro and Gordon (1983) in the context of monetary policy. The timeinconsistency problem occurs because economic agents or policy makers always have a
temptation to deviate from an optimal long-run plan, which is therefore time-inconsistent, when
they operate with discretion. In other words, even when an optimal long-run plan is formulated,
3

when tomorrow comes and the economic agent or policymaker reoptimizes, they renege on the
optimal plan. In the case of monetary policy, monetary policy cannot achieve higher economic
growth and lower unemployment in the long run by pursuing expansionary policy to produce
higher inflation. Thus in the Barro-Gordon (1983) framework, the optimal plan pursues price
stability, that is, a low and stable inflation rate. However, monetary policy makers are tempted
to pursue a discretionary monetary policy that tries to exploit the short-run tradeoff between
unemployment and inflation and so pursue more expansionary monetary policy than firms and
people expect because such a policy would boost economic output and raise employment,
thereby lowering unemployment in the short run. However, because there is no long-run tradeoff
between unemployment and inflation, this discretionary policy only leads to the higher inflation
in the long run, while it is unsuccessful in producing lower unemployment.
Elsewhere I have criticized this argument for the time-inconsistency problem in monetary
policy because I do not believe that central bankers want to renege on an optimal plan to keep
inflation low and stable. After all, by recognizing that there is no long-run tradeoff between
unemployment and inflation, monetary policy makers can avoid the temptation to pursue overly
expansionary monetary policy. Indeed, I have argued (Mishkin, 2016) that central bankers tend
to be too conservative along the lines described by Rogoff (1985) and so have a tendency to not
worry sufficiently about inflation being too low. Nonetheless, I believe that the timeinconsistency problem is a serious problem for monetary policy, not because it stems from
central bankers, but because politicians are short-sighted and put pressure on central bankers to
pursue overly expansionary monetary policy to lower unemployment in the short run. This
pressure can lead to central bankers reneging on the optimal, low inflation plan, even if they
would not renege otherwise. In other words, the time-inconsistency problem arises because
central banks cannot be completely insulated from political pressure (Mishkin and Westelius,
2008).
A commitment to an instrument, monetary policy rule that embeds a nominal anchor is
one way of avoiding the time-inconsistency problem. Once a monetary policy rule such as a
constant-money-growth rule or a Taylor rule is adopted, monetary policy no longer can try to
exploit the short-run tradeoff between unemployment and inflation because as the nominal
anchor of either the money supply or the target level of inflation is exceeded, monetary policy
4

automatically tightens, so that inflation is stabilized. Furthermore, the presence of a nominal
anchor in an instrument rule results in an anchoring of expected inflation, which results in a a
smaller tradeoff between output gaps and inflation gaps.
There can also be a time-inconsistency problem in the other direction, when the inflation
rate is too low, particularly when the policy interest rate has hit the zero lower bound and this
nominal interest rate cannot go below zero. This tme-inconsistency problem can be avoided bu
what Woodford (2003) refers to as history-dependent policy: that is, if the central bank could
commit to keep the policy rate “lower for longer,” so that when a the inflation objective is
reached, the policy rate would be lower than it otherwise would be to keep the inflation rate at
the desired level. However, once the desired inflation rate occurs, the central bank would have a
temptation to renege on this commitment and raise the policy rate to a level that is consistent
with keeping the inflation rate at the desired level. An instrument rule that sets the policy rate at
a lower rate when the price level is below a target path for the price level would overcome this
time-inconsistency problem.

2.2 The Case for Discretion
There are five main arguments against adoption of a monetary policy, instrument rule, and so
argue in favor of the conduct of monetary policy with some discretion.
1. A rule requires a reliable model of the macroeconomy.
2. A rule requires that the structure of the economy is stable.
3. A rule cannot foresee every contingency.
4. A rule does not allow judgement.
5. Monetary policymakers are not less trustworthy than rules.

5

We look at each of these in turn.

2.2.1 A Rule Requires a Reliable Model of the Macroeconomy

For an instrument rule to produce stable inflation and output, policymakers must have a
reliable model of the macroeconomy so that they can have confidence that the instrument rule
they choose is close to the policy rule that minimizes output and inflation gaps.. For example,
deriving a reliable Taylor rule requires that the central bank has confidence in its estimate of 1)
the natural (equilibrium) rate of interest, 2) the natural rate of unemployment and 3) that there is
a stable Phillips-curve relationship.
As we have seen recently, there have been major reassessments of the value of the natural
(equilibrium) rate of interest. The Summary of Economic Projections, which provides
projections from all the FOMC participants of long-term inflation and the long-term policy rate
under appropriate policy , shows that the FOMC participants have substantially reduced their
estimates of the natural rate of interest in recent years. Academic studies (Barsky, et. al., 2014,
Curdia, et. al., 2014 and Hamilton, et. al., Harris, Hatzius and West, 2015) also suggest that the
natural rate of interest has fallen in recent years, and they also emphasize how uncertain
estimates of the natural rate of interest are.
Research also indicates that estimates of the natural rate of unemployment are highly
uncertain (Staiger, Stock and Watson (1997) and Federal Reserve officials have cast doubts on
whether the Phillips curve is sufficiently stable to provide a reliable guide to monetary policy
(e.g., recent remarks by Brainard (2015) and Tarullo (2015). Indeed, Orphanides (2002) has

6

argued that the very high inflation outcomes in the United States in the 1970s were due to an
underestimate of the natural rate of unemployment on the part of Federal Reserve policymakers.

2.2.2 A Rule Requires that the Structure of the Economy is Stable

A successful instrument rule requires that the structure of the economy does not undergo
substantial changes so the instrument rule remains valid. The failure of monetary targeting in
many countries in the 1980s indicates the dangers of adopting instrument rules. A particularly
striking example occurred in Switzerland in the late 1980s, as documented in Bernanke,
Laubach, Mishkin and Posen (1999). In 1980, the Swiss National Bank adopted a growth rate
target for the monetary base. In 1988, the Swiss introduced a new interbank payment system, the
Swiss Interbank Clearing (SIC), and a wide ranging revision of commercial banks liquidity
requirements. These structural changes caused a severe drop in banks’ desired holdings of
deposits at the Swiss National Bank, and so a smaller amount of the monetary base was now
needed relative to aggregate spending. The resulting upward shift in velocity meant that
adherence to the monetary base target led to very high inflation, with Swiss inflation rising to
above 5%, well above that of the rest of Europe, which of course horrified the anti-inflation
Swiss. The problem with monetary targeting instrument rules is exemplified by the colorful
quote from Gerald Bouey, the governor of the Bank of Canada in the 1980s, who said, “We
didn’t abandon monetary aggregates, they abandoned us.”

2.2.3. A rule cannot foresee every contingency.

7

An instrument rule can be too rigid because it cannot foresee every contingency. For
example almost no one could have predicted that problems in one small part of the financial
system, subprime mortgage lending, would lead to the worst financial crisis since the Great
Depression. The unprecedented steps that the Federal Reserve took during the crisis to prevent it
from escalating into an even deeper crisis (Mishkin and White, 2016) could not have been
written into a policy rule ahead of time.

2.2.4. A rule does not allow judgement.

An instrument rule does not easily incorporate the use of judgement. Monetary policy is
as much an art as a science. Monetary policymakers look at a wide range of information in order
to decide on the best course for monetary policy, and some of this information is not easily
quantifiable. As an illustration, in the first go-round of every FOMC meeting, the Federal
Reserve Bank presidents provide anecdotal information about what their contacts their Federal
Reserve district tell them about the state of the economy, and this information is used by FOMC
participants in their decisions about setting the monetary policy instrument. Another illustration
is Alan Greenspan’s use of judgement in the mid to late 1990s to argue against monetary policy
tightening despite the rapidly growing economy and falling unemployment rate. Greenspan was
able to convince the FOMC to refrain from raising rates despite recommendations from the
Board’s models that the FOMC do so. Greenspan was proved to be right, earning him the
moniker of “maestro” (Woodward, 2000).
Judgement, which in its nature is discretionary, is thus an essential element of monetary
policy to stabilize inflation and output, as has been emphasized by Svensson (2003, 2005). But
8

how do you put judgement into an instrument rule, when judgement necessarily is based on nonquantifiable information? There is no way that I can see how this might be done and so the use
of judgement in monetary policy provides another strong argument against adoption of an
instrument rule.

2.2.5 Monetary Policymakers are Not Less Trustworthy than Rules
One argument for adoption of rules is that they are more trustworthy than policymakers.
There are certainly cases where this has been true in the past, as Friedman and Schwartz (1963)
and Meltzer (2004, 2014) have documented. However, I would argue that beginning in the
1980s, monetary policy in the United States has produced more stable inflation and output,
although not everyone would agree (e.g., Taylor, 2007). Inflation has been low and until the
global financial crisis in 2007 business cycle fluctuations have been quite muted. Although I
agree with John Taylor (2007) that monetary policy was too easy in the run up to the Great
Recession because inflation did overshoot the 2% level, I do not agree with Taylor (2007) that
monetary policy was a key reason why the housing bubble occurred for the reasons outlined by
Bernanke (2010). However, the Federal Reserve’s actions during the global financial crisis and
in its aftermath resulted in smaller output and inflation gaps than would have occurred if
monetary policy had been dictated by instrument rules, as the next subsection discusses. 1
Indeed, given the difficult circumstances, I think future historians will give the Fed very high
grades on its performance during this period. Indeed, as argued below, the Federal Reserve was
able to stabilize inflation and output during this period than would have a Taylor rule. Clearly
the Federal Reserve learned a lot from the policy outcomes during the Great Depression and the
Note that I have a conflict of interest in making this statement because I was an active
participant in Federal Reserve decisions during the early stages of the financial crisis.
1

9

Great Inflation of the 1970s, which led to monetary policy that produced more stable inflation
and output. Arguing that the Fed would be less successful at stabilizing output and inflation than
would a policy instrument rule is now harder to make.

2.2.6 An Illustration Using a Traditional Taylor Rule

To illustrate the arguments above, let’s see what a traditional Taylor (1993) rule would
have recommended for monetary policy during the global financial crisis and its aftermath.
This is only an illustration because more sophisticated instrument rules might do result in more
stable inflation and output than the simple, traditional Taylor rule discussed here. However, I
think that even more sophisticated Taylor or other instrument rules that would have reasonably
been developed before the crisis would likely have run into similar problems.
Figure 1 provides a comparison of the actual federal funds rate with a Taylor (1993) rule
using CBO estimates of potential output provided in the FRED database.

10

The global financial crisis started on August 2007 with the seizing up of interbank
markets as a result of an announcement by the French bank BNP Paribas that is was suspending
redemption of shares held in some of its money market funds. At the time, the U.S. economy
was growing rapidly and inflation was rising. The Taylor rule which raises the federal funds rate
when either the output gap or the inflation gap rises, would recommend a rise in the federal funds
rate. Indeed, the 1993 Taylor rule shown in the figure would have recommended a rise in the
federal funds rate of 38 basis points from the second quarter of 2007 to the fourth quarter of
2007. Instead, the FOMC decided to lower the federal funds rate by 25 basis points (0.25
percentage points) at the September FOMC meeting, and then by another 50 basis points in the
fourth quarter, exactly the opposite of what the Taylor rule would have suggested.

11

As you can see in Figure 1, from the fourth quarter of 2007 to the second quarter of 2008,
the Taylor rule kept the federal funds rate at fairly high level, around 4%, while the Federal
Reserve lowered the federal funds 300 basis from the 5% level to the 2% level. The Taylor rule
only recommended a substantial decline in the federal funds after the second quarter of 2008, but
even then the FOMC’s setting of the federal funds rate was well below the recommendation of
the Taylor rule through the fourth quarter of 2008.
I think that very few economists would argue that the economy would have been grown
faster and had inflation closer to the Fed’s 2% objective if the Fed had followed the Taylor rule
during this episode and kept the federal funds rate so high during the financial crisis. Indeed,
given the course of the economy once the financial crisis began, the Federal Reserve can be
criticized for not lowering the federal funds rate fast enough. Indeed, as is revealed by the
FOMC transcripts, at the December 2007 FOMC meeting, in that meeting I argued strenuously
for more pre-emptive easing of monetary policy and indicated that I would have preferred to
dissent from the FOMC decision to lower the federal funds rate by only by 25 basis points, but I
did not do so because it might have suggested to the markets that I was less supportive of the
Chair, Ben Bernanke, then I was. Then in a speech that I gave on January 11, 2008 (Mishkin,
2008a), I provided the arguments why a more preemptive monetary policy was required to cope
with the financial crisis. Subsequently, the Federal Reserve pursued a far more expansionary
monetary policy, although it was insufficient to keep the economy going into the most severe
recession of the post World War II period, with inflation falling well below the 2% inflation
objective, which is also embedded in the Taylor rule. If the Federal Reserve had not used
discretion and departed from the Taylor rule, inflation would have fallen even lower, so that
there would have been a real possibility of a deflation setting in, as occurred in Japan after 1998,.
12

Furthermore, the decline in GDP would have been even more severe. Indeed, the possibility of
the Great Recession turning into a full-scaled depression cannot be ruled out.
Why did the Federal Reserve depart from the Taylor rule? First, the global financial
crisis revealed that the standard general equilibrium models macroeconomic models used by both
central banks and academic economists were unreliable because they had ignored financial
disruptions as an important factor in the evolution of the economy (see Mishkin, 2011). Second,
is that the global financial crisis led to a change in the structure of the economy that made the
economy more nonlinear. (However, because financial factors had not been built into general
equilibrium macroeconomic models before the financial crisis, the change in structure could just
be thought of as the pre-crisis macro models being misspecified.) Third, is that the financial
crisis was not anticipated by macroeconomists, even those like myself who had studied financial
crises in emerging market economies, but couldn’t imagine that such a crisis would occur in a
developed economy like the United States. The contingency of this financial crisis was therefore
not even comtemplated in the literature on monetary policy rules. Fourth, is that the relatively
rapid reactions of the Federal Reserve to the financial crisis and the departure from the Taylor
rule were not based on hard data. Instead it was the judgement, very often based on anecdotal
evidence and conversations with financial market participants, that led the Fed to depart from the
Taylor rule. This was certainly true in my case, where my advocacy of more expansionary
monetary policy to contain the crisis was not based primarily on hard data, but rather on my
judgement that the financial disruption was going to have very adverse effects on the economy as
a result of my reading and research on what had happened in previous financial crises.

13

All of the objections to adoption of an instrument rule that were articulated at the
beginning of this section therefore came to play in the departure from the Taylor rule during the
global financial crisis.
What happened after the crisis was over in 2009 also provide support for discretion and
departures from the Taylor rule. As you can see in Figure 1, starting in the fourth quarter of
2009, the Taylor rule would have suggested that the federal funds rate should rise steadily to
over a 3% rate currently. In contrast, the Federal Reserve has been raising rates very gradually,
so by the second quarter of 2017 they are more than 200 basis points below the Taylor rule
recommendation. Again, I think there are very few economists who would advocate that the
Fed would have produced higher economic growth and inflation closer to the Fed’s 2% target if
it had followed the Taylor rule and raised the federal funds rate by 300 basis points, instead of
the around 100 basis points that they actually did.
What is the rationale for this departure from the Taylor rule? First is that the equilibrium,
natural rate of interest has been falling over time, although we don’t know exactly by how much,
while the Taylor rule has the equilibrium rate fixed at 2%. We could either see this as a
misspecification of the model or alternatively that the structure of the economy has changed,
leading to a decline in the equilibrium interest rate. In addition, inflation has remained below the
2% desired level, despite very low unemployment rates. This suggests that either the model of
the Phillips curve is wrong or that the estimate of the natural rate of unemployment is too high.
Stabilizing inflation and output in this environment where we are not sure what is going on
requires the use of judgement.
We thus see that the objections to an instrument rule come into play again in arguing for
the use of discretion in setting monetary policy in the period from late 2009 to the present.
14

2.3 Constrained Discretion: Making Discretion More Rule-Like

The arguments above argue against adoption of an instrument rule for monetary policy.
However, we have also seen that pure discretion can lead to high inflation. But is there
something in between?
Bernanke and Mishkin (1997) argue that the rules-versus-discretion debate has been
miscast because the dichotomy between rules and discretion is too simple. Advocates of rules
argue against pure discretion which is subject to the time-inconsistency problem, while
advocates of discretion argue against rigid rules. Bernanke and I argued that by imposing a
structure that imposes discipline on monetary policy, but does not eliminate flexibility, what we
called constrained discretion, monetary policy could avoid some of the disadvantages of either
rigid rules or pure discretion. Another way of thinking about constrained discretion is that it is
an attempt to achieve the best of both worlds of rules and discretion by making discretion have
rule-like properties, so that it avoids the time-inconsistency problem.

15

3

HOW CAN MONETARY POLICY DISCRETION BE MADE
MORE RULE-LIKE?
Constrained discretion as an approach to the conduct of monetary policy can help

stabilize output and inflation, but there is still the question of how a framework of constrained
discretion can be designed so that it is rule-like, and so avoids the time-inconsistency problem.
A first step in making monetary policy discretion more rule-like is for the monetary authorities to
constrain discretion to avoid the time inconsistency problem by adopting a nominal anchor and
being accountable to not deviate very far from it. However, higher accountability of monetary
policy to achieve the nominal anchor can be enhanced by communication of the monetary policy
reaction process.
Let’s look at each in turn.

3.1 Adoption of a Nominal Anchor
An increasingly popular approach to adopting a nominal anchor and being accountable to
not deviate from it is inflation targeting. As emphasized in Bernanke and Mishkin (1997),
Bernanke, et. al. (1999) and Mishkin (1999), inflation targeting is a form of constrained
discretion that can avoid the time-inconsistency problem by not only announcing an inflation
target, but also by being accountable to achieve the target through communication about how the
target is to be achieved and how past policy actions were consistent with achieving the inflation
target. Other similar approaches adopt other target criteria with a nominal anchor such as pricelevel targeting or nominal GDP targeting, or alternatively, as in Woodford (2003), a target
criterion that involves a tradeoff between output gaps and inflation gaps. These approaches are
sometimes referred to as target rules. This is because they have rule-like properties that allow
them to mitigate the time-inconsistency problem. However, these approaches are not rules in the
sense that they provide an automatic prescription for how monetary policy is conducted. Instead
they allow a lot of discretion on the part of monetary policymakers, including a lot of judgement
as to how monetary policy instruments are set to achieve the target criterion.

16

It should also be pointed out that even if monetary policy makers do not explicitly adopt a
nominal anchor by announcing a target for a nominal variable, they may do nearly as well by
implicitly adopting a nominal anchor. For example, until January 2012, when the Federal
Reserve adopted a 2% inflation target, the Federal Reserve did not have an explicit nominal
anchor. Nonetheless, the Federal Reserve did emphasize that price stability was its most
important long-term objective and expected inflation did become reasonably well-anchored both
before and immediately after the global financial crisis. Indeed, one of the great successes of the
Bernanke-Fed before 2012 was that it was able to anchor inflation expectations during the
financial crisis through highly active, discretionary actions that prevented inflation expectations
from plummeting, as they did in Japan. When I was a member of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, I nonetheless argued that adopting an explicit inflation target would
help stabilize output and inflation relative to the Fed’s monetary policy strategy at the time
because it would make it more likely that inflation expectations would be anchored in the future
(Mishkin, 2008b).
Advocates of instrument rules criticize inflation targeting for being too discretionary. I
do not want to go into great detail as to how inflation targeting or its variants can constrain
discretion to ensure that monetary policymakers are less tempted to renege on optimal plans.
This is well-covered territory. The evidence, however, does support that countries that have
adopted inflation targeting have been able to anchor inflation expectations well (Gürkaynak, et.
al, 2010), which only occurs if this strategy is rule-like and overcomes the time-inconsistency
problem. Furthermore, countries that have adopted inflation targeting have had inflation that is
low and stable without bearing the cost of larger fluctuations of output (Mishkin and SchmidtHebbel, 2002).
Indeed, the excellent performance of inflation targeting, which can be viewed as a new
technology for monetary policy, provides a counter to advocates of instrument rules who claim
that central banks cannot be trusted to conduct discretionary monetary policy and more stable
inflation and output would be achieved with an instrument rule. It is certainly true that central
banks, such as the Federal Reserve, have found that some of their past policies have led to less
stable inflation and output, but it is much harder to claim that central banks, particularly in
developed countries with solid institutional frameworks, cannot be trusted to conduct monetary
17

policy when they are using the new technologies such as inflation targeting. Inflation targeting
central banks have been able to avoid the time-inconsistency problem and keep inflation low and
stable. I would argue that advocates of instrument rules are fighting the last war. They argue
for an instrument rule to prevent a problem that is no longer occurring, high inflation.

3.2 Communicating a Monetary Policy Reaction Process
Although adopting a nominal anchor such as an inflation target can go a long way to
constraining discretion and making it rule-like, it might not create enough accountability to
constrain discretion sufficiently; the long lags from monetary policy to inflation mean that it may
be several years before the monetary policy authorities can be monitored to see whether they
took appropriate steps to achieve the target. Indeed, I suspect that this is why advocates of
instrument rules do not feel that inflation targeting is sufficiently rule-like and that adoption of a
rule would provide more stable inflation and output outcomes.
This concern that just announcing a nominal anchor is not sufficient to stabilize inflation
can be addressed by improving the use of discretion with more communication about the
monetary policy reaction process, that is, how monetary policy instruments would change as
economic circumstances change. (Note that I use the term monetary reaction process rather than
monetary policy reaction function. A function is a mathematical construct that generates an
output from quantifiable inputs. Since, as I argue later, judgement requires that not all inputs
into monetary policy decisions have to be quantifiable. Thus a description of monetary policy
reactions to evolving economic circumstances is better described as a reaction process rather
than a reaction function.) If the markets and the public have a better understanding of the policy
reaction process, they can evaluate whether the setting of the policy instruments is consistent
with achieving the nominal anchor target, thus increasing the accountability of the monetary
policy authorities for achieving this target.
It is true that the markets can glean some information about the policy reaction process
by seeing how actual monetary policy actions react to the incoming data, as the evidence
presented below indicates. However, the monetary authorities can provide even more
information about their policy reaction process and increase accountability by communicating
18

how the policy instruments would change as economic circumstances change and then
explaining how the current setting of their policy instruments is consistent with this policy
reaction process. Then as the economy evolves, the public and the markets can assess whether
monetary policy is trying to achieve the nominal anchor, even before the outcomes on this
anchor are revealed. However, communication about the policy reaction process can be
increased by the use of what Feroli et. al. (2017) refer to as data-based forward guidance: that is,
providing information on the future path of the policy rate conditional on the data that could
occur over the policy horizon.

3.2.1 Data-Based Forward Guidance

Data-based forward guidance requires not only that the central bank provides information on the
policy path given the central bank’s forecasts, but also communicates how that path would
change if the central bank’s forecast changes. One central bank that does this is the central bank
of Norway, the Norges Bank. The Norges Bank does this by first providing a baseline projected
policy path along with a fan chart showing the confidence intervals around the policy path.
More importantly, the Norges Bank explains why the policy path may deviate from the baseline
path by providing several scenarios as to how the policy path would change when economic
outcomes change. It is true that because the governance structure of the FOMC includes up to
nineteen particpants (seven governors and twelve Federal Reserve Bank presidents) that make
policy decisions, it would be extremely difficult to derive one probability distribution for the
policy path outcomes or an agreement on how the policy path would change when economic
outcomes change. This difficulty occurs because the Federal Reserve does not speak with one
voice, as occurs with the Norges Bank. However, FOMC participants could increase
communicating how their projections of the policy path would react to economic events.
Alternatively, the FOMC might delegate to the Chair to provide information on how the
committee’s view of the future policy path might change under different scenarios for how the
economy evolves.
This form of data-based forward guidance would not only make it easier for the public
and the markets to evaluate whether the actual setting of policy instruments is consistent with the
19

objective of hitting the nominal anchor target, but also has expectations dynamics that can help
stabilize output and inflation.
To see why data-based forward guidance leads to expectations dynamics that stabilize
inflation and output, consider a negative shock to aggregate demand when both the inflation gap
and output gap are at zero. The result would be that both the inflation and output gaps would turn
negative in the future and an monetary policy reaction process that minimizes output and
inflation gaps would indicate that the federal funds rate path would be lowered. If the central
bank’s reaction process is well understood by the markets and the public, then without -the Fed
taking any actions, expectations of the future federal funds rate would decline, which would
result in lower longer-term interest rates and stimulate the economy. The result would then be an
immediate offset to the negative aggregate demand shock which would help stabilize the
economy. Another way of stating this result is that successful central bank communication
about the monetary policy reaction process would enable the markets to do a lot of the work
(heavy lifting) for the central bank. If the monetary policy reaction to shocks is predictable,
expectation dynamics work to tighten or loosen financial conditions that stabilize output and
inflation appropriately when there are shocks to the economy.
However, forward guidance is often not done in a data-based way. As described in Feroli
et. al. (2017) the Federal Reserve has often engaged in a second type of forward guidance, timebased forward guidance, in which a central bank commits to set the policy rate at specific levels
at specific calendar dates. An extreme version of time-based forward guidance would be a
central bank committing not to raise interest rates from their current level for several years. Such
a commitment would ignore incoming information, which is why the forward guidance is timebased.
Not only does this time-based forward guidance provide less information about the policy
reaction process so that there is less accountability of the central bank to meet its nominal anchor
objectives, but it results in expectations dynamics that destabilize output and inflation. Again
consider the situation in which the positive employment report leads to expectations that
inflation will be higher than previously expected. With time-dependent forward guidance, the
projected policy path does not change, but expected inflation rises. This means that the expected
path of future real interest rates, policy interest rates minus expected inflation, now declines. The
20

effect of the positive employment report shock is then an effective easing of monetary policy, the
opposite to the monetary policy response that would stabilize output and inflation.
This feature of time-dependent forward guidance is exactly the same problem created by
the zero lower bound for the policy rate, as discussed in Eggertson and Woodford (2003). They
point out that when there is a negative aggregate demand shock and the policy rate is at the zero
lower bound, then a negative aggregate demand shock leads to a decline in expected inflation
and therefore a rise in real interest rates, which further weakens aggregate demand. Negative
aggregate demand shocks when the zero lower bound is binding therefore can lead to prolonged
economic downturns. Time-dependent forward guidance creates a similar problem because, just
as occurs when the policy rate is at the zero lower bound, a negative aggregate demand shock
leaves the projected future path of the policy rate unchanged, so that real interest rates rise,
thereby propagating the negative aggregate demand shock further.
Does empirical evidence support the theory that time-based forward guidance leads to
bad expectation dynamics because it leads to interest rates becoming insensitive to
macroeconomic news? Feroli et. al. (2017) find that the answer is yes. Using the methodology
developed by Swanson and Williams (2014), they evaluate how responsive interest rates were to
economics news during periods when the Federal Reserve used time-based forward guidance,
data-based forward guidance or no forward guidance at all. Chart 3.3 from Feroli et. al. (2017)
reproduced as Figure 2 below shows the sensitivity of Treasury bond rates to macroeconomic
news when there is no forward guidance, data-based forward guidance, or time-based forward
guidance. As the figure shows, time-based forward guidance is associated with lower sensitivity
of interest rates to macroeconomic news at all of the maturities they examine. Time-based
forward guidance not only leads to less sensitivity to macroeconomic news than does data-based
forward guidance, but also less than when there is no forward guidance at all. Indeed, the results
in Feroli et. al. (2017) indicate that, even without forward guidance, markets are able to glean
some information about the monetary policy reaction process, which does not occur with timebased forward guidance.

21

Figure 2: Sensitivity of Interest Rates to Economic News and Forward Guidance, 20012015

*Source: Feroli et. al. (2016).

Note that the results in Figure 2 are not driven by the zero-lower bound constraint during the post
Great-Recession period. Even excluding the zero lower bound period, the sensitivity of interest
rates to macroeconomic news is lower during periods in which FOMC communication on
forward guidance is more strongly time-dependent.

3.2.2 Why Communicating a Monetary Policy Reaction Process is Not an Instrument Rule

There is an important subtle issue about the benefits of a central bank communicating a
monetary policy reaction process. At first glance, a monetary policy reaction process appears to
be very similar to instrument rule like the Taylor rule. After all, a Taylor rule is a very simple
way of specifying a monetary policy reaction process. So why is data-based forward guidance
22

very different from adoption of an instrument rule, such as a Taylor rule. The answer is that
monetary policy that minimizes output and inflation gaps results in a policy reaction process to
change over time, either as monetary policymakers learn more about how the economy works or
when the structure of the economy changes. Furthermore, monetary policy that minimizes output
and inflation gaps leads to a modification of the policy reaction process when there are
unforeseen contingencies that were previously not part of the reaction process. Judgement is
also a feature of such as policy as demonstrated by Svensson (2005) and would then be part of a
monetary policy reaction process. A Taylor rule, which does not change over time, can therefore
be far from a policy that minimizes output and inflation gaps.
Unlike a Taylor rule, data-dependent forward guidance can be consistent with monetary
policy that minimizes output and inflation gaps, but this requires that it changes the monetary
policy reaction process. Monetary policy that minimizes output and inflation gaps requires that
projections of the future policy path not only must be altered when forecasts of the economy
change, but also when the central bank has reasons to expect that the model of the economy is
changing. Data-dependent forward guidance thus requires substantial communication to explain
not only the past policy reaction process, but also any reasons for changes in the reaction
process.
To understand this point, consider what data-dependent forward guidance might have
looked like when the global financial crisis started in August of 2007. At the time, inflation was
rising and the economy was still growing rapidly in the third quarter. The Federal Reserve
dramatically deviated from its previous reaction process by aggressively cutting the federal funds
rate even before the economy and inflation had turned down. If the Fed had been providing databased forward guidance, it would have explained the disruption to financial markets required a
change in the policy reaction process, with much easier monetary policy in the future in response
to financial shocks than had been anticipated earlier. Indeed, such a shift in the policy reaction
process is exactly what would have helped stabilize both aggregate output and inflation. If this
communication led to the markets understanding that there had been a shift in the policy reaction
process, longer-term interest rates would have fallen more rapidly in response to news that the
financial disruption was getting worse. This would have helped monetary policy to be even more

23

expansionary than it otherwise would have been, by helping offset some of the negative shocks
to the economy from the ongoing financial crisis.

4

CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this paper, I have argued that the rules versus discretion debate is miscast because

monetary policy does not have to choose only between adopting a policy instrument rule or pure
discretion, both of which have serious shortcomings. Instrument rules can lead to poor economic
outcomes if the model of the economy is not reliable or the structure of the economy is unstable,
or because rules cannot foresee every contingency or allow judgement. Pure discretion can lead
to policies that destabilize inflation and output and is subject to the time-inconsistency problem
where there monetary policy reneges on the long-run plan that minimizes output and inflation
gaps. Instead of making the stark choice between an instrument rule and pure discretion, another
choice is to constrain discretion and make it more rule-like. But how can discretion be
constrained and be accountable to be rule-like? I argue that monetary policy discretion can be
made more rule-like by 1) adopting a nominal anchor such as an inflation target, a monetary
policy strategy that has proved to be very successful at stabilizing inflation and output in recent
years, and 2) communication of a monetary policy reaction process, especially through databased forward guidance, in which the monetary policy authorities describe how the future policy
path will change as economic circumstances change.

24

REFERENCES
Barsky, R., A. Justiniano, and L. Melosi, (2014), “The Natural Rate of Interest and Its
Usefulness for Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 104(5):
37-43.
Barro, R.J. and D.B. Gordon (1983), “Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of Monetary
Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 1: 101-121.
Bernanke, B.S. (2010), “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble”, speech given at the annual
meeting of the American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia, 3 January 2010, available at
http://www.federalreserve.gov
Bernanke, B.S., and F.S. Mishkin, (1997), “Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for
Monetary Policy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol 11, #2 (Spring): 97-116.
Bernnake, B.S., Laubach, T., F.S. Mishkin, and A. Posen (1999), Inflation Targeting: Lessons
from the International Experience (Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press).
Brainard, L. (2015), “Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate is Low,”
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20151201a.htm.
Calvo, G.A., (1978), “On the Time-Inconsistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary Economy,”
Econometrica, 46, 6: 1411-1428.
Curdia, V., A. Ferrero, G.C. Ng, and A. Tambalotti, 2014, “Has U.S. Monetary Policy Tracked
the Efficient Interest Rate?”, FRB San Francisco Working Paper 2014-12.
Eggertsson, G. B. and Woodford, M. (2003), “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal
Monetary Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2003, No 1, pp. 139-211.
Eggertsson, G.B. and Woodford, M. (2004), “Policy Options in a Liquidity Trap”, American
Economic Review, 94(2), pp. 76-79.
Feroli, M., Greenlaw, D., Hooper, P., Mishkin, F.S. and A. Sufi (2017), “Language After Liftoff:
Fed Communication Away from the Zero Lower Bound,” Research in Economics, volume 71,
issue 3, September, pp. 452-490.
Friedman, M. and A. Schwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).

25

Gürkaynak, Refet S., Andrew Levin, and Eric T. Swanson (2010). "Does Inflation Targeting
Anchor Long-Run Inflation Expectations? Evidence from Long-Term Bond Yields in the U.S.,
U.K., and Sweden." Journal of the European Economic Association, 8:1208-1242.
Hamilton, J.D., Harris, E.S., Hatzius, J. and K.D. West, (2015) “The Equilibrium Real Funds
Rate: Past, Present and Future,” U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, February 2015,
https://research.chicagobooth.edu/-/media/research/igm/docs/2015usmpf.pdf?la=en&hash=E5C27E7E0FA17AA169B268EBC157039DC3D662C8
Kydland, F.E and E.C. Prescott, (1977), “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of
Optimal Plans, Journal of Political Economy, 85, 3: 473-492.
Mishkin, F.S., (1999) “International Experiences with Different Monetary Policy Regimes,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol 43, #3: 579-606.
Mishkin, F.S. and K. Schmidt-Hebbel, "One Decade of Inflation Targeting in the World: What
Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know?" in Norman Loayza and Raimundo Soto, eds.,
Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges (Central Bank of Chile: Santiago 2002):
171-219.
Mishkin, F.S. (2008a), “Monetary Policy Flexibility, Risk Management, and Financial
Disruptions,” speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, January 11, 2008.
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/mishkin20080111a.htm
Mishkin, F.S. (2008b), “Whither Federal Reserve Communication”, speech delivered at the
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC, 28 July, available at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/mishkin20080728a.htm.
Mishkin, F.S. (2011), “Monetary Policy Strategy: Lessons From the Crisis,” in Jarocinski, M,
Smets, F., and C. Thimann, eds. Moneary Policy Revisited: Lessons from the Crisis, Sixth ECB
Central Banking Conference (Frankfort, European Central Bank): 67-118.
Mishkin, F.S.(2016), “2% Forever? Rethinking the Inflation Target” in Oesterreichische
Nationalbank, Central Banking in Times of Change: 92-101.
Mishkin, F.S. and E. White, (2016), “Unprecedented Action: The Federal Reserve’s Response to
the Global Financial Crisis in Historical Perspective,” in M. Wynne and M. Bordo, eds., The
Federal Reserve System’s Role in the Global Economy: An Historical Perspective (Cambridge,
U.K., Cambridge University Press): 220-258.
Mishkin, F.S. and N. Westelius, “Inflation Band Targeting and Optimal Inflation Contracts,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking Volume 40, No. 4 (June 2008), pp. 557-582.
Meltzer, A.H. (2004), A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1: 1913-1951 (Chicago,
University of Chicago Press).
26

Meltzer, A.H. (2014), A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 2: 1951-1969 (Chicago,
University of Chicago Press)
Rogoff, K. (1985) “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 1169-1189.
Staiger, D, J.H. Stock and M.W. Watson, (1997), “The NAIRU, Unemployment and Monetary
Policy” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11, 1: 33-49.
Svensson, L. (2003) “What is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgment in Monetary Policy
Through Targeting Rules,” Journal of Economic Literature 41: 426-477.
Svensson, L. (2005), “Monetary Policy with Judgment: Forecast Targeting,” International
Journal of Central Banking 1(1) (2005), 1-54.
Swanson, E.T and J. C. Williams (2014), “Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on
Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, 104, 10: 3154-3185.
Tarullo, D. (2015) Remarks on CNBC’s “Power Lunch Today,” October 13,
http://www.cnbc.com/2015/10/13/.
Taylor, J.B., (1993), “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 39: 195-214.
Taylor, J. B. (2007), “Housing and Monetary Policy”, Housing, Housing Finance and Monetary
Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, pp. 463-476.
Woodford, M. (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Woodward, R. (2000), Greenspan’s Fed and the American Boom, (New York, Simon and
Schuster, 2000)

27

