                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         DOES SIZE MATTER? BAILOUTS WITH LARGE AND SMALL BANKS

                                        Eduardo Dávila
                                        Ansgar Walther

                                      Working Paper 24132
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24132


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2017




We are grateful for comments from Marios Angeletos, Robert Barro, Javier Bianchi, John
Campbell, Emmanuel Farhi, Xavier Freixas, Xavier Gabaix, Itay Goldstein, Ken Rogoff, Alexi
Savov, Philipp Schnabl, Ricardo Serrano-Padial, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, and Alp Simsek.
Luke Min provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Eduardo Dávila and Ansgar Walther. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Size Matter? Bailouts with Large and Small Banks
Eduardo Dávila and Ansgar Walther
NBER Working Paper No. 24132
December 2017
JEL No. E61,G21,G28

                                           ABSTRACT

We explore how large and small banks make funding decisions when the government provides
system-wide bailouts to the financial sector. We show that bank size, purely on strategic grounds,
is a key determinant of banks' leverage choices, even when bailout policies treat large and small
banks symmetrically. Large banks always take on more leverage than small banks because they
internalize that their decisions directly affect the government's optimal bailout policy. In
equilibrium, small banks also choose strictly higher borrowing when large banks are present,
since banks' leverage choices are strategic complements. Overall, the presence of large banks
increases aggregate leverage and the magnitude of bailouts. The optimal ex-ante regulation
features size-dependent policies that disproportionally restrict the leverage choices of large banks.
A quantitative assessment of our model implies that an increase in the share of assets held by the
five largest banks from 50% to 70% is associated with a 3.5 percentage point increase in
aggregate debt-to-asset ratios (from 90.1% to 93.6%). Under the optimal policy, large banks face
a “size tax” of 40 basis points (0.4%) per dollar of debt issued.


Eduardo Dávila
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
edavila@stern.nyu.edu

Ansgar Walther
University of Warwick
Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
ansgar.walther@gmail.com
        A surprising number of pundits seem to think that if one could only break up the big banks, governments
would be far more resilient to bailouts, and the whole “moral hazard” problem would be muted. That logic is
dubious, given how many similar crises have hit widely differing systems over the centuries. A systemic crisis
that simultaneously hits a large number of medium-sized banks would put just as much pressure on governments
to bail out the system as would a crisis that hits a couple of large banks.


                           Kenneth Rogoff. All for One Tax and One Tax for All? Project Syndicate, 04/29/2010



1         Introduction
The differential treatment of large financial institutions has drawn substantial interest in recent
financial regulatory discussions. In particular, several regulatory measures put in place after the
2008 financial crisis have singled out large banks as subjects of increased regulatory scrutiny. At
the same time, the U.S. banking industry has become increasingly concentrated, as illustrated
in Figure 1. The total number of U.S. banks has dropped from 25,000 in the 1920’s, to 14,000
in the 1970’s, to less than 6,000 as of today, while the top 10 bank holding companies now
control more than 50% of total bank assets. These developments suggest that concerns about
too-big-to-fail banks are now more important than ever before.
        Even though the too-big-to-fail question has been a perennial subject of heated public
debates – see, for instance, the forceful exposition of Stern and Feldman (2004) – the number
of formal contributions to this topic remains small. In this paper, we formally study the effects
of bank size on banks’ funding decisions in an environment with systemic bailouts. From a
positive perspective, we seek to understand whether the current levels of bank concentration
have consequences for aggregate banking stability. From a normative perspective, we seek to
understand whether regulators need to directly address bank concentration per se, or whether
size-independent regulations that apply to all banks are sufficient. We address both sets of
questions theoretically and provide a quantitative illustration of the mechanisms at play.
        A simple example illustrates the underlying mechanism behind our results.                         Is the
government’s decision problem different when it contemplates a bailout of 10 banks of size one
versus a bailout of one bank of size 10? If we assume that the losses associated with bank failure
are proportional to bank size, the naive answer to this question, from an ex-post perspective,
is no. This can be called the too-many-to-fail critique to the too-big-to-fail problem, or the
“clones” property of bailouts.1 The problem with this argument is that large banks are aware
    1
        See our opening quotation and the quotations reproduced in the Appendix for different formulations of this
logic.


                                                          2
                                                                  14000
    0.7
                                                                  13000

    0.6                                                           12000
                                                                  11000
    0.5
                                                                  10000
    0.4
                                                                    9000

    0.3                                                             8000
                                                                    7000
    0.2
                                                                    6000
            1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010                              1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

       (a) Share of total assets held by largest banks                      (b) Total number of U.S. banks

                                   Figure 1: Measures of bank concentration

Note: Figure 1a shows the share of total assets held by the 5, 10, 20, and 50 largest U.S. banks in terms of assets from 1976Q1
until 2013Q4. Figure 1b shows the total number of U.S. banks each year over the same period. Note that the secular increase in
concentration reaches back further. The U.S. economy had more than 25,000 banks in the 1920’s; see, e.g., Davison and Ramirez
(2014). Both figures are based on U.S. Call Reports data, as distributed by Drechsler, Savov and Schnabl (2016, 2017). See
also Janicki and Prescott (2006) and Fernholz and Koch (2016), who study the dynamics of the distribution of bank’s assets and
document the sustained increase in concentration in the U.S. banking sector over the last decades. Bank concentration in other
countries is even higher than in the U.S., as documented by Laeven, Ratnovski and Tong (2014).



that their individual choices directly affect the likelihood and magnitude of a bailout, while small
banks are individually unable to modify bailout policy responses. Therefore, anticipating the
government’s policy response and internalizing the effect of their size, large banks decide to be
more aggressive at an ex-ante stage, increasing their leverage in equilibrium and, consequently,
the likelihood of a bailout. Moreover, this effect is amplified by strategic spillovers to small
banks. Aggressive leverage choices by large banks increase the implicit bailout subsidy for the
banking sector as a whole. Small banks, encouraged by this shield, respond by increasing their
leverage beyond what they would optimally choose in the absence of large banks.
       In our model, banks optimally choose their leverage trading off bankruptcy costs associated
with default with costs of equity issuance, as in the canonical trade-off theory of capital
structure.2 Ex-post, to avoid bankruptcy costs, the government may find it optimal to bail
   2
       Our results remain valid under alternative theories of bank capital structure, as long as a meaningful trade-
off between bank equity and debt finance remains. Our results arise from market participants anticipating
system-wide bailouts, not from the specifics of the private costs and benefits of leverage.




                                                              3
out banks but, as in Farhi and Tirole (2012), it has to implement system-wide bailout policies.3
To highlight the strategic role of bank size, as opposed to technological differences, we make
two conservative assumptions. First, banks have constant returns to scale, so that they are
ex-ante identical with the exception of their size. Second, the government decides its bailout
policy considering all banks equally, that is, the government’s objective is simply to minimize
aggregate welfare losses, regardless of whether large or small institutions generate these losses.
These assumptions guarantee that a too-many-to-fail scenario, in which multiple small banks
fail, can provide as strong a motivation for a bailout as the failure of a single large institution
of equal size.
       Our first result shows that a large bank takes on more leverage than a small bank, purely
on strategic grounds. Relative to a small bank, a large bank internalizes that its actions
directly affect the magnitude of the government’s optimal bailout, which generates an additional
incentive to take on debt. Our second result establishes that small banks take on more leverage
when a large bank is present. This behavior arises because bank’s borrowing choices are strategic
complements. Intuitively, when choosing their capital structure ex-ante, banks anticipate that,
ex-post, the magnitude of any bailout increases with aggregate leverage. When other banks
increase their leverage, each individual bank rationally anticipates larger bailouts, which provide
an effective shield against bankruptcy costs and increase the marginal value of increasing its
own leverage. Thus, leverage choices become strategic complements, introducing a coordination
motive among banks.4 Because large banks have an additional incentive to take on more
leverage, their presence makes small banks more willing to borrow. This strategic interaction
generates amplification: Large banks take on yet more leverage in response to small banks’
choices, small banks respond with a further round of increased borrowing, and so forth, until
   3
       Kelly, Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2016) provide direct empirical evidence consistent with market
participants who expect system-wide bailouts to occur. Moreover, Farhi and Tirole (2012) show that even when
richer targeted instruments are available, as long as the government does not perfectly observe the performance
of each individual bank, the optimal policy is partially non-targeted, generating strategic complementarities. In
a related environment, Bianchi (2016) shows that systemic and broad-based bailouts dominate idiosyncratic and
targeted bailouts. In practice, system-wide bailouts are the only legal form of bailout under current US law:
The Dodd-Frank act limits emergency lending programs to those with “broad-based eligibility”, meaning that
bailouts cannot be designed to save specific institutions.
   4
     As in Farhi and Tirole (2012), this coordination motive opens the door to multiple equilibria. Our main
results do not rely on equilibrium uniqueness. Using tools from monotone comparative statics (e.g. Milgrom and
Shannon, 1994), we can characterize the differential roles of large and small banks regardless of which equilibrium
is selected. In our quantitative assessment, however, we find a unique equilibrium for a wide range of reasonable
parameter values.


                                                        4
convergence. These effects arise even though bank managers do not directly exploit government
bailouts. Instead, the incentive to take leverage is driven by the combination of managers’ value
maximizing goal with competitive capital markets, which value bank debt more generously when
expected bailouts are larger.
   When combined, our results about the behavior of large and small banks imply that system-
wide leverage is higher in an economy in which large banks are present. Our results predict that
all banks, large and small, take more leverage and default more frequently, also implying that
the government relies on bailouts more frequently than when banks are small. We show that
an increase in bank size is associated with a leverage multiplier that increases the quantitative
significance of this mechanism.
   After establishing the positive predictions of bank size for the behavior of banks, we
characterize the optimal ex-ante bank regulation. First, we show that when the government
implements a constrained efficient outcome, all banks, large and small, choose the same level of
leverage. This result implies that the optimal ex-ante regulation regarding quantities, which can
be implemented through binding capital requirements, is identical for large and small banks.
Subsequently, we show that the optimal regulation can be equivalently implemented with size-
dependent Pigouvian taxes. Large banks are charged a supplement tax on borrowing, which
counteracts their incentive to increase leverage so as to maximize government subsidies. Our
normative results provide a formal rationale to regulate large banks differently from small banks,
simply because of their size. Our results further imply that there is a natural interaction between
financial regulation and policies that directly control industry structure (i.e., antitrust policy,
merger regulation, etc.).
   Even though in the baseline model banks’ returns are only subject to aggregate risk, we show
that our results extend easily to the more realistic scenario in which banks face idiosyncratic
and aggregate risk. We can parametrize in our model whether idiosyncratic shocks cancel out
when small banks merge into a large bank, by appealing to a law of large numbers, or not, under
a granularity hypothesis (Gabaix, 2011). Although our theoretical results remain valid in both
scenarios, we show in our quantification that the granular formulation – which is the empirically
plausible one – substantially amplifies the strategic forces that we study in this paper.
   Although the model is stylized, it is worthwhile to provide a sense of the magnitudes that
it generates when calibrated. To quantitatively assess the mechanisms studied in the paper, we
illustrate the predictions of our model when selecting parameters consistent with U.S. data over
the period 1990Q1 to 2013Q4. We find that our model is able to rationalize roughly half of the
observed differences in leverage between large and small banks.

                                                5
   We use the quantitative results of the model as a laboratory to study the effects of industry
concentration. We find an increasing and convex relation between the leverage choices of large
and small banks and the degree of industry concentration. We show that moderate increases
in industry concentration starting from the status quo, in which the top 5 largest banks hold
around half of total bank’s assets, are associated with substantial increases in leverage by large
and small banks. In particular, an increase from 50% to 70% in the share of assets held by
the 5 largest banks is associated with a 3.5 percentage point increase in aggregate debt-to-asset
ratios (from 90.1% to 93.6%), or equivalently with a 5.5 point increase in the aggregate leverage
ratio (from 10.1 to 15.6), in the absence of regulation that counteracts large banks’ leverage
incentives.
   Finally, with the goal of guiding policymakers on the magnitude of optimal corrective policies,
we also compute the associated “size tax” implied by the optimal policy. Under the optimal
ex-ante policy, calculated for current levels of industry concentration, large banks pay a size tax
of 40 basis points (0.4%) per dollar of debt issued, over and above the Pigouvian levy that is
charged to small banks. This optimal size tax increases up to roughly 60 basis points per dollar
of debt issued if the share of assets held by the 5 largest banks reaches 70%.

Related Literature This paper is most closely related to the growing literature that studies
the implications of bank bailouts, and other system-wide government interventions in financial
crises. The core idea underlying both earlier and most recent contributions, including those
of Holmstrom and Tirole (1998), Freixas (1999), Schneider and Tornell (2004), Acharya and
Yorulmazer (2007), Diamond and Rajan (2012), Farhi and Tirole (2012), Bianchi (2016), Keister
(2016), Nosal and Ordoñez (2016), Chari and Kehoe (2016), Bianchi and Mendoza (2017), and
Gourinchas and Martin (2017) is that the lack of government’s commitment regarding ex-post
optimal policies modifies the ex-ante behavior of banks, a phenomenon that is often described
as moral hazard.
   The strategic problem faced by banks in our model is most closely related to that in Farhi
and Tirole (2012), who identify the strategic complementary caused by systemic, non-targeted
bailouts. They refer to this behavior as collective moral hazard. While our results build
on theirs, we focus on size asymmetries, while they exclusively study an environment with
symmetric (small) agents. Bianchi (2016) shows that non-targeted and systemic bailouts are
preferred to targeted ones, since the latter exacerbate banks’ ex-ante responses (moral hazard),
and provides a full-fledged macroeconomic calibration. Our results highlight the importance of
size asymmetries in a similar environment.
   Only a few papers refer to size asymmetries in the context of bank bailouts. Freixas (1999)

                                                6
rationalizes the presence of too-big-to-fail policies, through which a regulator responds more
strongly to the actions of large banks, if the costs associated with bank failure are increasing in
bank size. Acharya and Yorulmazer (2007) formalize the too-many-to-fail argument, showing
that multiple failures by small banks can generate an identical bailout response as the failure
of a single large bank. By design, our environment captures the too-many-to-fail effect. In
their extension with asymmetric banks, the behavior of large banks does not affect the optimal
bailout policy at the margin, which is crucial for our results. Nosal and Ordoñez (2016) show
that uncertainty about the ex-post bailout policy can mitigate the ex-ante effects of lack of
commitment, reducing the strength of strategic complementarities and consequently reducing
the incentives of banks to take on excessive risk. They show that this effect is weakest for large
banks. The thorough reviews of Freixas and Rochet (2008) and Gorton and Winton (2003) do
not discuss the effect of bank size on banks’ funding decisions.5
       In general, this paper belongs to the large literature that studies strategic complementarities
and coordination games. In these environments, when complementarities are sufficiently strong,
there exists the possibility of multiple equilibria, as emphasized by Cooper and John (1988) and
Angeletos and Lian (2016). Our main results remain valid regardless of whether there is a unique
equilibrium, since we exploit monotone comparative statics tools to derive results that hold in
any equilibrium. Within that line of work, purely from a strategic viewpoint, our results are most
closely related to the work by Corsetti et al. (2004), who study the effect of a large speculator
in a canonical currency attack global game framework. They provide conditions under which
the presence of a large agent makes coordination easier. Despite the many modeling differences
between their paper and ours — their model features a binary action game with dispersed
information — our paper, like theirs, solves a model with strategic complementarities with
agents of different sizes. Also related is the work by Sakovics and Steiner (2012), who show that
policy interventions in coordination games among small agents ought to be targeted towards
players whose choices have a large impact on others’ incentives. Similarly, it is optimal in our
model to target macroprudential taxes at large banks, whose leverage choices generate large
spillovers to other banks.6
       Within the sizable quantitative literature, the work of Cuciniello and Signoretti (2015) –
   5
       Leaving aside the possibility of bank bailouts, there is scope to explore further how asymmetries in bank
size affect bank’s decisions. For instance, Hachem and Song (2017) show how large banks choose more liquid
positions in an equilibrium model with endogenous interbank pricing.
   6
     The work by Drozd and Serrano-Padial (2016), which studies credit enforcement, also features heterogeneous
agents in an environment with strategic complementarities. Recent work by Kacperczyk, Nosal and Sundaresan
(2017) studies the effect of large players in a model of financial market trading and information acquisition.


                                                        7
see also Corbae (2015) – studies the effects of banks size in the context the model of Corbae
and D’Erasmo (2010), who provide a detailed quantitative analysis of banking dynamics in a
strategic environment. Our quantitative results abstract from several of the features emphasized
in this line of work to highlight the effects of system-wide guarantees.
        Finally, within the small but growing empirical literature that seeks to directly quantify the
effects of bank size and government guarantees, the work of Kelly, Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2016) is most relevant. By comparing the price of out-of-the-money put options on individual
banks with the price of identical options on a bank index, they present evidence consistent
with market participants who expect substantial collective government guarantees, which is the
starting point of our theory.

Outline Section 2 describes the environment and Section 3 characterizes the equilibrium,
introducing our main positive results. Section 4 conducts the normative analysis and Section 4
describes the implication of our results for policy-making. Section 5 discusses idiosyncratic risk
and granular shocks. Section 6 provides a quantitative illustration of our results, and Section 7
concludes. The Appendix contains all proofs and technical derivations.


2         Environment
Our model provides a parsimonious framework to study banks’ borrowing decisions in the
presence of government bailouts and heterogeneity in banks’ size. We first describe the economic
environment and then discuss our modeling assumptions in a series of remarks.

Agents and timing There are two dates t = {0, 1} and a single consumption good (dollar),
which serves as numeraire. There is a unit mass of risk-neutral financiers with a unit discount
factor and a benevolent government. Financiers hold claims in a continuum of banks, which
are indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. We denote by µ (A) the share of capital stock managed by any subset
of banks A ⊂ [0, 1]. If bank i has positive point mass µ (i) > 0, then we refer to it as a large
bank.7 We refer to infinitesimal banks as small banks. Without loss of generality, we normalize
total assets/capital held by banks to one unit. Figure 2 illustrates the timeline of events, which
we proceed to describe.
    7
        More rigorously, we define the probability measure µ : B([0, 1]) → R+ where B([0, 1]) is the σ-field of Borel
subsets of [0, 1]. For the point mass of individual banks i, we write µ(i) as shorthand for µ({i}) throughout the
paper.




                                                           8
                                                                 t=1
                 t=0

           Banks choose Aggregate return u             Government observes            Banks make
          capital structure is realized                signal s of u and sets        default decision
                                                        bailout transfer t(s)

                                        Figure 2: Timeline of events


Banks’ technology and capital structure At date 0, bank i sells claims to financiers by
issuing debt with face value bi and by selling equity. Banks choose a capital structure that
maximizes market value q i bi + ei , where q i is the market price of debt and ei is the market
value of the bank’s shares.8 Bond prices q i and stock values ei are endogenously determined in
equilibrium. The funds raised by issuing debt and equity are used by the bank to make a fixed
investment of one dollar per unit of capital at date 0.
        At date 1, each bank’s assets yield a random return u ≥ 0 of date 1 dollars per unit of
initial capital. The return u is common across banks and publicly observable. To clarify the
exposition, we begin by analyzing the case where the aggregate shock u is the only source of
uncertainty. This restriction does not affect our qualitative results. In Section 5, and in our
quantitative assessment in Section 6, we additionally allow for idiosyncratic shocks to individual
banks’ returns.
        At date 1, after u is realized and possibly after receiving a proportional government transfer
i
t ≥ 0, as described below, bank i’s shareholders decide whether to default. If the bank defaults,
shareholders receive nothing and creditors seize all bank’s resources including government
transfers and receive φu + ti per unit of capital, where the remainder (1 − φ) u measures the
deadweight losses associated with default. If the bank does not default, creditors are paid bi
and shareholders receive the residual claim (1 − ψ) (u + ti − bi ) per unit of capital, where ψ
captures the costs of equity issuance or tax advantages of debt. The costs of default, 1 − φ > 0,
and of equity issuance, ψ > 0, imply that the Modigliani and Miller (1958) theorem does not
hold. Our setup therefore mirrors the classical “trade-off theory” of capital structure (Kraus
and Litzenberger, 1973; Myers, 1984).
        A contentious issue is whether the costs of bank equity are private or social costs. We do not
take a stand in this debate and allow for either case. We therefore assume that ψ̄ (u + ti − bi )
dollars are reimbursed to financiers as a lump sum if the bank does not default, where 0 ≤ ψ̄ ≤ ψ.
    8
        Market value maximization is a standard assumption in the literature on optimal capital structure. In
Appendix B.1, we provide an explicit microfoundation for this objective function in the context of our model.


                                                       9
The boundary case ψ = ψ̄ corresponds to purely private costs, for example arising from tax
considerations, while ψ < ψ̄ implies that the private costs of bank equity issuance are also social
costs.
       Notice that asset values, as well as the costs of distress and equity issuance, exhibit constant
returns and are independent of bank size. This allows us to define all bank-level (lower-case)
variables per unit of capital/assets. For example, a large bank that manages a point mass
µ (i) > 0 share of capital issues debt with face value µ (i) bi , earns a return µ (i) u and receives
µ (i) ti from the government. A subset S of small banks collectively issue debt with face value
´ i                                                  ´ i
   b dµ,   earn returns uµ (S) and receive transfers   t dµ. We can express aggregates of bank
 S
                  i
                                            ´1 i 9 S
level variables a as the Lebesgue integral 0 a dµ.

Government policy The existence of deadweight losses associated with bank failure provides
a rationale for a benevolent government to bail out banks at date 1. Formally, we allow the
government to transfer funds to banks under the following three assumptions.
       First, we assume that government transfers cannot be conditioned on bank characteristics.
This assumption captures the fact that many bank support policies are provided to the banking
system as a whole, and cannot be perfectly targeted to distressed banks, as established in
Farhi and Tirole (2012) and consistently with the empirical evidence in Kelly, Lustig and
Van Nieuwerburgh (2016). Second, we assume that the government must decide on the level
of the bailout transfer with imperfect information about the realization of the aggregate state.
Formally, the government chooses a transfer t (s) contingent on a signal s about the realization
of aggregate returns u. Hence, each bank i receives a transfer ti = t (s) per unit of capital.
This assumption captures that bailout policies are often determined under uncertainty about
fundamentals. From a formal standpoint, it guarantees that the problem solved by banks is
smooth. Finally, we assume that government transfers are associated with a net deadweight
loss of κ (t) dollars, where κ (t) is a weakly increasing and convex function that satisfies
limt→∞ κ (t) = ∞. This assumption limits the magnitude of the optimal transfer chosen by
the government. The deadweight loss of intervention can be literally interpreted as a fiscal
distortion.10
   9
       The Lebesgue notation is convenient since we can include large and small banks in one integral. For an
illustration, suppose there is one large bank i = 0 with point mass µ (i) = λ, and all i > 0 form a continuum of
                                                                               ´1                       ´
identical small banks with mass 1 − λ. Then the aggregate of a variable ai is 0 ai dµ = λa0 + (1 − λ) i>0 ai di,
where the second term is the standard (Riemann) integral over small banks.
 10
    A broader interpretation of κ (t) not only captures the slack of the fiscal capacity of the government, but it
can also capture the “type” of the government: hawkish vs. dovish, as in Diamond and Rajan (2012), among
others.


                                                       10
       Asset returns and government signals are drawn according to a joint distribution F (u, s).
We write Fu (u|s) for the conditional distribution of asset values, with density fu (u|s), and G(s)
for the marginal distribution of signals.
       We impose a mild regularity condition that prevents the conditional c.d.f. Fu (u|s) from
changing too quickly. Formally, we assume that the conditional density of asset returns satisfies
the following condition for all marginal default states u = bi − t:
                                     d log fu (u|s)  uf 0 (u|s)
                                                    = u         > −1,        ∀s.                               (1)
                                         d log u      fu (u|s)
Intuitively, enough noise is necessary to preserve the smoothness of the capital structure problem
faced by banks. As we show in the Appendix, when signals are normally distributed, a high
enough variance for the signal s is a sufficient condition for Equation (1) to hold over the relevant
region.

Equilibrium definition An equilibrium is defined as a set of bank capital structure decisions
bi and default decisions, prices for bank debt q i and equity ei , and a government bailout policy
t (s), such that (i) banks maximize their market value net of issuance costs, given the behavior
of other banks and the government, (ii) financiers break even when purchasing debt or equity,
and (iii) the government maximizes ex-post welfare at date 1 given their signal.


Remarks on the environment
Our assumptions are geared towards studying an environment in which banks have endogenous
funding and default choices and government policies arise endogenously from a well-defined
government’s objective. Some of the assumptions deserve further discussion.

Remark 1: Differences between large and small banks. By design, in this paper,
the differences between large and small banks are strategic rather than technological. Banks’
technology features constant returns to scale and government bailouts are not targeted at large
banks. This allows us to speak to the “too many to fail” argument. In this paper, whether a
single large bank or many small banks are in distress is irrelevant ex-post.11
  11
       This assumption is in line with recently developed empirical metrics of systemic risk, such as CoVaR (Adrian
and Brunnermeier, 2016). CoVaR is defined so that many small banks generate the same measure of ex-post
distress as one large bank, holding constant their asset exposures and leverage. Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016)
further show that bank size predicts high contributions to CoVaR in the U.S. data. This is consistent with the
equilibrium prediction of our model, since larger banks choose higher leverage and contribute more to systemic
risk.



                                                         11
   Moreover, in the context of our paper, identical technologies are a conservative assumption.
Indeed, we argue that the presence of large banks renders the financial system riskier. If policy-
makers provided implicit guarantees to large banks but not to small ones – as would occur, for
example, if we allowed the marginal cost of default (1 − φ) to be bank specific and increasing
in bank size – this effect would be strengthened. Similarly, all banks in our setup choose their
leverage simultaneously, so that large banks have no timing advantage. This assumption removes
herding and signaling effects in the presence of large banks, which would also strengthen the
strategic importance of large banks (Corsetti et al., 2004). Our key point is, therefore, that
policy bias or timing advantages are not necessary for large banks to be important: size matters
purely for strategic reasons.
   We focus on the role of size as the single dimension of heterogeneity across banks. Banks
may differ on their degree of interconnectedness in the form of network centrality, or in richer
dimensions regarding liquidity risk or maturity mismatch. While these are important factors,
they are unlikely to change our main results, since ex-post government responses continue to
induce strategic complementarities even when there is additional heterogeneity. Ceteris paribus,
the presence of large banks then continues to lead to increased risk taking.
   In this paper, the distribution µ of bank size and the scale of each bank’s investment are
taken as primitives of the model. Similar results would obtain in an extension of our model
in which banks’ technologies feature decreasing returns to scale. Under decreasing returns to
scale, technological differences would induce an endogenous size distribution of banks. Banks
which are large for technological reasons in that case would behave as large banks in our setup,
and moreover, strategic differences between large and small banks would affect scale as well as
leverage decisions. We focus on the case with constant returns and an exogenous size distribution
because it allows us to directly address the “too many to fail” argument, which has dominated
the public debate.

Remark 2: Systemic bailouts and noisy signals. Bailouts in our model are systemic
and not targeted, which is consistent with the evidence in Kelly, Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2016). This assumption is relevant in the sense that it generates strategic complementarities
among banks. Targeted transfers can be introduced to the model, and our results remain valid
as long as some strategic complementarities remain, which occurs in a wide class of settings. In
particular, while we focus on monetary transfers for concreteness, the interpretation of ex-post
government intervention can be broader, and strategic complementarities arise naturally if the
government could intervene by lowering interest rates below their otherwise optimal level (a
policy often referred to as the “Greenspan put”) or by conducting asset purchase and lending

                                               12
programs such as TARP or TALF. Even if targeted instruments were available, Farhi and Tirole
(2012) have shown that strategic complementarities remain as long as the government does not
perfectly observe the performance of each individual bank.
   Finally, even if we allowed transfers to be targeted ex-post, it is not obvious that policy is
anticipated perfectly ex-ante. If a large bank A fails and the government decides to conduct
a targeted bailout, it can either provide a subsidy directly to bank A or a subsidy to bank B
in order to purchase A’s assets. The various proposals tabled before the failures of Lehman
Brothers and Bear Stearns in 2008 are a case in point. If it is unclear which exact policy
option the government will pursue ex-post, strategic complementarities will remain ex-ante.
Indeed, ex-ante ambiguity may be an optimal arrangement: Nosal and Ordoñez (2016), for
example, argue that constructive ambiguity is valuable when governments conduct bailouts but
lack commitment. This point further motivates our assumption that bailouts are noisy; the
government does not know the exact realization of the common shock when choosing its policy
at date 1. As well as generating constructive ambiguity, this assumption guarantees that banks
face a smooth optimization problem, which facilitates the exposition.

Remark 3: Banks’ capital structure and institutional setting. Although we have
adopted a classic trade-off theory formulation, in which bankers have a meaningful source of
outside equity, to determine bank funding choices, alternative assumptions that generate a
well-defined capital structure decision do not modify the insights of the paper. For example,
the trade-off between bank debt and equity could be driven by concerns about moral hazard
among shareholders, a desire to create “money-like” and information-sensitive claims (Gorton
and Pennacchi, 1990; Stein, 2012; DeAngelo and Stulz, 2015), or concerns about bank runs and
market discipline as in Diamond and Rajan (2001). Our results merely rely on the presence of
strategic complementarities, which arise from the non-targeted bailout, with heterogeneity in
bank sizes.
   Furthermore, the financial institutions in our model need not be interpreted as traditional
banks. Indeed, they could represent any segment of the financial sector and the “shadow
banking” system, as long as widespread defaults cause social costs and induce the government
to provide support. This observation also motivates our choice to abstract from (insured
or uninsured) demand deposit contracts and focus on leverage choices more generally. More
generally, the results of this paper can be adapted to other sectors of the economy in which
government bailouts occur.
   Finally, note that bank managers in our model act as a veil and are solely motivated by
the maximization of bank value, or equivalently, by the desire to reduce banks’ cost of funds.

                                               13
Therefore, our results do not assume that bank managers are ill-intentioned or that they directly
have to form expectations of bailout probabilities and government policy, it is sufficient if market
participants do so.


3     Equilibrium characterization
We characterize the equilibrium of the model in multiple steps. First, we characterize the ex-
post optimal government policy. Next, we determine banks’ default decisions at date 1 and their
date 0 market value for a given government policy. Finally, we study banks’ ex-ante funding
decisions at date 0.


Ex-post optimal bailout policy
At date 1, the government observes the signal s of asset values and chooses transfers t to
                                                                                      1
maximize expected social welfare. Given banks’ borrowing choices b = (bi )i=0 , a choice of
transfer t, and a signal s, we let W1 (b, t|s) denote expected social welfare from the perspective
of date 1.
    In our model, date 1 welfare corresponds to the sum of aggregate resources:

                      W1 (b, t|s) = E [u|s] − κ (t)
                                            ˆ     h    i h       i
                                  − (1 − φ) Pr Di |s E u|Di , s dµ
                                           ˆ      h    i h                   i
                                  − ψ − ψ̄      Pr N i |s E t + u − bi |N i , s dµ.             (2)

where Di denotes the event of default by bank i, and N i is the complementary non-default
region. The interpretation of Equation (2) is intuitive. The first line captures the present
value of banks’ assets and deadweight costs of taxation. The second and third lines respectively
measure the deadweight costs of bank failure and equity issuance. Note that the latter accounts
for the possibility that the costs of equity are partly or exclusively private costs when ψ̄ > 0.
    Hence, the government’s optimal bailout policy after observing the signal s is to maximize
expected welfare. It corresponds to

                                     t (b|s) = arg max W1 (b, t|s) .                            (3)
                                                   t≥0

The optimal bailout policy t (b|s) is characterized by the following first-order condition:
                    ˆ                                        ˆ       h    i
                            i          i            0
            (1 − φ) fu b − t|s b − t dµ ≤ κ (t) + ψ − ψ̄               Pr N i |s dµ,            (4)

                                                   14
which is satisfied with equality when the optimal t is strictly positive. Intuitively, the left-
hand side in Equation (4) measures the marginal benefit of transfers, which equals the marginal
reduction in default costs. The right-hand side measures the marginal cost of the bailout which
consists of two terms. First, the government incurs the direct marginal cost of taxation κ0 (t).
Second, an indirect cost arises when a bailout is conducted but the bank remains solvent. In this
case, the bailout constitutes a transfer to shareholders, who derive a lower marginal utility from
                                                   
this transfer due to the social costs ψ − ψ̄ of equity.12 This second term only matters whenever
bank i is solvent, which occurs with conditional probability Pr [N i |s]. In the empirically relevant
region where public news s are bad, this probability is low, and therefore bailouts are driven
largely by the trade-off between the benefit of preventing bank failure and the cost of taxation.
       The government’s optimal response illustrates the key difference between small and large
banks. A small bank’s choice bi has no impact on the integral in (4), and therefore no impact on
ex-post optimal transfers. But if bank j is large – with point mass µ (j) – and the government
chooses a strictly positive transfer, t (b|s) > 0, after receiving a signal s, a marginal change in
the large bank borrowing position bj increases the optimal transfer, since
                    "                                                                     #
    ∂t (b|s) sign 0  j       
                                   j
                                                
                                                     j
                                                                ψ − ψ̄  j        
              =   f u b − t|s    b   − t   + f u   b   − t|s   +       f u b − t|s                           > 0,   (5)
      ∂bj                                                        1−φ                          u=bj −t(b|s)

where the inequality is implied by our regularity condition. The formal derivation of (5) is in
the Appendix, but the economics are clear. If a large bank takes more leverage, all else equal,
the failure of this bank becomes more likely after adverse realizations of the public signal s.
Therefore, to reduce the deadweight losses associated with bank failure, the government decides
in favor of a larger bailout.


Banks’ default decision and date 0 market value
At date 1, given a realization of banks’ aggregate return u and after the government chooses
a bailout policy t (b|s), a bank i defaults on its debt whenever u + t (b|s) < bi , and repays
otherwise. As expected, holding u and t (b|s) constant, the likelihood of default increases with
the level of bank borrowing bi .
       Formally, the payoff to debtholders corresponds to
                                       
                                       bi ,              if u + t (b|s) ≥ bi
                                       
                                       
                                                                                                                    (6)
                                       φu + t (b|s) ,                        i
                                                          if u + t (b|s) < b ,
                                       
                                       

  12
       This indirect cost is absent if we assume that the costs of equity issuance are sunk at date 0. Assuming that
these costs are paid ex-post clarifies the exposition, but does not materially affect our qualitative results.

                                                          15
while the payoff to shareholders corresponds to
                              
                              (1 − ψ) (u + t (b|s) − bi ) ,       if u + t (b|s) ≥ bi
                              
                              
                                                                                                 (7)
                              0,                                  if u + t (b|s) < bi .
                              
                              


In equilibrium, because financiers are risk-neutral, the market value of bonds q i bi is determined
by the expected payoff to debtholders, while the market value of bank shares ei is determined
by the expected payoff to shareholders.
      Therefore, taking expectations at date 0, the market value of a bank given a level of borrowing
 i
b and a set of possible transfers t (b|s) for each signal realization s, corresponds to
                 
     V bi , t (b|s) ≡ q i bi + ei
                                                    h    i     h       i        h    i     h     i
                      = E [u + t (b|s)] − (1 − φ) Pr Di E u|Di − ψPr N i E u + t (b|s) − bi |N i ,
                                                                                                 (8)

where the optimal default and non-default regions are defined as
                                             n                             o
                                       Di = (u, s)| t (b|s) + u < bi ,
                                             n                             o
                                      N i = (u, s)| t (b|s) + u ≥ bi .

Note that expectations and probabilities in Equation (8) account for the realizations of the return
u and signal s received by the government. The value function V (bi , t (b|s)) is therefore defined
in terms of all possible realizations of these variables and of the corresponding government
policy t (b|s). A detailed derivation of this function is in the Appendix. Equation (8) highlights
that banks’ leverage decisions are driven by competitive market forces. Bank managers do not
directly benefit from government bailouts, and their objective function simply corresponds to
their firm’s market value at date 0. Nevertheless, markets generate implicit incentives to capture
government bailouts, because the implicit subsidy is accounted for in security prices.
      Equation (8), which effectively corresponds to the banks’ objective function, further clarifies
our previous remark on the difference between large and small banks. From a technological
perspective, both large and small banks face an identical optimization problem. Large banks
are different only in a strategic sense; unlike small banks, they expect their leverage choices to
directly impact bailout policies t (b|s) in future states of the world. Equation (8) also highlights
that banks’ decisions are determined through classic trade-off theory: Only its second element,
which corresponds to costs of distress, and its third element, which corresponds to the costs of
equity issuance, are affected directly by the choice of bi for a given value of t (b|s).

                                                        16
Banks’ leverage choices
We now turn to banks’ incentives when choosing their borrowing level bi at date 0. Bank i’s
problem is
                                                          
                                       max
                                        i
                                           V bi , t (b|s) , subject to (3).                                      (9)
                                       b ≥0

The bank takes as given others’ choices (bj )j6=i , and realizes that the government will respond to
the collective choice b according to Equation (3). Then, it chooses its leverage bi to maximize
the joint value of debt and equity.
       The first-order condition for a small bank i, which takes the government policy t (b|s) as
given, is
                                                                          ˆ
                              ∂V (bi , t (b|s))       h
                                                          i
                                                            i
                                                = ψPr   N     − (1 − φ)        udF = 0.                         (10)
                                   ∂bi
                                                                         ∂Di

where ∂Di = {u, s|bi = t (b|s) + u} is the boundary of the default region.13 This expression is
familiar from the canonical trade-off theory of capital structure. The first term captures the
deadweight costs of equity issuance, which encourage higher leverage and arise whenever the
bank is in the solvent region N i . The second term measures the deadweight costs of default,
which discourage higher leverage.
       In addition to these terms, large banks internalize the indirect effect of its leverage on the
optimal bailout t (b|s), as characterized in Equation (5). Therefore, the first-order condition for
a large bank j is to set the total derivative of its value function equal to zero:
              dV (bj , t (b|s))   ∂V (bj , t (b|s))
                                =
                   dbj             " ∂b
                                            j
                                                              #           ˆ
                                    ∂t (b|s)          
                                                          j
                                                                          ∂t (b|s)
                                +E         j
                                                 1 − ψ1 N       + (1 − φ)            udF = 0,                   (11)
                                      ∂b                                      ∂bj
                                                                                ∂Dj

where 1 (N j ) denotes an indicator function for the non-default states of bank j. Comparing
(10) and (11), it follows that ceteris paribus, a large bank has strictly greater incentives to
take leverage than a small bank, measured by the two terms on the second line of (11). First,
increasing leverage strictly increases the expected government transfer E[t (b|s)]. To the extent
  13
       Technically, the second term is defined as a “line integral”, along a one-dimensional curve (i.e., along ∂Di )
in a two-dimensional space (i.e., in the space of signals s and asset returns u). In terms of Riemann integrals,
this line integral is defined as
                            ˆ                      ˆ
                               J (u, s) dF (u, s) = J bi − t (b|s) , s f bi − t (b|s) , s ds
                                                                                        

                           ∂D i                    S

for any function J (u, s), where S denotes the support of signals s.

                                                          17
that transfers are eventually distributed to shareholders, these benefits are adjusted for the
deadweight costs of equity. Second, by increasing transfers, an increase in leverage bj shifts
the default boundary, reducing the bankruptcy region and consequently the deadweight losses
associated with bankruptcy.
   We next consider the impact of a large bank’s leverage on small banks’ payoffs and incentives.
We show that, all else constant, small banks have greater market value, and a higher marginal
incentive to borrow, when large banks borrow more.

Lemma 1. (Effect of large bank leverage on small banks’ incentives) Suppose that in
some states a positive bailout is optimal, that is, t (b|s) > 0 for some s. Then for a small bank
i with borrowing level bi , denoting by bj the leverage choice of a large bank, we have
                                    dV (bi , t (b|s))
                                                       >0                                (12)
                                          dbj
                                   d2 V (bi , t (b|s))
                                                       > 0.                              (13)
                                        dbi dbj
   Lemma 1 shows that both the value of a small bank and its marginal benefit from leveraging
up are increasing in the leverage choices of the large bank. The first result is intuitive. If a large
bank takes more leverage, the government’s optimal bailout policy is more generous. Financiers
are now willing to pay more for claims on a small bank at date 0, because they expect to benefit
from a higher bailout at date 1. Thus, other things equal, the market value of a small bank
increases, which explains Equation (12)
   The second result in Equation (13) shows that banks’ payoffs are supermodular in each
others’ borrowing choices. The economic implication of supermodularity is that banks’ leverage
decisions become strategic complements in the sense of Bulow, Geanakoplos and Klemperer
(1985) and Cooper and John (1988). Higher leverage for large banks strengthens the strategic
incentives for small banks to increase leverage. Intuitively, small banks perceive that they are
shielded by the large banks.
   To understand this point, recall that a small bank’s appetite for borrowing is driven by the
trade-off between the costs of equity issuance and the costs of default. When a large bank
levers up, bailouts are larger and, consequently, small banks remain solvent more frequently.
This has two effects. First, the costs of equity issuance, which hit shareholders when the bank
is solvent, become more salient, and the marginal benefit of issuing debt rises. Second, since
default becomes less likely, the marginal costs of default fall, and borrowing becomes yet more
attractive. Both effects increase small banks’ appetite for borrowing. Moreover, the same logic
applies if bj in Equation (13) is interpreted as the borrowing among the whole sector of small
banks, or at least among a subset of small banks with positive mass.

                                                 18
       In summary, our model simultaneously allows for moral hazard in the classical sense, since
large banks have incentives to take leverage in order to exploit government subsidies, and for
collective moral hazard in the sense of Farhi and Tirole (2012), since small banks have a bigger
appetite for leverage when their peers are also levering up.
       These observations lead to the two main positive results of this paper, which are stated in
Propositions 1 and 2. Two technical challenges arise in characterizing equilibria. First, large
banks’ objective functions are not necessarily concave. Second, the strategic complementarity
in leverage choices opens the door to multiple equilibria. Since we wish to keep the model
general, we do not restrict the primitives to guarantee concavity or uniqueness.14 Without such
restrictions, it is not possible to derive comparative statics by totally differentiating the relevant
first-order conditions. Instead, our proofs rely on a modified version of the results on monotone
comparative statics in Milgrom and Shannon (1994), which require only supermodularity of
payoffs.

Proposition 1. (Large banks borrow more) Large banks borrow strictly more than small
banks in any equilibrium.

       This result follows from observing that large banks are subject to moral hazard in the classical
sense. Large banks internalize that their leverage decisions directly affect the magnitude of
bailouts t and, therefore, that they can increase the market prices of their debt and equity
at date 0 by borrowing more and boosting their implicit government subsidy. Small banks,
by contrast, are not subject to classical moral hazard because bailouts depend exclusively on
aggregate conditions, and small banks rationally consider their impact on aggregates to be
infinitesimal. Therefore, large banks choose to borrow strictly more than small ones.
       Strategic complementarities also imply that large banks’ appetite for leverage spills over to
small banks. Indeed, the mere presence of large banks induces small banks to leverage up more
aggressively.

Proposition 2. (When large banks are present, small banks take more leverage) Let
b0 be the smallest borrowing level which occurs in a symmetric equilibrium with only small banks.
In any equilibrium with large banks, each small bank chooses strictly higher borrowing bi > b0 .

       Proposition 2 is an instance of collective moral hazard, and follows naturally from Lemma 1.
Consider a hypothetical market where all banks are small and choose to borrow b0 in equilibrium,
  14
       In Section 6, we show numerically that both concavity and equilibrium uniqueness are satisfied for a range
of empirically plausible parameters.


                                                        19
         bS                                                               bS




                                                             CBRL (bS )
                                                                                                                        BRS (bS , bL
                                                                                                                                   1)
                                                             CBRS (bL )
       bS1                                                                                                     Small banks’
                                           E                                                               choice given bL    L
                                                                                                                         1 > b0



                   Benchmark                                                                                   BRS (bS , bL
                                                                                                                          0)
                  without large
                                            Equilibrium
                     banks
                                          with large banks
       bS0                                                                                Small banks’
                                                                                         choice given bL
                                                                                                       0
                       B



                 45◦                                                           45◦
                                                               bL                                                              bS
             0                                                            0
                                  (a)                                                           (b)




                                        Figure 3: Equilibrium determination

Note: Figure 3a shows the best response of large banks (blue dashed line), given the borrowing choices of small banks, and the
aggregate best response of small banks (red solid line), given the best responses of large banks. Figure 3b shows the best responses
of a small bank given the borrowing choices of other small banks for two given values of large bank borrowing (bL      L
                                                                                                                0 and b1 ). By
varying the level of bL
                      0 in Figure 3b, we can trace the aggregate best response of small banks (solid red line) in Figure 3a.




                                                                    20
and suppose that a subset of these banks merge to form a large bank. As shown in Proposition
1, the large bank has an independent incentive to increase their leverage to b > b0 . Because
banks leverage decisions are strategic complements, the marginal benefit of borrowing increases
for the remaining small banks, and they follow suit by choosing bi > b0 .
   We can combine our positive results in the following Corollary, which follows directly from
both Propositions.

Corollary. (Banking systems with larger banks are associated with higher system-
wide leverage) All else constant, when larger banks are present, aggregate leverage is higher
and government bailouts are larger and more frequent.

   In summary, the presence of large banks leads to an unambiguous increase in system-wide
leverage and financial sector risk, implying that the government is forced to rely more frequently
on larger bank bailouts than when banks are small. However, the effect of large banks on the
likelihood of bank failures is ambiguous, since banks create more system-wide risk, but the
government simultaneously responds with increased support. Our quantitative exercise below
illustrates these competing forces.
   Figure 3 provides a simple graphical illustration of equilibrium when there are large and
small banks. Consider an economy where there are N large banks with total point mass λ, so
                                            λ
that each large bank controls a share       N
                                                of aggregate capital, and a complementary mass 1 − λ
of identical small banks. In this case, each small bank takes as given the borrowing choices bL
of the large bank and the choices bS of its small peers, and its best response is to set
                                                                                     
                        bi = arg max V b, t bS , bL |s                   ≡ BRS bS , bL .
                                    b

Given a borrowing level bL for large banks, the partial equilibrium choice of the sector of small
                                                                                         
banks is found by solving the fixed point problem bS = BRS bS , bL . Figure 3b shows this for
two different levels bL0 and bL1 of large banks’ borrowing choices. This induces the “collective
                                                                                             
best response” of the small bank sector as a whole, denoted CBRS bL and shown as the red
(solid) curve in Figure 3a.
   Similarly, we can define a large bank’s individual best response, if small banks are choosing
bS and other large banks are choosing bL , as
                                                                                       
                     bL = arg max V b, t bS , b; bL−1 |s                      ≡ BRL bS , bL ,
                                b

where bL−1 denotes the (N − 1)-vector of other large banks’ symmetric choices. We can again
                                                                    
define large banks’ collective best response CBRL bS as the solution to the fixed point problem
                
bL = BRL bS , bL , which is shown as the blue (dotted) curve in Figure 3a.

                                                        21
   The economy is in equilibrium if small banks and large banks are responding optimally to
each others’ choices, that is, where the best response curves intersect at point E. If there were
no large banks, by contrast, the economy would be in equilibrium at point B, where small banks
are responding optimally to each other.
   Proposition 1 establishes that, regardless of parameters, any equilibrium will be below the
45-degree line where large banks choose more leverage bL > bS than small ones. Proposition 2
shows that small banks will always choose more leverage in an equilibrium when large banks
are present (e.g. point E) than in the benchmark case with only small banks (e.g. point B).
   The arrows connecting points B and E illustrate an amplification mechanism that arises in
our model. Starting from the benchmark B, when large banks enter the market, they increase
their leverage for strategic reasons, and the economy moves to the right in the Figure onto the
collective best response CBRL of large banks. As a result of strategic complementarities, small
banks now increase their leverage, and we move upwards to the collective best response CBRS
of small banks. This move gives large banks an additional incentive to increase leverage, and
so forth, until equilibrium is reached at point E. In the remainder of this section, we study the
importance of this amplification mechanism when industry concentration increases.


Industry concentration and multiplier effects
We have established that the presence of large banks, or more generally increases in industry
concentration, lead to higher system-wide leverage. By exploiting monotone methods, we
have so far emphasized directional and qualitative results. We now show analytically that
the quantitative implications of the mechanisms that we study in this paper are potentially
significant because strategic complementarities amplify the initial impulse of an increase in
concentration. In Section 6, we further explore the quantitative importance of our results by
simulating the model for empirically plausible parameters.
   For concreteness, suppose that there are N large banks with collective mass λ and that
the economy is in a stable equilibrium of the form illustrated in Figure 1. Now consider an
increase in industry concentration, that is, an increase in the size λ of the large bank sector.
One interpretation of this change is a merger between each large bank and a subset of small
banks.
   First, hold constant the leverage choice bL of the large bank, and consider the response
of the remaining small banks.     As before, this is determined by the fixed-point equation
                  
bS = BRS bS , bL ; λ , where we have made explicit the dependence of best responses on industry
structure. It is easy to see that, holding constant borrowing choices in the neighborhood of an

                                               22
equilibrium, the best response of a small bank is increasing in λ with             ∂BRS/∂λ   > 0. Intuitively,
         L     S
because b > b in equilibrium, the increase in λ shifts weight from high-leverage to low-leverage
banks, which increases aggregate leverage and leads to more generous government bailouts. By
Lemma 1, this makes leverage more attractive for each small bank. However, once each small
bank increases its leverage, aggregate leverage increases again, and we move into a second round
of adjustments. Overall, we can characterize the response of the small bank sector as
                                            ∂bS      ∂BRS
                                                = MS
                                            ∂λ        ∂λ
where the small bank multiplier M S is defined as
                                                               !−1
                                        S  ∂BRS
                                    M ≡ 1−                           > 1.                                (14)
                                            ∂bS
Even before large banks respond, small banks respond by increasing leverage, and this effect is
amplified by strategic complementarities, as captured by the multiplier M S > 1.
   Second, large banks respond to the change by adjusting their own leverage, for two reasons.
On one hand, small banks have raised their borrowing, making borrowing more attractive. On
the other hand, the large bank is now larger than before, and internalizes an even stronger effect
of its choices on government bailouts. Computing total changes yields
                        dbL                ∂BRS ∂BRL              L
                                                                                   !
                                                            L ∂BR
                            = M̄ · M L M S              + M           ,
                        dλ                  ∂λ    ∂bS          ∂λ
                        dbS                    L      S           S
                                                                    !
                                           ∂BR   ∂BR          ∂BR
                            = M̄ · M L M S              + MS          ,
                        dλ                  ∂λ    ∂bL          ∂λ
where the large bank multiplier M L is defined as
                                                               !−1
                                             ∂BRL
                                    ML ≡ 1 −                         > 1,
                                              ∂bL
and the aggregate multiplier M̄ > 1, which is itself a function of the small and large bank
multipliers, is defined as
                                                                      !−1
                                                           L
                                             L      ∂BR        ∂BRS
                             M̄ ≡ 1 − M          MS                         > 1.                         (15)
                                                     ∂bS        ∂bL
Equation (15) reveals that industry concentration has an effect on leverage that is amplified
on two levels. First, within each subsector (of large or small banks), banks encourage each
other to take more leverage, in line with the collective moral hazard argument of Farhi and
Tirole (2012), and as reflected by the size-dependent multipliers M S and M L . Second, across
bank sizes, strategic complementarities induce further amplification via the aggregate multiplier
M̄ > 1 in Equation (15). The two effects reinforce each other since the aggregate multiplier M̄
is itself increasing in M S and M L .

                                                    23
4     Optimal ex-ante policies
In our model, there is a clear case for prudential regulation. In particular, banks do not
internalize the impact of their leverage choices on the social cost of ex-post bailouts. On the
contrary, they endeavor to attract bailouts because funding markets at date 0 reward them for
large implicit subsidies.


Constrained efficient choices
We study a constrained efficient benchmark for policy, in which a benevolent social planner can
dictate banks’ borrowing choices b at date 0, but cannot overcome financing frictions, that is,
the costs of default and the social cost of equity issuance.
    We first compute a general expression for expected social welfare at date 0. Given banks’
choices b and a state-contingent bailout policy t(s) at date 1 (not necessarily equal to the ex-post
optimal policy t (b|s)), expected welfare at date 0 is



                   W0 (b, t (s)) = E [u] − E [κ(t (s))] ,
                                           ˆ     h i h      i
                                 − (1 − φ) Pr Di E u|Di dµ
                                         ˆ       h   i h                 i
                                 − ψ − ψ̄      Pr N i E t (s) + u − bi |N i dµ.                (16)

This is intuitive: The constrained social planner measures welfare as the expected value of
asset returns, less the deadweight social costs of bailout transfers, bank default, and equity
issuance. Comparing (16) with banks’ private objective function in (8) highlights the rationale
for regulation. In particular, the government transfer t(s) enters negatively in social welfare due
to deadweight costs κ(t(s)). This cost is not accounted for in banks’ market values. Moreover,
t(s) enters positively in banks’ market values because it represents a subsidy from taxpayers to
the owners of bank debt and equity.
    Two maximization problems are of potential interest. First, we can assume that the planner
can commit to any state-contingent bailout policy t (s) at date 0. Then he solves

                                        W c = max W0 (b, t) .                                  (17)
                                              {b,t(s)}

Second, we can assume that the planner cannot commit to transfers, and chooses them optimally
ex-post as in Section 3. In this case he solves

                      W nc = max {W0 (b, t (s)) subject to t (s) = t (b|s)} ,                  (18)
                             {b,t(s)}

                                                  24
where t (b|s) is the government’s ex-post best response, defined in (3). Clearly, the loss of
commitment in (18) cannot increase the maximized value of welfare, so that W c ≥ W nc .
Moreover, we can show that a lack of commitment does not reduce welfare in this instance:

Lemma 2. (Commitment is irrelevant when the planner controls banks) When the
planner perfectly controls banks’ borrowing decisions b, the solutions to problems (17) and (18)
coincide and satisfy W c = W nc .

   Intuitively, commitment provides no additional value when the planner controls the banks,
because in any case, the solution with commitment involves choosing bailouts that are ex-
post optimal. When the planner does not control the banks, by contrast, commitment may
be beneficial because it allows the planner to distort bailouts away from ex-post optimality in
order to curb moral hazard.
   Lemma 2 allows us to characterize the planner’s optimal borrowing choices:

Proposition 3. (Efficient leverage is independent of bank size) The constrained efficient
choice is to set bi = b? for almost all i, regardless of the distribution µ of bank sizes, and
regardless of whether the planner can commit to a transfer policy.

   Proposition 3 shows that the planner chooses symmetric policies for all banks, and in
particular, that the socially optimal borrowing level bi is independent of bank size. This is
a natural consequence of constant returns to scale: A large bank has no technological reason
to take more or less leverage than a small bank. This policy is in contrast to the laissez-faire
equilibrium of Section 3, where large banks unambiguously chose larger borrowing levels. These
equilibrium choices were motivated not by technological or contractual differences, but rather
by the desire to maximize an implicit government subsidy. Since the planner internalizes that
such a subsidy is socially wasteful, he does not respond to the same incentives.
   Before considering ways to implement the optimal allocation, it is useful to explicitly
characterize the best borrowing level b? . When all banks choose the same borrowing level
b, we can write ex-ante welfare as

          W̄0 (b, t (s)) = V (b, t (s)) + ψ̄Pr [N ] E [t (s) + u − b|N ] − E [t (s) + κ(t (s))] ,

where V (b, t(s)) is the private value of an individual bank in Equation (8), and N =
{t(s) + u ≥ b} is the event of non-default. The first term is aligned with the bank’s objective.
The second term captures the fact that the costs of equity issuance are not fully social costs if
ψ̄ > 0. The last term arises because, unlike the bank, the social planner internalizes the full
cost t(s) + κ (t (s)) of the bailout to taxpayers.

                                                    25
   Since the welfare maximization problems with and without commitment are equivalent, we
can assume that the planner is already committed to the optimal ex-post transfer t(b? |s). Then
the choice of b? must maximize welfare taking this commitment as given, thus solving the fixed
point equation
                                           b? = arg max W̄0 (b, t(b? |s))
                                                        b

The first-order condition in this problem gives a characterization of socially optimal borrowing:
                                     ∂V (b? , t (b? |s))
                                                         − ψ̄Pr [N ? ] = 0,                         (19)
                                           ∂b
where N ? = {t(b? |s) + u > b? } is the non-default event under the optimal policy. Intuitively,
the planner considers the impact of debt choices on the value of the bank, adjusted for the part
of private equity issuance costs which is explained by transfers. One might expect the planner
to also consider the impact of debt choices on the ex-post transfer. Formally, Equation (19)
                           ∂W0 ∂t(b? |s)
                      h                    i
includes the term E       ∂t(b? |s) ∂b
                                               . However, since transfers are chosen optimally, marginal
changes in transfers have only a second-order welfare effect, and this term vanishes after an
application of the envelope theorem.


Optimal capital requirements
Dictating banks’ choices bi is tantamount to quantity regulation. Indeed, the constrained
efficient choice b? can be achieved by imposing binding capital requirements, as included in
the Basel III Accord, which limit borrowing as a fraction of risky assets (recall that in our
model, borrowing choices bi are already expressed per unit of risky capital). The following
result is a direct corollary of Proposition 3.

Corollary. (Optimal capital requirements are independent of bank size) The
constrained efficient allocation can be implemented by imposing binding capital requirements
that are independent of bank size.

   It follows that strategic differences between large and small banks are insufficient to justify
size-dependent capital regulation. Even though the incentives to take leverage remain stronger
for large banks when capital requirements are in place (the Lagrange multiplier on a large bank’s
capital constraint will be greater), the optimal level of capital that a regulator wishes to enforce
is independent of bank size, as long as technologies exhibit constant returns to scale.
   Naturally, this conclusion changes when policy is conducted via Pigouvian taxes, which we
examine next.

                                                            26
Optimal Pigouvian taxes
We now assume that the social planner cannot directly control banks’ borrowing quantities b.
Moreover, we focus on the case where the planner has no commitment power; in particular, he
cannot credibly announce a date 1 bailout policy at date 0. Market participants instead expect
that the date 1 bailout policy will be chosen to maximize welfare ex-post.
    The socially optimal choices b? can be implemented by taxing banks in proportion to their
borrowing choices at date 0. We let τ i denote the Pigouvian tax levied on bank i, who
consequently pays bi τ i to the government; tax revenues are rebated to financiers as a lump
sum. Therefore, the value of τ i should be interpreted as a tax on the bank’s face value of debt.
Under Pigouvian taxation, the bank maximizes its value net of tax, V (bi , t (b|s)) − bi τ i . As
before, small banks take the bailout policy t (b|s) as fixed. Large banks, on the other hand,
realize that the government lacks commitment and take into account their impact on the ex-post
optimal bailout. A standard argument then leads to optimal taxes:

Proposition 4. (Optimal Pigouvian taxes) The following Pigouvian taxes implement the
social planner’s choice bi = b? in equilibrium:
    – If i is a small bank, then set
                                           τ i = ψ̄Pr [N ? ] .                                             (20)

    – If j is a large bank, then set
                "                              #             ˆ
               ∂t (b|s)                                           ∂t (b|s)
   τj = τi + E                             ?
                                 (1 − ψ1 (N )) + (1 − φ)                            (b? − t (b? |s)) dF,   (21)
                 ∂bj      b=b?
                                                                    ∂bj      b=b?
                                                            ∂D?

    where ∂D? = {t(b? |s) + u = b? } is the boundary of the optimal default region.

    To implement the efficient outcome, each small bank is charged in proportion to the expected
wedge between private and social costs of equity issuance. Second, large banks are charged a
size top-up tax in order to account for their risk taking incentives. The ”size tax” is designed to
counteract the part of large banks’ incentives that stems from their desire to maximize implicit
subsidies. In particular, the second term in (21) offsets a large bank’s incentive to attract larger
subsidies for its financiers, while the third term offsets the incentives generated by the fact that
larger subsidies reduce the expected costs of default. Note that these two terms are equivalent
to the final two terms in the large bank’s first-order condition (11), evaluated at the optimal
choice b? .




                                                   27
Policy implications
The prescription of the optimal policy is as follows. If large banks are present, regulators
need to be wary of significant and amplified increases in risk taking incentives. If binding
capital requirements can be imposed to correct all externalities, then constant returns to scale
still guarantee that there is no need to make capital requirements size-dependent. However, if
regulators choose to use price instruments to combat systemic risk, then a top-up tax in line with
Equation (21) should be charged to large banks. We now discuss some further implications of
our results, which concern (i) the interaction between financial policy and antitrust tools that
can directly affect the bank size distribution, and (ii) cases in which the implementation of
quantity or price controls is imperfect.

Prudential and antitrust policy Consider again the thought experiment in which the
economy starts out with only small banks, but a subset of them propose a merger in order
to form a large bank. Should antitrust authorities prevent this? The traditional tests for
allowing the merger would be based on concerns about market power and reductions in consumer
surplus. Our model abstracts from consumer surplus, since banks capture all available surplus
in equilibrium, but points towards different trade-offs.
   The arguments in Section 3 imply that a merger among banks can have significant and
amplified effects on risk taking when (i) banks benefit from systemic bailouts and (ii) the
banking sector is unregulated. In a financial sector with weak or absent regulation, financial
stability ought to be a first-order concern when assessing mergers. This is especially salient when
banks in our model are taken to be “shadow banks” that fall outside the regulatory perimeter.
   Antitrust policy can be more lenient when financial regulation is strong. If regulators are
already implementing the optimal quantity constraint b? , then the merger should be permitted,
modulo considerations about consumer surplus, since risk taking will not change as a result. If
regulators are imposing the optimal Pigouvian tax on small banks, as defined in Equation (20),
then the merger should be permitted as long as prudential regulators are ready to respond by
charging the appropriate top-up tax, defined in Equation (21), to the newly created large bank.
   It follows that prudential and antitrust policy are substitutes. Mergers should be waved
through more frequently when prudential regulation is strong. Conversely, prudential regulation
– especially when implemented via Pigouvian taxes – can be more lenient when the antitrust
authority does not permit banks to merge and form large, dominant entities.
   One implication of our model, therefore, is that caps on bank size can be valuable when
prudential regulation is imperfect. While this paper identifies an additional marginal benefit


                                                28
of size caps, other defensible arguments exist in favor of large financial institutions. Better
diversification and risk management, economies of scale, ability to handle large projects, creation
of insensitive claims a la Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) or reduction of international frictions
as in Freixas and Holthausen (2005) are relevant arguments on the opposite side of the debate.
Trading off these considerations will determine the optimal size distribution for the banking
sector.

Discussion of second-best policy We have focused on first-best policy, that is, on the exact
implementation of the constrained efficient outcome. There is a stark contrast between quantity
and price controls in this case: Capital requirements ought to be independent of bank size, while
optimal Pigouvian taxes call for a top-up tax on large banks. This dichotomy becomes less strict
when we relax the assumption of first-best policy.
    For example, consider the second-best case in which the regulator cannot push borrowing
limits all the way to b? , for example due to political constraints that are generated by lobbying.
In this case, there may again be a case for increased capital requirements for large banks; these
would curtail large banks’ leverage and, via strategic complementarities, reduce risk-taking
incentives for small banks.
    Alternatively, consider a model in which banks can deviate from binding capital
requirements: If the regulator requires bank i to choose bi = b̄, then the bank can extend
its borrowing to b̄ + δ at a cost χ per unit of capital. This cost can be interpreted as an outright
bribe that entices the regulator to turn a blind eye, or as the cost of a more indirect strategy,
such as gaming regulatory risk models. If this cost is intermediate, small banks do not find
it worth it to deviate from the capital requirement. Large banks, on the other hand, may
still choose to deviate because they realize that doing so increases their implicit subsidy and
therefore improves their valuation at date 0. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that large
banks have a stronger incentive to deviate from capital requirements. For intermediate costs
χ, the second-best policy is therefore to impose a higher capital requirement on large banks in
anticipation of such deviations in equilibrium.


5     Idiosyncratic risk
In our baseline environment, to simplify the exposition, we assume that bank returns are fully
determined by an aggregate shock. In this Section, we assume that bank returns have both an
aggregate and an idiosyncratic component.


                                                  29
Modified environment Formally, we preserve the rest of the assumptions, but we now
assume that bank i’s assets yield a random return ui at date 1 of the form

                                           ui = v + w i ,

where the first component v is an aggregate shock, while the second component wi is an
idiosyncratic shock to bank i, which is independent across banks and independent of v, with
mean E [wi ] = 0, variance Var [wi ] < ∞, and density hi (wi ). As in the baseline model, the
government receives a signal s of the common shock v, and we write fv (v|s) for the conditional
density of v. Therefore, the value of the aggregate capital stock at date 1 is given by
                                    ˆ
                               ū = ui dµ (i) = v +      µ (j) wj ,
                                                     X

                                                           j∈L

where L = {j : µ (j) > 0} denotes the set of large/non-infinitesimal banks. This setup allows
for a flexible relationship between idiosyncratic risk and bank size. Intuitively, the idiosyncratic
shocks wi of small banks integrate to zero by the law of large numbers. By contrast, idiosyncratic
shocks wj to large banks, who have a strictly positive point mass µ (j) > 0, directly affect
aggregate output. In particular, aggregate output is more volatile when large banks are present
as long as the variance of large bank’s idiosyncratic return component is non-zero, since
                                                                   h   i
                                                          µ (j)2 Var wj .
                                                    X
                             Var [ū] = Var [v] +
                                                    j∈L

Therefore, depending on the assumptions on how the variance of large banks, Var [wj ], is
determined, our formulation allows us to capture different views of how idiosyncratic risk
aggregates within entities. On the one hand, one can assume, appealing to a Law of Large
Numbers, that when a continuum of small banks merge to form a large bank, their idiosyncratic
risk cancels out. In that case, the variance of the idiosyncratic return component for large
banks becomes zero, that is, Var [wj ] = 0 if j ∈ L. On the other hand, one can assume that
the idiosyncratic return component is realized at the bank level (e.g., each bank has a CEO,
and the idiosyncratic shock is driven by the CEO’s individual decisions). In that case, which
we refer to as the granular scenario as in Gabaix (2011), the variance of the idiosyncratic return
component for otherwise comparable large and small banks should be identical.
   Formally, consistently with our assumption that all banks are otherwise identical but for
their size, we modulate the extent to which the idiosyncratic shocks to large bank returns of
granular by defining a parameter ζ ∈ [0, 1], such that,
                                                 h          i
                                             Var wlarge
                                        ζ=                       (Granularity parameter).
                                             Var [wsmall ]
                                                30
       Under this formulation, when ζ = 0, idiosyncratic shocks cancel out at the bank level and
a Law of Large of Numbers applies, which corresponds to the first scenario we just described.
When ζ = 1 instead, idiosyncratic shocks occur at the bank level, consistently with the granular
scenario. Intermediate levels of ζ simply represent a combination between both extremes.

Equilibrium with idiosyncratic risk In the presence of idiosyncratic risk, the conditional
c.d.f. of total asset values in bank i is given by
                                     ˆ∞ ˆu−v
                                                             
                            h         i
                             i
                         Pr u ≤ u|s =     hi (w) dw                i
                                                      fv (v|s) dv ≡ Fu (u|s) .                           (22)
                                           0   −∞

       In Appendix B.4, we show formally that our main results remain valid under mild regularity
conditions after this change of variable. Intuitively, the government has less information about
individual banks’ performance when there is idiosyncratic risk. In general, the impact of
idiosyncratic risk on the level of bailouts is therefore ambiguous: After good aggregate news,
the government is less confident that individual banks are safe, and may increase its bailout,
while after bad aggregate news, the government is less confident that a bailout is necessary,
since a positive measure of individual banks are certain to recover. However, for any given level
of bailout, it remains true that (i) only large banks internalize the marginal impact of their
leverage choices on government policy, and that (ii) leverage choices are strategic complements
across banks. Therefore, large banks continue to choose greater leverage in any equilibrium, as
in Proposition 1, and small banks choose greater leverage in response, as in Proposition 2. We
provide further insights into how changes in the granularity parameter ζ affect our results in
Section 6.3.


6        Quantitative assessment
As formally shown above, changes in industry composition have the potential to generate
substantial amplification due to the presence of strategic complementarities. To gauge the
strength of the complementarities and, more generally, to illustrate how bank size affects
aggregate leverage, the likelihood of bank failure, and the magnitude of government bailouts in
equilibrium, we illustrate the predictions of our model by selecting parameters consistent with
U.S. data over the period 1990Q1 to 2013Q4.15 Given that our model seeks to capture long-term
funding decisions, we map a period in our model to a two-year time horizon. We work with the
  15
       If not stated explicitly, any reference to measures of actual banks’ performance is drawn from U.S. Call
Reports data, as distributed by Drechsler, Savov and Schnabl (2016, 2017).

                                                       31
richer formulation with idiosyncratic risk developed in Section 5, since it is easier to discipline
by observables.

Functional forms In order to explicitly solve the model, we must make specific functional
form assumptions, which were not needed to derive our theoretical results.
   First, regarding industry composition, we assume that there exists a finite number N of
large banks that hold a share λ of total bank assets, and a set of small banks that hold a
share 1 − λ of total assets – this is the same formulation used to draw Figure 3. Figure 4
illustrates the distribution of bank’s assets in the economy. Although our framework allows us
to match the whole distribution of bank assets at a moderate computational cost, the current
formulation is more parsimonious and allows us to easily parametrize the effect of changes in
banking concentration.

                                         Large banks            Small banks

                                     0   λ             λ                      1
                                         N


                                   Figure 4: Distribution of banks’ assets


   Second, we assume that the social cost of government bailouts κ (t) takes the following
exponential-affine form
                                         κ1  κ2 t  
                                             e −1 ,
                                             κ (t) =
                                         κ2
where κ1 and κ2 are non-negative parameters. The parameter κ1 represents the marginal cost
of public funds for a small intervention, since κ0 (0) = κ1 while the parameter κ2 is a measure of
                   κ00 (t)
curvature, since   κ0 (t)
                             = κ2 , ∀t. Note that this formulation naturally guarantees that κ (0) = 0.
Although we find similar results with alternative functional forms (e.g. linear or quadratic),
the exponential formulation counteracts the incentives of large banks in the model to take
implausibly large leverage positions, in particular when λ is sufficiently large.
   Finally, we assume that all random variables are normally distributed. In particular, we
assume that the aggregate component v and the idiosyncratic component wi of banks’ returns
are normally distributed as follows:

                                   v ∼ N (µv , σv )    and wi ∼ N (0, σw ) ,

where Cov [v, wi ] = 0, ∀i, and Cov [wj , wi ] = 0, ∀i 6= j. We also assume that the government
receives a signal s with the following structure: s = v + εs , where εs ∼ N (0, σs ). Therefore,
after observing the signal s, the government perceives the return v to be distributed as

                                                           32
                 σv2             σs2            2 2
                                                       
v|s ∼ N       σv2 +σs2
                         s+   σv2 +σs2
                                         µv , σσ2v+σ
                                                   σs
                                                      2 .   Although assuming a Gaussian structure for returns
                                               v    s

and signals simplifies the government inference problem; its drawback is the possibility of
experiencing negative payoffs. Our parametrization is such that the probability of u taking
negative values is negligible. Similar results emerge assuming that returns are log-normally
distributed. Since we allow for idiosyncratic risk, we are not restricted in the choice of σs . In
particular, the government’s problem remains smooth even when the aggregate state is perfectly
observed with σs = 0.

Parameter values Table 1 summarizes the parameter choices in our baseline parametrization.
We need to assign values to twelve parameters, which can be classified into three broad
categories: banks’ profitability, industry composition, and government related parameters. Our
strategy is to select parameters to target average cross-sectional values, letting the model
endogenously generate differences in behavior between large and small banks. We take a
conservative stance and discipline all parameters using directly observable or already available
information, except for σv and κ2 , which we jointly determine by matching two key statistics
of our model. We adopt this approach because obtaining direct measures of the volatility σv of
aggregate shocks to the banking sector is difficult, since such shocks (i.e. financial crises) are
rare events. Bianchi (2016) and Mendicino, Nikolov and Suarez (2017) follow a similar approach
by calibrating aggregate volatility parameters to match the empirical frequency of crises.
   The first set of parameters determines banks’ profitability and their capital structure. We set
the value of deadweight losses associated with default to be 1 − φ = 20%, of banks’ value. This
choice is consistent with the existing literature on capital structure, as shown by Davydenko,
Strebulaev and Zhao (2012) and Strebulaev and Whited (2012). We set the value of ψ = 0.15,
which is on the high end of estimates used in Hennessy and Whited (2005), but which is
necessary to generate the large levels of leverage observed in the banking sector. Consistent
                                                                                                    ψ
with our agnostic view on the social vs. private costs of equity we set ψ̄ equal to                 2
                                                                                                      .   We set
µv = 1.02 and σw = 0.06 to match the average standard deviation across all banks during
the period of interest in the Call Report data. In line with the findings of Gabaix (2011),
and consistently with our own calculations using the Call Reports data, we set the granularity
parameter to ζ = 1, implying that the idiosyncratic return risk is identical across banks of all
sizes. Finally, we choose σv = 0.02 (jointly with κ2 ) to target a probability of a significant
intervention, defined as the probability of receiving a transfer higher than 2%, of 10%, which
corresponds to a crisis episode in 20 years, as in Mendicino, Nikolov and Suarez (2017) – see
also Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), and to target an average intervention conditional on a bailout
occurring of 3% of bank value, which is slightly above the median for developed countries in

                                                                  33
Laeven and Valencia (2013), but substantially below the median for emerging markets, and in
line with bailouts granted to major global banks during the crisis of 2008, as reported by Hüttl
and Schoenmaker (2016).

                                     Table 1: Parameter values

              Parameter                      Definition                     Value
                       Banks’ profitability and capital structure determinants
                 1−φ                 Default Deadweight Loss                 0.20
                  ψ, ψ̄               Cost of Equity Issuance            0.15, 0.075
                   µv                      Average ROA                       1.02
                   σv          Standard Deviation ROA (aggregate)            0.02
                   σw        Standard Deviation ROA (idiosyncratic)          0.06
                   ζ                  Granularity Parameter                      1
                                       Industry composition
                   λ                    Large Banks’ Share                   0.5
                   N                  Number of Large Banks                      5
                                            Government
                 κ1 , κ2                   Bailout Costs                   0.13, 10
                   σs             Government’s Signal Precision                  0


   The second set of parameters pins down the industry composition. Consistently with our
description of recent U.S. data in Figure 1, we set values of λ = 0.5 and N = 5. Our choice of N
seeks to capture the persistence in the size rankings of a handful of banks. In particular, Bank of
America, Citibank, JP Morgan Chase, and Wells Fargo have persistently ranked among the top
5 banks by asset size for the whole period considered. Our benchmark choice of λ is consistent
with current levels of concentration, although our central counterfactual exercise explores in
detail how alternative values of λ affect the outcomes of the model.
   The third set of parameters determines the magnitude of the bailout policy. Given that
σs and σw cannot be separately identified when ζ = 1, and to remain parsimonious, we set
σs = 0, implying that the government perfectly observes the aggregate state. We set the value
of κ1 to match a (net) marginal cost of public funds for small interventions of 13%, which is
a standard estimate in the literature (Dahlby, 2008). Finally, as described above, we choose
κ2 = 10 (jointly with σv ) to target a probability of a significant intervention every 20 years, and
an average intervention conditional on a bailout occurring of 3% of bank value.

                                                 34
                               0.98
                               0.97
                               0.96
                               0.95
                               0.94
                               0.93
                               0.92
                               0.91
                                 0.9

                                    0.1      0.2     0.3      0.4        0.5    0.6     0.7      0.8      0.9


                                                Figure 5: Borrowing choices

Note: Figure 5 shows the optimal equilibrium debt-to-asset ratio chosen by large banks (dark blue solid line) and by small banks
(light blue solid line) for different levels of λ ∈ [0.1, 0.9]. It also shows the average debt-to-asset ratio in the economy (green dashed
line). Note that, mechanically, the average debt-to-asset ratio tends to the debt-to-asset ratio of small banks when λ → 0 and to
the debt-to-asset ratio of large banks when λ → 1.



6.1       Model results and industry concentration counterfactuals
Figures 5 and 6 summarize our results for the baseline calibration and illustrate our leading
counterfactual exercise, in which we explore how changes in industry composition modify the
leverage decisions for large and small banks, as well as other equilibrium outcomes. The
equilibrium outcomes reported in this subsection correspond to the unregulated equilibrium
described in Section 3; we turn to optimal policy below.
    Our baseline parametrization generates values for average debt to assets of 0.906, with large
banks choosing 0.910 and small banks 0.901. Compared to the average debt-to-asset ratios
for top 5 banks and the remaining banks during the period considered, which respectively
correspond to 0.935 and 0.914 in the Call Reports data, our model accounts for around half
of the difference in debt-to-asset choices between large and small banks, although it somewhat
understates average leverage. The difference in leverage choices was not directly targeted by
our parameter choices. In particular, since large and small banks are otherwise identical, any
difference in the behavior of large banks relative to small banks is due to the strategic effect
that we identify in this paper.
    Consistently with our theoretical results, Figure 5 shows that increases in the level of industry
concentration in the form of an increase in the share of assets held by the top 5 banks are

                                                                    35
    0.07                                                                  0.05

    0.06
                                                                          0.04
    0.05
                                                                          0.03
    0.04

    0.03                                                                  0.02
    0.02
                                                                          0.01
    0.01

         0                                                                   0
         0.1   0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5    0.6    0.7    0.8    0.9          0.1     0.2     0.3   0.4       0.5      0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9


                  (a) Average bailout transfer                                             (b) Probability of default

                            Figure 6: Government response and default probabilities

Note: Figure 6a shows the equilibrium level of average bailout transfers, conditional on the size the intervention. Figure 6b shows
the biannual probability of default for large banks (dark blue solid line) and small banks (light blue solid line).



associated with a significant effect on the leverage choices of both large and small banks. Our
results show that increases in industry concentration have a significant impact on system-wide
borrowing, in particular for values of λ higher than 0.5. For instance, our model implies that
an increase in concentration in which the largest 5 banks hold 70% of assets (λ moves from 0.5
to 0.7) would be associated with an increase in system-wide borrowing of 3.5 percentage points,
from 90.1% to 93.6%, with the difference between large and small banks borrowing increasing
slightly to around 2%. Put differently, the aggregate leverage ratio in the economy increases by
around 50% (from 10.1 to 15.6) following the increase in concentration.16
       Figure 6 shows the behavior of the government response and the default probabilities by large
and small banks in equilibrium. Figure 6a shows that the magnitude of bailouts in equilibrium
increases monotonically with the level of industry concentration. Intuitively, given that both
large and small banks borrow more, all else equal, the probability of failure is larger, which makes
more appealing for the government to bail out banks in bad aggregate states. In the baseline
scenario, the magnitude of the government’s transfer, conditional on a significant intervention,
which we define as transfer greater than 2% of bank value, corresponds to just under 3% of
bank’s assets, as targeted by our calibration. The unconditional value of government guarantees
is roughly 0.6% of banks’ total asset value. A shift from λ = 0.5 to λ = 0.7 would be associated
with a 25% increase in the magnitude of significant intervention, from 2.75% to 3.5%, and with a
  16                                                                        Assets            1               1
       The leverage ratio of bank i in our model is calculated as           Equity   =   1−Debt/Assets   =   1−bi .



                                                                  36
four-fold increase in the average expected transfer, from 0.6% to roughly 2.5% of banks’ value.17
       The likelihood of default for large and small banks is respectively 1.5% and 1% per annum
under the baseline parametrization. Figure 6b shows that the probability of bank failure is
increasing in the level of banking concentration λ for large banks, but is decreasing in the level
of concentration for small banks. While the result for large banks is intuitive, the finding for
small banks is somewhat surprising, in particular given that we know from Figure 5 that small
banks borrow more when λ is higher. In this case, the reduction in the probability of default
is due to the increase in the ex-post transfer associated with the large bank taking on more
leverage, which counteracts the direct effect of higher leverage by small banks in the probability
of default.
       In sum, beyond the exact numerical predictions of the model, Figures 5 and 6 jointly illustrate
that, through the mechanism that we study in this paper, increases in banking concentration
can generate a substantial effect on banks’ choices, especially when large banks are sufficiently
large.


6.2        Optimal Policy
Building on the results described in Section 4, Figure 7 quantitatively assesses the magnitude of
the optimal Pigouvian policy, for different values of concentration. Since we have assumed that
the wedge ψ̄ between the private and social costs of equity issuance is non-zero, the planner
finds optimal to set a non-zero corrective tax for both large and small banks.
       The optimal Pigouvian tax for the baseline parametrization is of the order of 7.5% of the
value of the debt issues by banks, and is directly related to the value of ψ̄, as implied by the
optimal tax characterization in Equation (20).18 In particular, large and small respectively face
taxes of 7.69% and 7.29%. However, the main object of interest for us is the differential tax
charged to large banks relative to small banks. In our baseline scenario, large banks face an
additional 0.4% additional tax relative to small under the optimal ex-ante policy: we refer to
this difference in taxes as a “size tax”. The optimal size tax grows approximately linearly with
λ. For instance, our model implies that an increase in concentration in which the largest 5
  17
       Our quantitative assessment also yields a direct measure of leverage multipliers, as defined in Equations (14)
and (15), which characterize the amplified effect of a local increase dλ in banking industry concentration. For
our baseline calibration, the small- and large-bank multipliers are M S = 1.300 and M L = 1.228 respectively.
The aggregate multiplier which magnifies the total equilibrium response is M̄ = 1.091.
 18
    The optimal debt-to-asset choice for the planner in the baseline scenario for both large and small banks is
0.874.



                                                          37
                                                                         0.007
    0.085
                                                                         0.006

     0.08                                                                0.005

                                                                         0.004
    0.075
                                                                         0.003

     0.07                                                                0.002

                                                                         0.001
    0.065
                                                                             0
        0.1    0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5    0.6   0.7    0.8    0.9           0.1     0.2   0.3    0.4    0.5    0.6    0.7   0.8    0.9


                 (a) Optimal Pigouvian taxes                                               (b) Optimal size tax

                                                 Figure 7: Optimal taxes

Note: Figure 7a shows the optimal Pigouvian tax levied on large banks (dark blue solid line), small banks (light blue solid line), as
well as the average tax (green solid line) in our baseline calibration. The optimal tax for small banks is uniform and independent of
bank size, consistently with our results in Proposition 4. Figure 7b shows the optimal size tax, which corresponds to the difference
between the taxes levied on large and small banks in Figure 7a.



banks hold 70% of assets (λ moves from 0.5 to 0.7) would be associated a 50% increase in the
optimal size tax, from 0.4% to about 0.6%.


6.3         Sensitivity analysis: granularity parameter
Lastly, we explore the sensitivity of our results to the granularity parameter ζ, which is crucial
to generating meaningful counterfactuals regarding changes in bank concentration. Figure 8
assesses the sensitivity of our quantitative results to ζ. Recall that ζ = 1 corresponds to the case
where idiosyncratic shocks occur at the bank level, consistent with the granular hypothesis; ζ ' 0
corresponds to the case where large banks are perfectly diversified. It is clear that granularity is
important for our findings. The high levels of leverage associated with our baseline calibration,
and the strategic effects of bank size, arise only for ζ sufficiently close to 1, and are small for
ζ < 0.5.
    Figure 9 illustrates the deeper reasons for this result by examining large banks’ objective
function and expected government transfers. As ζ falls, large banks face lower idiosyncratic risk
and are less likely to default for given leverage choices. Hence, bailout transfers become less
relevant relative to trade-off theory considerations, dampening the strategic differences between
large and small banks, and inducing lower aggregate leverage in equilibrium. This occurs because


                                                                  38
                                   0.91


                               0.905


                                    0.9


                               0.895


                                   0.89

                                      0.1         0.2   0.3     0.4   0.5    0.6    0.7   0.8   0.9      1


                             Figure 8: Sensitivity analysis: Granularity parameter ζ

Note: Figure 8 shows the effect of varying the granularity parameter ζ on banks’ borrowing choices in our baseline calibration.




                                                                             0.01
                  1

             0.995
                                                                            0.008
              0.99
                                                                            0.006
             0.985

              0.98                                                          0.004

             0.975
                                                                            0.002
              0.97

                                                                               0
                            0.85            0.9          0.95                         0.85         0.9          0.95


                      Figure 9: Large banks’ incentives and the granularity parameter ζ

Note: Figure 9 illustrates the effect of varying the granularity parameter ζ on large banks’ objective function. The left panel plots
                        
the value V bj , t (b|s) of a large bank as a function of its borrowing bj , for different levels of ζ, assuming that all other banks
select b−j = 0.9. The right panel plots the corresponding expected government transfer E [t (b|s)] as a function of bj .




                                                                      39
the expected government transfer become less sensitive to large banks’ borrowing choices, which
decreases large banks’ marginal benefit from borrowing, consistently with banks’ optimality
conditions (10) and (11).
    The granular case ζ ' 1 is empirically plausible: Minton, Stulz and Taboada (2017), for
example, report a marginally higher standard deviation of return on assets for the largest banks
in the Call Reports data – our own unreported calculations replicate their conclusions. This
is consistent with estimates for large companies across industries in Gabaix (2011). Therefore,
the sensitivity of our results to ζ arises in an empirically unlikely region of the parameter space.
However, our analysis highlights an interesting feature of the model. The impact of granular
shocks on system-wide risk is amplified by the strategic responses of large banks. Therefore, and
in addition to the failure of the law of large numbers highlighted by Gabaix (2011), granular
shocks further increase aggregate volatility due to the behavioral response of large firms in
equilibrium.


7     Conclusion
We have shown that the size distribution of financial institutions does matter for the ex-ante
determination of leverage when bailouts are possible. Large banks, by internalizing that their
actions affect the government’s bailout response, find it optimal to increase their leverage in
equilibrium. Their increased leverage increases the magnitude of bailouts, thereby encouraging
small banks to take on more leverage. Both effects are mutually reinforcing, and generate further
increases system-wide leverage in equilibrium. Hence, aggregate leverage and the magnitude of
government bailout interventions are larger when large banks are present.
    Our results rely on the fact that system-wide policy responses induce strategic
complementarities and do not hinge on the exact nature of how banks determine their capital
structure. Our findings support the notion that regulators and policymakers must pay special
attention to large financial institutions, since they have a direct motive to take on more risk
and also because their behavior disproportionally influences the decisions of small players in
equilibrium. In this model, a regulator that closely monitors and restricts funding decisions of
large financial institutions arises as a natural optimal policy.
    A quantitative assessment of the model implies that further increases beyond the current
levels of concentration will be associated with a substantial increase in system-wide leverage.
At the current concentration levels, the optimal ex-ante corrective policy in our model can be
implemented with a size tax on large bank’s debt of 40 basis points (0.4%) per dollar of debt

                                                40
issued.




          41
References
Acharya, V.V., and T. Yorulmazer. 2007. “Too many to fail - An analysis of time-inconsistency
  in bank closure policies.” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 16(1): 1–31.
Adrian, Tobias, and Markus K Brunnermeier. 2016. “CoVaR.” American Economic Review,
  106(7): 1705–1741.
Angeletos, G-M, and Chen Lian. 2016. “Incomplete information in macroeconomics:
  Accommodating frictions in coordination.” Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2: 1065–1240.
Bianchi, Javier. 2016. “Efficient Bailouts?” American Economic Review, 106(12): 3607–3659.
Bianchi, Javier, and Enrique Mendoza. 2017. “Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential Policy.”
  Journal of Political Economy, Forthcoming.
Bulow, Jeremy I, John D Geanakoplos, and Paul D Klemperer. 1985. “Multimarket oligopoly:
  Strategic substitutes and complements.” Journal of Political Economy, 93(3): 488–511.
Chari, VV, and Patrick J Kehoe. 2016. “Bailouts, time inconsistency, and optimal regulation: A
  macroeconomic view.” The American Economic Review, 106(9): 2458–2493.
Cooper, Russell, and Andrew John. 1988. “Coordinating coordination failures in Keynesian
  models.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103(3): 441–463.
Corbae, Dean. 2015. “Discussion of large banks, loan rate markup, and monetary policy.”
  International Journal of Central Banking, 11: 179–92.
Corbae, Dean, and Pablo D’Erasmo. 2010. “A quantitative model of banking industry dynamics.”
  Working Paper.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Amil Dasgupta, Stephen Morris, and Hyun Song Shin. 2004. “Does
  one Soros make a difference? A theory of currency crises with large and small traders.” Review of
  Economic Studies, 71(1): 87–113.
Cuciniello, Vincenzo, and Federico M Signoretti. 2015. “Large Banks, Loan Rate Markup, and
  Monetary Policy.” International Journal of Central Banking.
Dahlby, Bev. 2008. “The marginal cost of public funds.” The MIT Press, 1(8): 3–2.
Davison, Lee K, and Carlos D Ramirez. 2014. “Local banking panics of the 1920s: Identification
  and determinants.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 66: 164–177.
Davydenko, Sergei A, Ilya A Strebulaev, and Xiaofei Zhao. 2012. “A market-based study of
  the cost of default.” The Review of Financial Studies, 25(10): 2959–2999.
DeAngelo, Harry, and René M Stulz. 2015. “Liquid-claim production, risk management, and
  bank capital structure: Why high leverage is optimal for banks.” Journal of Financial Economics,
  116(2): 219–236.
Diamond, D. W., and R G. Rajan. 2001. “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation and Financial
  Fragility: A Theory of Banking.” Journal of Political Economy, 109(2): 287–327.
Diamond, D. W., and R G. Rajan. 2012. “Illiquid Banks, Financial Stability, and Interest Rate
  Policy.” Journal of Political Economy, 120(3): 552–591.
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. 2016. “The deposits channel of monetary
  policy.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. 2017. “Banking on Deposits: Maturity
  Transformation without Interest Rate Risk.”
Drozd, Lukasz, and Ricardo Serrano-Padial. 2016. “Credit Enforcement Cycles.” Working Paper.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Jean Tirole. 2012. “Collective moral hazard, maturity mismatch, and
  systemic bailouts.” The American Economic Review, 102(1): 60–93.

                                                42
Fernholz, Ricardo T, and Christoffer Koch. 2016. “Why are big banks getting bigger?” Working
  Paper, Dallas Fed.
Freixas, Xavier. 1999. “Optimal Bail-Out, Conditionality and Creative Ambiguity.” CEPR
  Discussion Papers.
Freixas, Xavier, and Cornelia Holthausen. 2005. “Interbank market integration under asymmetric
  information.” Review of Financial Studies, 18(2): 459.
Freixas, Xavier, and Jean-Charles Rochet. 2008. Microeconomics of Banking, 2nd Edition. The
  MIT Press.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2011. “The granular origins of aggregate fluctuations.” Econometrica, 79(3): 733–772.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Winton. 2003. “Financial intermediation.” Handbook of the Economics
  of Finance, 1: 431–552.
Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi. 1990. “Financial intermediaries and liquidity creation.”
  Journal of Finance, 49–71.
Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier, and Philippe Martin. 2017. “Economics of Sovereign Debt, Bailouts
  and the Eurozone Crisis.” Working Paper.
Hachem, Kinda, and Zheng Michael Song. 2017. “Liquidity Rules and Credit Booms.” Working
  Paper.
Hennessy, Christopher A, and Toni M Whited. 2005. “Debt dynamics.” The Journal of Finance,
  60(3): 1129–1165.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. 1998. “Private and public supply of liquidity.” Journal of
  Political Economy, 106(1): 1–40.
Hüttl, Pia, and Dirk Schoenmaker. 2016. “Fiscal capacity to support large banks.” Policy
  Contribution, Bruegel, 17.
Janicki, Hubert P., and Edward S. Prescott. 2006. “Changes in the Size Distribution of US
  Banks: 1960–2005.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 92(4): 291.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Jaromir Nosal, and Savitar Sundaresan. 2017. “Market Power and
  Informational Efficiency.” Working Paper.
Keister, Todd. 2016. “Bailouts and financial fragility.” The Review of Economic Studies, 83(2): 704–
  736.
Kelly, Bryan, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2016. “Too-systemic-to-fail: What
  option markets imply about sector-wide government guarantees.” The American Economic Review,
  106(6): 1278–1319.
Kraus, Alan, and Robert H Litzenberger. 1973. “A state-preference model of optimal financial
  leverage.” Journal of Finance, 28(4): 911–922.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. 2013. “Systemic banking crises database.” IMF Economic
  Review, 61(2): 225–270.
Laeven, Luc, Lev Ratnovski, and Hui Tong. 2014. “Bank size and systemic risk.” IMF Staff
  Papers, , (14).
Mendicino, Caterina, Kalin Nikolov, and Javier Suarez. 2017. “Equity versus Bail-in Debt in
  Banking: An Agency Perspective.” CEPR Working Paper.
Milgrom, Paul, and Chris Shannon. 1994. “Monotone comparative statics.” Econometrica,
  62(1): 157–180.
Minton, Bernadette A., Rene M. Stulz, and Alvaro G. Taboada. 2017. “Are Larger Banks
  Valued More Highly?” NBER Working Paper.


                                                 43
Modigliani, F., and M.H. Miller. 1958. “The cost of capital, corporation finance and the theory
  of investment.” The American economic review, 48(3): 261–297.
Myers, Stewart C. 1984. “The capital structure puzzle.” Journal of Finance, 39(3): 574–592.
Nosal, Jaromir B, and Guillermo Ordoñez. 2016. “Uncertainty as commitment.” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 80: 124–140.
Reinhart, Carmen M, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. This time is different: Eight centuries of
  financial folly. Princeton University Press.
Sakovics, Jozsef, and Jakub Steiner. 2012. “Who matters in coordination problems?” The
  American Economic Review, 102(7): 3439–3461.
Schneider, Martin, and Aaron Tornell. 2004. “Balance Sheet Effects, Bailout guarantees and
  Financial crises.” Review of Economic Studies, 71(3): 883–913.
Stein, Jeremy C. 2012. “Monetary policy as financial stability regulation.” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 127(1): 57–95.
Stern, Gary H, and Ron J Feldman. 2004. Too big to fail: The hazards of bank bailouts. Brookings
  Institution Press.
Strebulaev, Ilya A, and Toni M Whited. 2012. “Dynamic models and structural estimation in
  corporate finance.” Foundations and Trends in Finance, 6(1–2): 1–163.




                                               44
                                          Appendix

A      Quotations
Breaking up big banks wouldn’t really solve our problems, because it’s perfectly possible to
have a financial crisis that mainly takes the form of a run on smaller institutions.
    (...) Breaking up big financial institutions wouldn’t prevent future crises, nor would it eliminate
the need for bailouts when those crises happen. The next bailout wouldn’t be concentrated on a
few big companies - but it would be a bailout all the same. I don’t have any love for financial
giants, but I just don’t believe that breaking them up solves the key problem.

                                                   Paul Krugman. The New York Times, 04/01/2010

    Most observers who study this believe that to try to break banks up into a lot of little pieces would
hurt our ability to serve large companies and hurt the competitiveness of the United States. But that’s
not the important issue. They believe that it would actually make us less stable, because the individual
banks would be less diversified and, therefore, at greater risk of failing, because they would haven’t
profits in one area to turn to when a different area got in trouble.
    And most observers believe that dealing with the simultaneous failure of many small
institutions would actually generate more need for bailouts and reliance on taxpayers than
the current economic environment.

                      Lawrence Summers. Interview with Jeffrey Brown, PBS Newshour, 04/22/2010

    But, while regulation must address the oversized bank balance sheets that were at the root of
the crisis, the IMF is right not to focus excessively on fixing the “too big to fail” problem. A
surprising number of pundits seem to think that if one could only break up the big
banks, governments would be far more resilient to bailouts, and the whole “moral hazard”
problem would be muted. That logic is dubious, given how many similar crises have hit widely
differing systems over the centuries. A systemic crisis that simultaneously hits a large number
of medium-sized banks would put just as much pressure on governments to bail out the
system as would a crisis that hits a couple of large banks.

              Kenneth Rogoff. All for One Tax and One Tax for All? Project Syndicate, 04/29/2010


B      Proofs and derivations
B.1     Microfoundation for the bank’s objective function
We assume in the paper that each bank chooses a capital structure that maximizes the market value
of the firm. To derive this objective function, we consider a single bank, and we assume, as in the
paper, that there are no conflicts of interest between equity-holders and bank managers. All lowercase


                                                   45
variables are defined per unit of capital managed by the bank. Equity-holders maximize expected
utility of consumption, c0 + βE [c1 ]. Their date 0 and date 1 consumption is respectively given by

                                                             c0 = w0 − e0

where w0 is their initial wealth and e0 is their inside equity contribution to date 0 investment (a
dividend payout at date 0 implies e0 < 0); and

                                                     c1 = w1 + σd1 (1 − ψ)

where d1 is the final dividend paid to shareholders at date 1, w1 is shareholders’ exogenous date 1
endowment, and σ is the share of equity retained by initial equity-holders. Note that w1 and d1 can
both be random variables.
      In addition, the bank issues debt with face value b0 and initial market value q0 b0 , as well as outside
equity, which is associated with a claim to a share 1 − σ of final dividends, and has initial market value
ē0 . Since the bank can make a fixed investment of one dollar per unit of capital at date 0, its budget
constraint is

                                   1
                                  |{z}      =          e
                                                       0            +          ē
                                                                               0         +         q0 b0
                                                     |{z}                    |{z}                  |{z}
                               Investment       Inside equity           Outside equity       Debt market value

The final dividend d1 is defined as the residual claim on the bank’s assets, including any transfers from
the government, and therefore given by the random variable

                                                   d1 = max {u + t − b0 , 0}

The market values of debt and outside equity satisfy

                                                   ˆ                                 ˆ
                                                                                             

                                    q0 b0 = β             (φu + t) dF + b0              dF                                        (A.1)
                                                                                             

                                                   D                                 N
                                                                               ˆ
                                                                                                      

                                      ē0 = (1 − σ) β (1 − ψ)                      (u + t − b0 ) dF                               (A.2)
                                                                                                      

                                                                               N

where D = {u + t < b0 } is the default event, and N = Dc .
     Shareholders’ full maximization problem, after substituting the budget to eliminate inside equity
e0 , becomes
                                                ˆ
            max − (1 − q0 b0 − ē0 ) + σβ(1 − ψ) (u + t − b0 ) dF subject to (A.1) and (A.2)
          b0 ,q0 ,ē0 ,σ
                                                                    N

Substituting the market pricing constraints (A.1) and (A.2), we can further eliminate q0 and ē0 to get
the equivalent unconstrained problem

                           ˆ                                ˆ                                              ˆ
                                                                                                                              

            max −1 + β           (φu + t) dF + b0              dF + (σ + (1 − σ))(1 − ψ)                      [u + t − b0 ] dF 
                                                                                                                              
             b0 ,σ                                                         |        {z        }
                           D                                N                       =1                     N

                                                                        46
Note that the share σ of equity retained by insiders is indeterminate, because outside equity is fairly
priced. It is then straightforward to show that this problem reduces to

                                                           max V (b0 , t)
                                                             b0

with V (b0 , t) = E [u + t] − (1 − φ) Pr [D] E [u|D] − ψPr [N ] E [u + t − b0 |N ] is the market value of the
bank, and corresponds exactly to Equation (8) in the paper. Therefore, the bank’s initial equity-holders
optimally choose the capital structure to maximize the market value of the firm.


B.2      Section 3
Government’s problem
For a given signal realization s, the government optimally chooses a transfer t (b|s) at date 1 to
maximize:
                                          max W1 (b, t|s) ,
                                                           t≥0

where W1 (b, t|s) is given by
                ˆ∞                        ˆ       bˆi −t
                                                                                             ˆ       ˆ∞
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                   
W1 (b, t|s) =        udFu (u|s)−(1 − φ)                udFu (u|s) dµ− ψ − ψ̄                              (t + u − bi )dFu (u|s) dµ−κ (t) ,
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                 
                0                                 0                                                bi −t

which corresponds to Equation (2) in the text. Note that the outer integrals in the second and third
terms are cross-sectional integrals over banks i, while the inner ones are integrals over the possible
realizations of u given the signal s.
     The first-order and second-order conditions to this problem correspond to
                         ˆ                                          ˆ h
 ∂W1 (b, t|s)                                                                        i
                                  i          i
                = (1 − φ) fu b − t|s b − t dµ − ψ − ψ̄                    1 − Fu bi − t|s dµ − κ0 (t)
       ∂t
                            ˆ h                                                          ˆ
∂ 2 W1 (b, t|s)                  0
                                                                     i                              
                = − (1 − φ)    fu   bi
                                       − t|s   bi
                                                  − t   + f u   bi
                                                                   − t|s    dµ −   ψ − ψ̄     fu   bi
                                                                                                      − t|s  dµ − κ00 (t) ≤ 0.
      ∂t2
Note that the second-order condition is always satisfied with strict inequality under our regularity
condition (1).19 It immediately follows that limt→∞ ∂W1∂t      (b,t|s)
                                                                       < 0, which guarantees that the optimal
t is bounded above. Note further that
                                       ˆ                              ˆ h
           ∂W1 (b, t|s)                                                             i
                                                i      i
                             = (1 − φ) fu b |s b dµ − ψ − ψ̄               1 − Fu bi |s ) dµ − κ0 (0) ,
                ∂t      t=0
                                                                                   ´
                                                                                     fu bi |s bi dµ ≤ κ0 (0) +
                                                                                             
which
        implies
         ´      that  the  optimal   transfer   t (b|s) is zero   when   (1 − φ)
             1 − Fu bi |s dµ, and determined uniquely by the first-order condition otherwise.
                          
  ψ − ψ̄
     Totally differentiating the first-order condition with respect to bj , we have
    ∂ 2 W1 (b, t|s)   ∂t    ∂ 2 W1 (b, t|s)
0=                  ×     +
         ∂t2          ∂bj        ∂t∂bj
      2
    ∂ W1 (b, t|s)     ∂t            h                                                                 i
                                                  0  j          j               j                        j
  =                 ×     + µ(j)  ×  (1  −  φ)  fu  b  − t|s   b  − t   + fu   b  − t|s   +  ψ − ψ̄  fu b  − t|s    ,
         ∂t2          ∂bj
  19                                                        f 0 (x)        x−µu|s 1
     Note that when u|s is normally distributed, x fuu (x) =                σu|s σu|s ,   so Condition (1) is satisfied whenever σu|s
is sufficiently large.

                                                                      47
and it follows that
                                              !−1
∂t (b|s)        ∂ 2 W1 (b, t|s)                           h                                                                                              i
         =    −                                     µ (j) (1 − φ) fu0 bj − t|s                         bj − t + fu bj − t|s                  + ψ − ψ̄ fu bj − t|s        .
  ∂bj                ∂t2

Note that first factor is strictly positive, given the second-order condition, which implies Equation (5).

Banks’ market value
The ex-post payoffs to debtholders and shareholders are defined in Equations (6) and (7) in the text.
Taking expectations under the joint distribution of returns and signals F (u, s) yields the date 0 value
of bonds and shares for bank i, respectively given by
                                       ˆ          ˆ
                                  i i      i
                                 q b = b dF + (φu + t (b|s))dF
                                                              Ni                    Di
                                                                            ˆ
                                                        ei = (1 − ψ)                (u + t (b|s) − bi )dF,
                                                                            Ni

where the default and repayment regions are defined as Di = t (b|s) + u < bi and N i =
                                                                                                                      

  t (b|s) + u ≥ bi . Adding up both, we can express the market value of the bank as follows


                  ˆ h                                 i ˆ
        i i   i                                      i
       q b +e =       u + t (b|s) − ψ u + t (b|s) − b dF + [u + t (b|s) − (1 − φ) u] dF
                     Ni                                                                            i
                     ˆ                                                 ˆ                        ˆ D                          
                 =           (u + t (b|s)) dF − (1 − φ)                     udF − ψ                    u + t (b|s) − bi dF
                                                                       Di                    Ni
                                                                   h        i       h       i              h    i    h                             i
                 = E [u + t (b|s)] − (1 − φ) Pr Di E u|Di − ψPr N i E u + t (b|s) − bi |N i ,                                                              (A.3)

which corresponds to the definition of V bi , t (b|s) in Equation (8).
                                                                                        



Banks’ leverage choices
The bank maximizes its market value. Let S denote the support of the signal s, and recall that G(s),
s ∈ S, is the marginal distribution of signals. We can write the bank’s value, from (A.3), more explicitly
as
                                      ˆ                                   ˆ
                                                                       bi −t(b|s)                                   ˆ∞
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                
V bi , t (b|s) = E [u] +                  t (b|s) − (1 − φ)                             udFu (u|s) − ψ                           u + t (b|s) − bi dFu (u|s) dG(s).
                                                                                                                                                               

                                      S                                     0                                  bi −t(b|s)

Partially differentiating with respect to bi gives
                         ˆ                                                                                          ˆ∞
                                                                                                                                         
             ∂V                           i
                                                    
                                                         i
                                                                                                     
                 =            − (1 − φ) b − t (b|s) fu b − t (b|s) |s + ψ                                                    dFu (u|s) dG(s)
                                                                                                                                         
             ∂bi
                         S                                                                                     bi −t(b|s)
                                  h       i                   ˆ
                  = ψPr N i − (1 − φ)                             udF,
                                                          ∂Di


                                                                                    48
which corresponds to Equation (10) in the text. The total effect of increasing bi further takes into
account the effect of bi on optimal transfers, and is given by

                  ˆ                                                                                          ˆ∞
                                                                                                                             
   dV   ∂V            ∂t (b|s)              i
                                                    
                                                            i
                                                                                                
       = i +                   1 + (1 − φ) b − t (b|s) fu b − t (b|s) |s − ψ                                         dFu (u|s) dG(s)
                                                                                                                              
   dbi  ∂b              ∂bi
                  S                                                                                      bi −t(b|s)
                                                                       ˆ
           ∂V             ∂t (b|s)                                             ∂t (b|s)
                                                  
       =       +E                      1 − ψ1 N i         + (1 − φ)                      udF,
           ∂bi              ∂bi                                                   ∂bi
                                                                       ∂Di

which corresponds to Equation (11) in the text. The first-order conditions (10) and (11) follow by
noting that ∂t(b|s)
              ∂bi
                    = 0 for small banks.

Proof of Lemma 1 (Effect of large bank leverage on small banks’ incentives.)
Proof. Differentiating the bank’s value function in (8) with respect to bj gives
                                                                                                 ˆ
              dV bi , t (b|s)
                                  
                                  ∂t (b|s)                                                            ∂t (b|s)
                                                                            
                              = E            1 − ψ1  Ni  + (1 − φ)                                              udF > 0,
                  dbj               ∂bj                                                                  ∂bj
                                                                                                 ∂Di


where the inequality follows from the properties of optimal bailouts. Indeed, (5) implies that ∂t(b|s)
                                                                                                 ∂bj
                                                                                                       ≥ 0,
with strict inequality for the (positive measure) set of public signals s such that t (b|s) > 0.
   Differentiating again with respect to bi gives
                                 ˆ                        ˆ
           d2 V bi , t (b|s)                                                ufu0 (u|s)
                            
                                    ∂t (b|s)                 ∂t (b|s)
                                                                                      
                              =ψ             dF + (1 − φ)               1+               dF > 0,
                dbi dbj                ∂bj                     ∂bj           fu (u|s)
                                        ∂Di                             ∂Di

where the inequality follows from our regularity condition (1).

Proof of Proposition 1 (Large banks borrow more.)
                                                                                                                                        
Proof. Take any equilibrium with leverage choices b̂ and ex-post optimal transfer t̂(s) = t b̂|s .
Suppose that j is a large bank, and let tj bj |s = t (b|s)|b−j =b̂−j be the transfer which becomes ex-
                                                    

post optimal if a large bank j chooses borrowing level bj , while all other banks play their equilibrium
strategy (note that tj (b̂j |s) ≡ t̂(s)).
    First, suppose that b̂i > b̂j for a small bank i and a large bank j. Optimality implies that neither
bankhas a profitable
                         deviation by copying the other’s strategy. Bank i’s market value in equilibrium
is V b̂ , t̂ (s) . If bank i deviates from equilibrium by copying bank j’s choice b̂j , the bailout policy is
       i
                                                                                                           
unchanged because bank i is small, and i’s market value becomes V b̂j , t̂(s) . Therefore, optimality
for bank i implies
                                                                                     
                                                  V b̂i , t̂ (s) ≥ V b̂j , t̂ (s) .
                                                                  
Bank j’s market value in equilibrium is V b̂j , t̂ (s) . If bank j deviates to b̂i , then the bailout policy
                                                                                        
changes to tj b̂i |s , and j’s market value becomes V b̂i , tj b̂i |s . Therefore, optimality for bank j
requires that                                                     
                                    V b̂j , t̂ (s) ≥ V b̂i , tj b̂i |s .

                                                                  49
                                                                                                                
Combining the two optimality conditions, we have V b̂i , t̂ (s) ≥ V b̂i , tj b̂i |s                                       , or equivalently,

                                                                                ˆb̂i dV b̂i , t (b|s)
                                                                                                          
                                                                 
                0 ≥ V b̂i , tj b̂i |s         − V b̂i , tj b̂j |s           =                                                 dbj ,
                                                                                                dbj                      −j
                                                                                b̂j                            b−j =b̂


which contradicts Lemma 1. Therefore, b̂j ≥ b̂i .
    Second, suppose that b̂j = b̂i . We begin by showing that the small bank makes an interior choice
in equilibrium, with 0 < b̂i < ∞. Taking limits of the derivative in (10), we get

                                                                                       ˆ 
                                              
                              ∂V bi , t̂(s)                  h     i                                   
                       lim                         = ψPr N i − (1 − φ)                           −t̂ (s) dF > 0.
                      bi →0           ∂bi
                                                                                       ∂Di

Thus the small bank must choose b̂i > 0. Moreover, we have
                                                                                       ˆ 
                                                    
                                     ∂V bi , t̂(s)                                                         
                           lim                           = − (1 − φ) lim                        bi − t̂ (s) dF.
                           bi →∞            ∂bi                             bi →∞
                                                                                 ∂Di
                                                                                                                h               i
Note that the integral is strictly positive for a given bi if and only if bi > E t̂ (s) |Di . The convexity
of the cost κ (t) of bailouts, combined with our assumption that limt→∞ κ (t) = ∞, implies that t̂ (s)
is bounded above. Since the small bank takes t̂ (s) as given, it follows that the integral is positive
                                             i
for large enough bi , so that limbi →∞ ∂V (b∂b,it̂(s)) < 0, which establishes that the optimal choice b̂i < ∞.
Therefore small banks are at an interior solution with b̂i ∈ (0, ∞), and the first-order condition
                                                                           
                                                         ∂V b̂i , t̂(s)
                                                                                = 0.
                                                                 ∂bi

holds with equality. The large bank’s first-order condition, using the conjecture b̂j = b̂i , can in turn
be written as                                                   
                                ∂V b̂i , t̂(s)    dV b̂i , t (b|s)
                                                +                    = 0.
                                     ∂bi               dbj
                                                                                    ∂V (b̂i ,t̂(s))
Lemma 1 implies that the second term is strictly positive, and we obtain                ∂bi
                                                                                                    < 0, a
contradiction.

Proof of Proposition 2 (When large banks are present, small banks take more
leverage.)
Proof. Let t0 (b|s) denote the ex-post optimal transfer when there are only small banks who play the
symmetric strategy bi = b, and let BR0 (b) = arg maxbi V bi , t0 (b|s) be a small bank’s best response
                                                                      

                                                                        ∂V (bi ,t)
to this transfer. b is a symmetric equilibrium if b ∈ BR0 (b). Since       ∂bi
                                                                                     > 0 regardless of
                                                                                                                    bi =0
transfers, we know that BR0 (0) > 0. By Tarski’s fixed point theorem, the smallest equilibrium b0
exists, and moreover, we have inf BR0 (b) > b for all b < b0 .
    Now take any economy with large banks, and any equilibrium
                                                                    (not necessarily symmetric) with
leverage choices b̂ and ex-post optimal transfer t̂(s) = t b̂|s . Let the lowest borrowing level arising

                                                                   50
in equilibrium be b1 ≡ inf i b̂i . Proposition 1 implies that a positive measure of banks (at least all large
banks) chooses to borrow strictly more than b1 . Moreover, a parallel argument to Lemma 1 implies
that incentives to borrow for small banks are strictly stronger under the equilibrium transfer t̂ (s), than
under the transfer t0 (b1 |s) which would obtain if everybody chose b1 :
                                                         
                                         ∂V bi , t̂(s)          ∂V bi , t0 (b1 |s)
                                                                                        
                                                              >                    .                     (A.4)
                                                ∂bi                   ∂bi
We need to show that b1 > b0 .
    First, suppose that b1 < b0 . Let b̃1 = inf BR0 (b1 ) be the lowest borrowing level which small banks
pick if everybody else chooses b1 . We know that b̃1 > b1 , because our assumption b1 < b0 implies that
BR0 (b1 ) > b1 . Since b̃1 maximizes bank value given the transfer t0 (b1 |s), we have
                                                             
                                         V b̃1 , t0 (b1 |s) ≥ V (b1 , t0 (b1 |s))

Moreover, since b1 maximizes some (small) bank’s value given the equilibrium transfer t̂(s), we have
                                                                                 
                                            V b1 , t̂ (s) ≥ V b̃1 , t̂ (s) .

Combining,                                                                                      
                  V b̃1 , t0 (b1 |s) − V (b1 , t0 (b1 |s)) ≥ 0 ≥ V b̃1 , t̂ (s) − V b1 , t̂ (s) ,

which implies
                                ˆb̃1 
                                                                                       
                                      ∂V bi , t0 (b1 |s)
                                                        
                                                            ∂V bi , t̂ (s)
                                                         −                 ≥ 0,
                                            ∂bi                ∂bi
                               b1

contradicting (A.4).
     Second, suppose that b1 = b0 . Since b0 is optimal if everybody else chooses b0 , we have the
first-order condition for a small bank
                                ∂V (b0 , t0 ((b0 |s)))   ∂V (b1 , t0 (b1 |s))
                                                       =                      = 0.
                                         ∂bi                    ∂bi
Moreover, since some small bank optimally chooses b1 in equilibrium, we have
                                                     
                                    ∂V b1 , t̂(s)                      ∂V (b1 , t0 (b1 |s))
                                                          =0=                               ,
                                              ∂bi                             ∂bi
again contradicting (A.4).


B.3      Section 4
Proof of Lemma 2 (Commitment is irrelevant when the planner controls banks.)
Proof. Taking expectations over signals in (2) and comparing to (16) we obtain, for any (not necessarily
optimal) bailout policy t (s),
                                   W0 (b, t (s)) = E [W1 (b, t (s) |s)] .


                                                                  51
Suppose that W c > W nc . Then the constraint in W nc must bind in some states, that is, the policy
achieving W c is not ex-post optimal for a set of signals s with positive probability measure. Call
this policy {bc , tc (s)} and consider replacing the transfer policy with the ex-post best response to bc ,
setting t0 (s) = arg maxt W1 (bc , t|s) for almost all s. By ex-post optimality, W1 (bc , t0 |s) ≥ W1 (bc , tc |s),
with strict inequality for a positive measure of signals. The policy {bc , t0 (s)} yields ex-ante welfare
W0 (bc , t0 (s)) = E [W1 (bc , t0 (s)|s)] > E [W1 (bc , tc (s)|s)], contradicting optimality of {bc , tc (s)}.

Proof of Proposition 3 (Efficient leverage is independent of bank size.)
Proof. Lemma 2 shows that the maximization problems with and without commitment are equivalent.
We consider the problem (17) with commitment. Suppose policy {bc , tc (s)} solves this problem. Note
that we may write welfare in terms of bank value, the wedge between private and social equity issuance
costs, and transfers:
                         ˆ h                      h i h               ii
          W0 (b, t(s)) =     V (bi , t (s)) + ψ̄Pr N i E t(s) + u − bi dµ − E [t (s) + κ (t (s))] .

Since t(s) may be chosen independently of b, the first-order condition for the optimal b is obtained by
differentiating pointwise under the integral, and we obtain
                                         ∂V bc,i , tc (s)
                                                                
                                                                h i
                                                  i
                                                          = ψ̄Pr N i
                                              ∂b
for all i. But under our regularity condition, the pointwise maximization problem is strictly concave
in bi so that we have bc,i = bc,j = b̄ for almost all i, j.


B.4      Section 5
Equation (22) defines the distribution of total asset returns ui = v + wi of bank i. We denote its
density conditional on the public signal s by fui (u|s) as before. We impose the equivalent to our
previous regularity condition (1) on this density: In marginal default states where ui = bi − t, we
require that
                                        d log fui (u|s)
                                                        > −1, ∀s, i.                                 (A.5)
                                            d log u
Note that this is generally a weaker condition than our requirement in (1) for the baseline model.
Indeed, (1) holds when public signals about the aggregate state are sufficiently noisy. Since idiosyncratic
risk effectively introduces noise into the government’s signal of bank health, (A.5) is generally an even
milder condition than (1).
    In the model with idiosyncratic risk, welfare at date 1 is
                                                        
                                  ˆ       bˆi −t                              ˆ       ˆ∞
                                                                                                               

                                               udFui (u|s) dµ − ψ − ψ̄                    t + u − bi dFui (u|s) dµ − κ (t) , (A.6)
                                                                                                    
 W1 (b, t|s) = E[v|s] − (1 − φ)
                                                                                
                                      
                                          0                                       bi −t

The ex-post optimal bailout policy t (b|s) can be characterized exactly as in the text. In particular,
for a large bank j, we have the analogue to Equation (5):
                  "                                                                                   #
    ∂t (b|s) sign                                       ψ − ψ̄            
                    j,0    j         j          j    j                j  j
              =   fu      b  − t|s  b  − t  + fu    b  − t|s +      f   b  − t|s                                         ≥ 0,   (A.7)
      ∂bj                                                      1−φ u                                      u=bj −t(b|s)

                                                               52
with strict inequality whenever t(b|s) > 0. Now writing down the market value of bank i, we have

                   ˆ                           ˆ
                                            bi −t(b|s)                           ˆ∞
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                          
V bi , t (b|s) =       t (b|s) − (1 − φ)            udFui (u|s) − ψ                          u + t (b|s) − bi dFui (u|s) dG(s).
                                                                                                                         

                   S                          0                              bi −t(b|s)

Given this characterization, we can establish that the key qualitative properties of the bank’s objective
function V are as in the baseline model without idiosyncratic risk. In particular, if j is a large bank
and i is a small bank, then

    1. Bank j has strictly higher incentives to take leverage, other things equal:
                                             dV bj |t (b|s)   dV bi |t (b|s)
                                                                                             
                                                            >
                                                 dbj              dbi

    2. Banks’ leverage choices are strategic complements:
                                                     d2 V bi , t (b|s)
                                                                             
                                                                       > 0.
                                                          dbi dbj

The derivations of these properties are identical to those in Appendix B.2 and in the Proof of Lemma
1. We can now apply the arguments of Propositions 1 and 2 without further modification.


C       Computational algorithm
                                                                        
    1. We write θ = φ, ψ, ψ̄, κ1 , κ2 , λ, N, µv , σv , σw,i , σ for the primitives of the model.

    2. We first characterize the optimal ex-post transfer given a signal as a function of parameters

                                                             t (b, s; θ) ,
                                            ∂t
       which also allows us to characterize ∂b j (b, s; θ) as a function of the same primitives.
                                                                                        
       Conditional on s, the assets of bank i are distributed ui |s ∼ N µu|s , σu|s,i 2    , where µu|s =
                                                                                                         σv                    2
                             2    = Var [v|s] + Var wi = ωσ2 + σw,i
                                                                  2 , with updating weight ω =
                                                                    
       ωs + (1 − ω) µv and σu|s,i                                                                     σv2 +σ2
                                                                                                               .
                         2               2
                                          
       We write ϕ x|µ, σ and Φ x|µ, σ for the normal density and c.d.f. respectively. The first-order
       condition for ex-post optimal transfers is then
               ˆ                                    ˆ h                            i
                      i           2     i
       (1 − φ) ϕ b − t|µu|s , σu|s,i b − t dµ − ψ − ψ̄         1 − Φ bi − t|µu|s , σu|s,i
                                                                                    2
                                                                                             dµ − κ0 (t) ≤ 0

       with equality whenever t > 0.

    3. We can compute bank value as follows. Note that the marginal distribution of signals is
       s ∼ N µs , σs2 , where σs2 = σv2 + σ2 .
                     

       The value of a bank, given bi and signal-contingent transfer policy t (s), is
                                                       h   i       h       i            h       i   h               i
            V bi , t = E [u + t (s)] − (1 − φ) Pr Di E u|Di − ψPr N i E t (s) + u − bi |N i                                   (A.8)
                             ˆ                  
                     = µu + V̂ (s) ϕ s|µs , σs2 ds,                                                                           (A.9)


                                                             53
   where
                                       h       i   h             i           h       in            h         i     o
           V̂ (s) = t (s) − (1 − φ) Pr Di |s E ui |Di , s − ψPr N i |s                    t (s) + E ui |N i , s − bi .

   The cutoff for default given s is ui = bi − t (s). Define the normalized cutoff

                                                           bi − t (s) − µu|s
                                               υ i (s) =
                                                                 σu|s,i

   We write ϕ (z) ≡ ϕ(z|0, 1) and Φ (z) = Φ(z|0, 1) for the standard normal density and c.d.f. We
   can then compute V̂ (s) by noting that
                                   h       i        h                            i            
                               Pr Di |s = Pr ui ≤ bi − t (s) |s = Φ υ i (s)
                                   h       i                        
                               Pr N i |s = 1 − Φ υ i (s)

   and
                                                                        ϕ υ i (s)
                      h        i       h                             i                                 
                    E ui |Di , s = E ui |ui ≤ bi − t (s) , s = µu|s − σu|s,i        ,
                                                                        Φ (υ i (s))
                                                                          ϕ υ i (s)
                     h        i   h                    i                              
                       i  i         i i    i
                    E u |N , s = E u |u > b − t (s) , s = µu|s + σu|s,i                 .
                                                                        1 − Φ (υ i (s))

4. We then characterize the best response of a small bank, given the borrowing choices of other
   small and large banks, by solving the first-order condition
                                    ˆ 
         ∂V i       h i
                       i                 i
                                                    
                                                        i                    2
                                                                                   
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                  
              = ψPr  N   −  (1 − φ)     b  − t (s)  ϕ  b  − t (s) |µ u|s , σu|s,i  ϕ  s|µ s , σs    ds = 0,
         ∂bi
   which allows us to find bank i’s optimal choice
                                                                        
                                                        bi? b−i ; θ .

   We can then characterize the aggregate best response of all small
                                                                     banks, given the borrowing
                                               i    i   i? i  L
   choices of large banks, as the solution in b of b = b b , b ; θ .

5. For large banks, we optimize directly the bank’s objective function, to allow for possible non-
   concavities in the objective function of large banks. This yields large bank’s optimal choice
                                                                        
                                                        bj? b−j ; θ .

   Note that, at any interior optimum, large banks best response satisfies Equation (11). We can
   then characterize the aggregate best response of all large
                                                              banks, given the borrowing choices of
                                    j    j
   small banks, as the solution in b of b = bj?   S   j
                                                 b ,b ;θ .

6. Finally, we combine both responses and solve for the value of bi for both large and small banks
   that jointly satisfy banks’ best responses.




                                                           54
