                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE IMPORTANCE OF EDUCATION AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT FOR ECONOMIC
                  GROWTH IN THE INFORMATION ERA

                                       Charles R. Hulten

                                      Working Paper 24141
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24141


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2017




I would like to thank Leonard Nakamura and Valerie Ramey for their comments on earlier drafts,
as well as the participants at the October 16-17, 2015, NBER/CRIW conference Education,
Skills, and Technical Change: Implications for Future U.S. GDP Growth. Remaining errors and
interpretations are my responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Charles R. Hulten. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Importance of Education and Skill Development for Economic Growth in the Information
Era
Charles R. Hulten
NBER Working Paper No. 24141
December 2017
JEL No. I26,J24,O47

                                          ABSTRACT

The neoclassical growth accounting model used by the BLS to sort out the contributions of the
various sources of growth in the U.S. economy accords a relatively small role to education. This
result seems at variance with the revolution in information technology and the emergence of the
“knowledge economy”, or with the increase in educational attainment and the growth in the wage
premium for higher education. This paper revisits this result using “old fashioned” activity
analysis, rather than the neoclassical production function, as the technology underlying economic
growth. An important feature of this activity-based technology is that labor and capital are strong
complements, and both inputs are therefore necessary for the operation of an activity. The
composition of the activities in operation at any point in time is thus a strong determinant of the
demand for labor skills, and changes in the composition driven by technical innovation are a
source of the increase in the demand for more complex skills documented in the literature. A key
result of this paper is that the empirical sources-of-growth results reported by BLS could equally
have been generated by the activity-analysis model. This allows the BLS results to be interpreted
in a very different way, one that assigns a greater importance to labor skills and education.


Charles R. Hulten
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
Room 3114, Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
hulten@econ.umd.edu
                                                  I. Introduction


The rapid advance of information technology and globalization has led to major structural
changes in the U.S. economy. The extent of these changes is evident in the decline of
manufacturing industry and the rise of selected service-producing sectors shown in Figures 1 and
2. The share of manufacturing in private GDP has been cut in half over the last half century,
from 30% in 1960 to less than 15% in 2015, and the share of private employment has fallen from
around 34% to 10%. This decline was more than offset by increases in those service sectors that
involve “expert” advice, information, or interventions — finance, business and professional,
education, health, law, and information services: the share of value added rose from around 13%
to 37%, while the share of employment rose from under 14% of total private employment to over
40%. 1 These shifting patterns reflect, in part, the outsourcing of production to lower-wage
countries, labor-saving technical change, and the evolution of demand for different products. 2
The trends in professional and business organizational services, also shown in Figures 1 and 2,
indicate a significant shift in employment within firms toward non-production activities, and
reflect the growth of in-firm research and development, product design, and the emergence of
sophisticated organizational management systems.
          The change in the structure of employment and valued added occurred during a period
that also saw a parallel increase in higher-order cognitive and non-cognitive worker skills of the
labor force, documented by Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) in their path-breaking paper, as
well as a significant increase in educational attainment. Moreover, the fraction of the U.S.
population 25 years or older with at least a B.A. degree quadrupled (to 32%) over the period
from 1960 to 2015; the fraction of those with at least a high school degree more than doubled (to
almost 90%), according to data from the Census Current Population Survey. Evidence cited in
this paper suggests that the upward trends in educational attainment and the demand for more

1 The part of the service sector designated “expert” in Figures 1 and 2 refers to those NAICS industries 51, 52, 54,
55, 56, 61 and 62. (the organization services include NAICS 54, 55, and 56). The statistics shown here are taken
from the industry accounts of the Bureau of Economic Analysis. They are expressed as a share of the private
economy because the focus of this paper is on innovation, education, and growth accounting in the business sector.
The ratio of private to total value added was 87% in 2015, and the corresponding ratio for full and part time
employees was 86%, so the sectoral estimates are somewhat smaller when expressed as a ratio of the totals. The
time series shown in Figure 2 is pieced together from different parts of industry Table 6.5 and is thus subject to
some discrepancies.
2
    Haskell et al. (2012) and Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013).



                                                                                                                       1
complex cognitive skills are connected to the structural changes in the economy evident in
Figures 1 and 2; those service sectors where the employment increase was most pronounced
were also those where the high-skill, high-education professions are located. The observed
structural shifts are thus consistent with the growth of the knowledge economy.
       It is one thing to regard skill development and education as important for the functioning
and growth of the economy, but how important are they compared to other factors that influence
the growth of GDP? Surprisingly, estimates from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Multifactor
Productivity Program suggest that educational attainment may not be as important for economic
growth as the recent focus on education and skills implies. The BLS data indicate that changes
in the composition of the labor force, largely due to education, accounted for only a small
fraction (7%) of the growth in labor productivity in the U.S. private business sector over the
period 1995 to 2007 (the last year before the Great Recession). Robert Solow famously
remarked in 1987 that “you can see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity
statistics”; in the current context, one might say that we can see the revolution in educational
attainment everywhere but in the productivity statistics.
       Acemoglu and Autor (2012) have questioned how education can have played only a
relatively small role in the growth of the economy, given the knowledge-intensive nature of the
information revolution. Indeed, there is a large literature on the importance of education as a
source of economic growth and on the importance of skill-biased technical change. However,
most of this analysis does not stray far from a production-function formulation of the problem
and an emphasis on marginal productivities and factor substitutability.
       The approach taken in this paper builds on the contributions of Acemoglu and Autor
(2011, 2012), who focus on the role of skills and education at the task and occupations levels of
the production process, with the goal of linking the growth in complex non-routine skills to skill-
biased technical change. The activity-analysis model of this paper also starts at the micro level
of production, but focuses on the substitution possibilities among inputs; the goal is to show
how limited substitution possibilities within the production techniques of an activity can lead to a
much greater role for skill development and education than that implied by the neoclassical BLS
approach, even though both use virtually the same growth accounting methods. The basic idea is
that the choice of technique determines the nature of the inputs required, and once a technique is
adopted, substitution possibilities among the inputs are typically quite limited (accountants are



                                                                                                    2
not substitutes for neurosurgeons). The skills necessary for each type of activity come embodied
in people, in part via their educational preparation, and access to people with the necessary skills
and education becomes a critical factor enabling structural change and economic growth.
Conversely, an inadequate supply of skilled workers with the requisite skills can serve as a drag
on growth. Education provides a pool of general cognitive and occupational expertise, and in
some cases, specific vocational skills, from which firms can draw the workers they need. It is
hard to imagine the economy of 2017 operating with a pool of workers in which less than half
had a high school degree, as in 1960, and less than 10% had a college degree.
       These points are developed in greater detail in the sections that follow. The Solow
neoclassical growth accounting model used by BLS is described in Section II, along with a
critique of the theory underpinning its labor force composition adjustment in Section III. This is
followed, in Section IV, by the activity-analysis framework proposed in this paper. The fixed-
proportion nature of the framework is described and illustrated using several examples. This
“necessary input” model is contrasted with the aggregate production function approach, with
special attention to its implication for skills and education. A sources-of-growth framework
based on the activity analysis model is derived, and shown to be essentially equivalent to the
neoclassical version of the growth accounting model. This result allows the BLS growth
accounting estimates to be given a different interpretation, one that assigns a greater importance
to labor skills and education than the conventional approach. The three sections that follow
Section IV are empirical, and examine the evidence on the trends in labor and capital to see if
they are consistent with the predictions of the activity-analysis framework. Section V traces the
growing importance of higher educational attainment, higher order cognitive and non-cognitive
skills, and professional occupations and employment over the last half century. Section VI looks
at the parallel development in the growth in Information and Communications Technology
equipment (ICT) and intangible knowledge capital like R&D. Sources-of-growth estimates
expanded to include intangible capital are presented in Section VII, and interpreted in light of the
activity-analysis framework. A final section sums up.

                        II. The Neoclassical Growth Accounting Model

Many factors affect the growth of GDP, including labor and its skills but also capital formation
and technical change. Any general assessment of the contribution of labor skills and education



                                                                                                     3
should therefore be framed in the context of all of the relevant factors. The main empirical
framework that does this is the neoclassical growth accounting model developed by Solow
(1957) and greatly extended by Jorgenson and Griliches (1967), who laid the groundwork for the
official productivity program at the BLS.
       Neoclassical growth models share a common feature: they are rooted in the assumption
of an aggregate production function relating aggregate outputs to the factor inputs of aggregate
labor and capital, with a shift term that allows for changes in the productivity of the inputs: Yt =
F(Kt,Lt,t). In describing the role of the shift term in the function, Solow states:
   “The variable t for time appears in F to allow for technical change. It will be seen that I am
   using the phrase ‘technical change’ as a short-hand expression for any kind of shift in the
   production function. Thus slowdowns, speed-ups, improvements in the education of the labor
   force, and all sorts of things will appear as "technical change." (p. 312)

In its most succinct form, the aggregate formulation combines various types of capital into a
single total K, and different types of labor into a single L. Once formed, they are treated as
substitutes, implying that the same amount of output can be produced by different combinations
of capital and labor.
       The basic sources-of-growth model is derived from an aggregate production function
which is assumed to exhibit constant returns to scale in capital and labor, and Hicks’-neutral
productivity change as reflected in a shift term At. Under the further assumption that capital and
labor are paid the value of their marginal products, the resulting Yt =AtF(Kt,Lt) can be
differentiated with respect to time to give the sources of growth equation:
                        .∗     .∗      .∗    .∗
       (1)              y = sK k + sL  + a .

Dots over variables indicate rates of growth and time subscripts are dropped for ease of
exposition. This formulation decomposes the growth rate of output into the growth rates of the
inputs, weighted by their respective output elasticities (as proxied by income shares), and the
growth in the productivity with which the inputs are used (total factor productivity, or TFP). The
former is interpreted as a movement along the production function and the latter, as a shift. Both
processes are assumed to occur smoothly. All the elements of this equation except the last term
can be measured using data on prices and quantities, or assumptions about parameters like
capital depreciation. This allows the productivity variable to be measured as a residual.




                                                                                                     4
       There is no specific provision for the contributions of education or skills in the basic
formulation. This issue was addressed by Jorgenson and Griliches (1967), who proposed a
version of the production function that allowed for different types of labor, differentiated by
worker characteristics like education, which have different wage rates and marginal products.
The production function then becomes Y = A F(K,L(H1, … ,HN)), where the Hi’s are the hours
worked in each of the N categories, total hours are H = Σi Hi, and L(•) is a function that
aggregates the N groups into an index of total labor input. The growth rate of L is the share-
weighted contribution of each group’s hours to total hours, where the sHi are each group’s share
of total labor income:

                            ∗        ∗          N         ∗   ∗        ∗
       (2)                  = h +         ∑s
                                            i=1
                                                    Hi   ( h i - h ) = h + qLC .


The growth rate of labor input is thus the sum of the growth rate of total unweighted hours plus
the labor composition effect, qLC. The associated growth equation is then
                                .∗         .∗            .∗       .∗       .∗
       (3)                      y = sK k + sL h + sL qLC + a .

The variable qLC records the effect on output of a shift in worker hours among groups with
different output elasticities (cum factor shares), and is positive when the composition of the labor
force shifts toward higher productivity groups. In practice, multiple worker characteristics are
included in the index.
       It is this framework that produced the BLS estimates, cited in the introduction, that show
qLC accounted for only 7% of labor productivity growth in the private business sector over the
period 1995 to 2007. The overall composition effect is dominated by the education effect, and
the 7% estimate reflects the combined effect of the increase in the wage share of the educated (its
weight in qLC) and the growth rate of educational attainment as reflected in the H’s. Estimates
reported at the end of this paper also show an acceleration in the qLC effect in the 1970s, and a
slowdown in the late 1990s averaging 7% for the period 1995-2007.

                                         III. A Choice of Parables

The relatively small contribution of education in recent years seems inconsistent with the growth
of the knowledge economy. Indeed, Hanushek and Woessmann (2015) begin their book on The
Knowledge Capital of Nations with the statement that “knowledge is the key to economic


                                                                                                    5
growth” and go on to note the positive correlation between educational attainment and income
per capita in a cross-sectional comparison of countries. Acemoglu and Autor (2012) have also
expressed their reservations, as noted above. Since it is hard to imagine the complex
technologies and capital of the digital revolution being operated with a work force equipped with
only the most rudimentary cognitive skills and knowledge, it therefore seems appropriate to
examine the sources-of-growth framework more closely to see what features of the model might
lead to that result.
        Solow himself recognized the simplification involved when he began his classic 1957
paper with “it takes something more than a ‘willing suspension of disbelief’ to talk seriously of
the aggregate production function”, and, in his 1987 Nobel Laureate Lecture, “I would be happy
if you were to accept that [growth accounting results] point to a qualitative truth and give
perhaps some guide to orders of magnitude” (Solow (1988), p. xxii). Writing in defense of the
aggregate approach, Samuelson (1962) argues that it is a parable whose purpose is insight
building (more on this below).
        Parables are neither inherently right nor wrong, just more or less useful for illustrating
some underlying truth. The growth accounting model has enjoyed great success for its insights
into the general contours of economic growth. However, the aggregate model may be more
successful in describing overall economic growth than in characterizing structural economic
change and the implied role of education. The problem is that some of the assumptions
underlying the neoclassical model require a particularly large suspension of disbelief. The first
is the one-sector nature of the aggregate production function, Yt = F(Kt(•),Lt(•),t). The single
product, Yt, is a macroeconomic surrogate for the many products actually produced, and the
surrogate aggregate production is a methodological parable for summarizing the complex
processes that contribute to their production. This formulation is a useful, indeed, essential, part
of the conceptual framework that underpins the aggregate circular-flow of products and
payments that characterize the macro economy. However, its usefulness is questionable for
addressing issues concerning changes in the structure of the flows that make up the aggregate --
in the composition of Yt -- and the corresponding changes in the allocation of resources that are
evident in Figure 2.
        A more general representation of the structure of production is needed in order to deal
with these structural issues. A step in this direction can be made by formulating the production



                                                                                                     6
problem in terms of the production possibility frontier, ɸ[(Y1,t,...,Y,.t);Kt(•),Lt(•),t]]. In this
formulation, the collection of outputs at any point in time, (Y1,t, ... , Ym,t), is produced by
aggregate capital, Kt(•), whose components are categories of capital identified by type and
industry of use, and aggregate labor, Lt(•), whose components are categories of labor identified
by their characteristics (including education) and industry of use. The technology shifter t is
included to allow for increases in the efficiency with which labor and capital are used, although
individual efficiency parameters Ai.t might be used instead (or the factor augmentation
equivalents). Underlying the PPF are separate industry production functions for each sectoral
output, Yi.t = Fi(Ki.t(•),Li.t (•),t). 3
         The multiproduct way of looking at the structure of production has an important
implication for studying the importance of skills and education: a movement along the
production possibility frontier not only changes the composition of output, it shifts the
composition of the inputs required to produce the output. With these shifts come changes in the
required composition of labor skills. This means that a change in the mix of skills may occur
without technical change, as for example, when the movement along ɸ is caused by changes in
the structure of consumer preferences or changes brought about by a shift in the pattern of global
trade, or by non-unitary income elasticities. Indeed, aggregate output along the PPF may be
unchanged. 4
         Then there is the question of technical change. This is represented in the conventional
aggregate formulation as a shift in the production function holding inputs constant (or, a similar
shift in the PPF). This convention implicitly views all technical change in terms of increases in
the productivity of the input base, or “process innovation”. This kind of innovation has made
important contributions to economic growth during the course of the information revolution, but
it is not the only kind of technical change, nor necessarily the most important. Innovation in new
or improved products has also played a central role in the revolution. 5

3
  The assumptions required to move from the individual sectoral production functions, Yi,t = Fi(Ki,t(•),Li,t (•),t), to
an exact form of the aggregate production function, Yt = F(Kt (•),Lt (•),t), are very restrictive.
4
  The sources-of growth equation (1) is, formally, a Divisia Index (Hulten (1973)). A movement along the PPF
frontier ɸ from one point to another involves line integration that does not change the value of the output index (the
invariance property).
5
  Data from the National Science Foundation’s Business R&D and Innovation Survey (BRDIS) suggest that
process-oriented business R&D is a small share of the total, accounting for only 15% of the $224 billion in domestic
R&D paid for by companies (Wolfe (2012)). The rest is for product development, though some of the new products


                                                                                                                          7
        Product innovation changes the mix of outputs (Y1.t,...,Ym.t) over time. Improved goods
appear and ultimately displace their older counterparts, others drop out because of a lack of
demand, while new goods enter the market. In the process, a new vector appears,
(Y1,t+1t,...,Ym+k,t+1), with a product list expanded by k to allow for new items. The list of
individual product functions is expanded accordingly, but with Yi.t+1 = 0 for displaced goods.
The individual production functions for the new or improved goods may have a different set of
skill requirements than those they displace. Evidence suggests that this was, indeed, the case
during the information revolution, during which the growth in digital-economy goods has led to
increases in the demand for more cognitively complex skills sets. However, it is important to
note that, while the technology for producing the new goods became more complex and required
more complex skills, the main impetus behind the increased demand for these skills was product
innovation and not skill-biased process innovation.
        Two further suspensions of disbelief are also needed. The first involves the assumption
that the capital and labor are paid the values of their marginal products, thus allowing income
shares to be used as a proxy for the underlying output elasticities in the sources-of-growth
formulation. This is a very strong assumption, mainly defensible as a macroeconomic
approximation. Prices may well deviate from marginal products due to monopolistic pricing,
labor market rigidities, discrimination, and cyclical fluctuations in economic activity. Moreover,
the marginal social return to education may exceed the marginal private return implied by market
wages because of externalities of the type noted by Lucas (1988), a point elaborated in a
subsequent section.
        Second, the existence of separate aggregate labor and capital entities, L(•) and K(•), and
of a unique qLC, requires the assumption of weak separability in the aggregate production
function. This, in turn, requires the marginal rate of substitution between one type of labor and
another to be independent of the amount and composition of aggregate capital (Hulten (1973)).
This is a mathematical proposition, but in economic terms, it means that if a worker in a lower
education category acquires a higher degree in pursuit of a wage premium, output will increase
without any change in capital or technology. This is problematic because those workers with


are inputs to the production process (capital-embodied technical change, for example, or improved materials). The
fraction of R&D devoted primarily to new consumer goods is not reported.




                                                                                                                    8
higher educational attainment often do, indeed usually, end up in jobs or occupations with more
complex technological requirements and capital. Simply educating more people will not, all else
held equal, necessarily result in a significant increase in output, a point that will be elaborated in
the activity-analysis model developed in the section that follows.

                         IV. The Activity-Analysis Approach to Production
                                          A. The Model

A close examination of the neoclassical model of production thus suggests that it may not
capture the full effects of education buried in the underlying complexity of “reality”. Indeed,
one of the founders of the neoclassical aggregate approach, Paul Samuelson, has indeed
”insisted” in his 1962 paper on “Parable and Realism in Capital Theory” that
        “capital theory can be rigorously developed without using any Clark-like concept of
        aggregate ‘capital’, instead relying upon a complete analysis of a great variety of
        heterogeneous physical capital goods and processes through time. Such an analysis leans
        heavily on the tools of modern linear and more general programming and might therefore
        be called neo-neo-classical. It takes the view that if we are to understand the trends in
        how incomes are distributed among different kinds of labor and different kinds of
        property owners, both in the aggregate and in the detailed composition, then studies of
        changing technologies, human and natural resources availabilities, taste patterns, and all
        the other matters of microeconomics are likely to be very important” (p. 193).

This is essentially the view taken in this paper. But, he goes on to say:

        “At the same time in various places I have subjected to detailed exposition certain
        simplified models involving only a few factors of production. Because of a Gresham's
        Law that operates in economics, one's easier expositions get more readers than one's
        harder. And it is partly for this reason that such simple models or parables do, I think,
        have considerable heuristic value in giving insights into the fundamentals of interest
        theory in all its complexities” (p. 193),

The tension between the two perspectives over the appropriate level of analysis is central to the
objections against the neoclassical production function and the concept of aggregate capital
raised during the Cambridge Controversies of the 1950s and 1960s (Harcourt (1969)). 6


6
   Opposition to the aggregate production function and the neoclassical view of economic growth has a long history,
and is by no means limited to the Cambridge Controversies. It is also present in the literatures on organizational
theory, the importance of institutions in economic history, and in Schumpeterian analysis. Nelson and Winter
(1962) provide an in-depth analysis of the evolutionary nature of the process of economic growth that focuses on the
firm and its activities, and the skills and competence of its workers. The activity analysis model sketched in this
paper is rooted in this view of the firm.



                                                                                                                  9
         Given these questions and those that have been raised about the size of the neoclassical
labor composition effect, it seems reasonable to take a closer look at the micro foundations of the
aggregate production framework, essentially disaggregating it to get at its “primitive” activity-
analysis level. When approached at this foundational level, many of the issues raised in this
paper can be addressed, particularly those involving the way labor-skills interact with capital to
make educational attainment necessary for many activities. The “old fashioned” activity-
analysis model is well-suited to this task. 7
         Where the neoclassical model offers a succinct and mathematically viable way of
summarizing the supply-side of the economy, the activity analysis is neither succinct nor
mathematically convenient. It does provide a more detailed look into the underlying processes
of growth and the shifting demands for the various skills and types of capital required by
different production techniques. It treats the firm and its various activities, not the aggregate
production function, as the fundamental unit of analysis for studying the shifting demand for
different types of labor and capital.
         An activity is defined in this paper as an operational segment of a firm that has an
identifiable output or outcome produced by a technique that specifies a certain mix of inputs.
What gives the activity-analysis parable its distinctive feature is the assumption that the inputs
are combined in a fixed proportion. This assumption implies that there is no substitution among
inputs, so each input is necessary for the activity, and it thus contrasts strongly with the
assumption of input substitutability in the neoclassical parable. A firm may operate several
activities simultaneously, as, for example, both production and non production (or overhead)
activities, or the activities of multiple establishments within the firm, each producing a different
product. In light of the model of Acemoglu and Autor (2011), it is worth noting that the way the
labor input functions within an activity may involve a specific set of tasks requiring a specific set
of skills. 8

7
  Activity analysis has had a long and honorable, though somewhat neglected, history. It was well positioned, in the
early 1950s, to become the dominant supply-side paradigm for the economy. The 1951 Cowles Commission
conference volume, Activity Analysis of Production and Allocation, edited by Tjalling C. Koopmans, contains
papers authored by four future Nobel Laureates in Economics. Yet, it was neoclassical growth theory that prevailed
over the next two decades.
8
  In their framework, a task is defined as a unit of work activity that produces an output. This use of the term
“activity” in the context of job performance differs from the way an activity is conceived of in this paper, which
involves a fixed-proportions technology that may encompass many separate tasks and types of input. However, the
task-based activity of Acemoglu and Autor and the production-based activity approach are mutually consistent and


                                                                                                                 10
         The following example illustrates the issues involved. A given amount of earth can be
moved using different techniques: one technique uses a few skilled operators equipped with
expensive bulldozers, the other uses many manual workers each equipped with cheap shovels. In
the aggregate representation of these different techniques, the “neoclassical” form of the
technology for earth-moving would be Y=AF(KH,KL,HS,HU), or the factor augmentation
equivalent (the capital subscripts denote “higher technology bulldozers” and “lower technology
shovels”, and “skilled” and “unskilled” for the labor subscripts). In order to speak of aggregate
capital, K, and labor, L, this production function must have the previously noted separable form,
which in this case is Y=A F(K(KH ,KL),L(HS ,HU)). The different types of labor are substitutable
among each other within the labor aggregate L(•), as are the different types of capital within K(•),
and the aggregates themselves are substitutable along an isoquant connecting K and L. The
isoquant QQ shown in Figure 3A allows for this substitution, which occurs as the movement
along the isoquant from A to B as relative factor prices change from aa to bb. The broken L-
shaped lines represent two activities that use different techniques for producing the same amount
of output, Y, and illustrate the putty-putty model of neoclassical analysis in which the isoquant is
the envelope of the various activities. 9
         As portrayed in Figure 3A, activity analysis is consistent with the aggregate production
function as long as aggregate capital is treated as a homogeneous malleable entity that represents
forgone consumption valued at investment cost. While this is a useful macroeconomic way of
looking at capital and technology -- Samuelson’s surrogate production function -- it glosses
over the technical differences between shovels and bulldozers and the skill differences between
the workers. It is therefore not a helpful framework for studying how the choice of technique
affects the demand for skilled labor.
         Figure 3B illustrates the “clay-clay” version of activity analysis in which different types
of capital work with the requisite labor and skills and cannot be substituted across or within an
activity. This implies that the separate inputs should not be combined using the K(KH ,KL) and


can operate simultaneously, although the former is used to motivate aggregate skill biased technical change, with the
implication that the BLS sources-of growth estimates understate the role of complex-skill development, while
activity analysis in this paper is used to motivate the “necessary input” framework that also implies that the role of
complex-skill development is understated, though it operates through a different channel.
9
  There is a putty-clay variant in the model which applies when investments are irreversible in the short run and
capital can only be changed as it depreciates.



                                                                                                                    11
L(HS ,HU) parings of the aggregate production function approach, but instead by the functional
pairings a(KL ,HU) and b(KH ,HS). This is represented in Figure 3B by the broken L-shaped lines
showing the two techniques for producing the same amount of output, Y. However, while both
techniques produce the same kind (and amount) of output, the inputs on the axes refer to
different types of capital and labor. One implication is that the factor price lines aa and bb refer
to different input prices. Moreover, the strict complementarity of the techniques implies that the
ratios of the marginal products of the different types of capital and labor are not well-defined and
variations in the wage-rental cannot affect the input ratio. Thus, if the wage rate increases, there
can be no substitution of capital for labor within a technique.
       An important implication for this paper is that a shift in techniques from a(KL ,HU) to
b(KH ,HS) cannot occur without a shift from unskilled to skilled workers and from less to more
technologically sophisticated capital (which is to say, there is no substitution along the isoquant
of a surrogate production function). In this particular case, a deficiency of skilled workers will
slow or prevent the adoption of the b(KH ,HS) technology. It is also possible, in a more
sophisticated rendering of the model, that a deficiency of workers with a particular skill set could
induce innovation designed to compensate for the deficiency (the Habakkuk thesis), but the
larger point is that in order for a firm to actually operate the activity b(KH ,HS), access to both KH
and HS in the right proportions is necessary.
       Figure 3C adds yet another complication. The activities in the first two figures represent
different techniques for producing the same type of output. This is not a good assumption to
apply to all activities in an era with a high rate of product innovation because switching from one
quality, or model, of output to another often involves a switch in the way the goods are produced
and in the inputs required. For example, in summarizing their study of new IT-enhanced
machinery, Bartel, Ichniowski, and Shaw (2007) make the following points:

  “First, plants that adopt new IT-enhanced equipment also shift their business strategies by
  producing more customized valve products. Second, new IT investments improve the
  efficiency of all stages of the production process by reducing setup times, run times, and
  inspection times. The reductions in setup times are theoretically important because they make
  it less costly to switch production from one product to another and support the change in
  business strategy to more customized production. Third, adoption of new IT-enhanced capital
  equipment coincides with increases in the skill requirements of machine operators, notably
  technical and problem-solving skills, and with the adoption of new human resource practices
  to support these skills.”



                                                                                                     12
The ability to customize output to suit the needs of the buyer represents an important change in
product quality, and is linked, in this case, to increased skill requirements. The advent of the
automatic teller machine, a labor saving device from the standpoint of production, is another
example of how the quality of a product was also improved, in this case by making money
accessible at all times of day or night. These examples are illustrated in Figure 3C by activity-
specific output indexes.
                                       B. Aggregation and Dynamics

The activities as portrayed in Figures 3A, 3B, and 3C illustrate the logic of the activity-analysis
model. From an operational standpoint, activities are generally combined to form a larger set
that constitute the production plan of a firm. In formal terms, the technology of a firm j can be
characterized at any point in time by the activity set Aj,t, whose elements are the totality of
activities it operates {ai,j,t(Ki,j,t ,Hi,j,t ,Mi,j,t)}. An output or outcome is associated with each
activity, although much of the output is delivered to other activities within the firm (e.g.,
overhead and different stages of production along an assembly line). The vector Mi,j,t is added to
allow for the presence of intermediate goods produced and used within the firm, but also the
intermediate inputs acquired externally. The set {ai,j,t(Ki,j,t,Hi,j,t ,Mi,j,t)} is thus a disaggregated
representation of the firm’s technology, but it is not, strictly speaking, a neoclassical production
function relating total output to aggregated inputs. 10
         The firm is the organizational entity responsible for choosing the appropriate mix and
level of activities for Aj,t from a larger set of possible techniques. Selecting the right mix and
level of activities is an essential organizational function of the firm, and once the selection has
been made, the capital requirements of the firm {Ki,j,t} and staffing needs {Hi,j,t} are determined.
Prescott and Visscher (1980) point to the acquisition and proper use of human capital as centrally
important for the success of an organization, and Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) have pointed to
the importance of good managers and management practices. The role of human agency can
sometimes get lost in the formal mathematical presentation of the various models.


10
   As previously noted, the conditions for exact functional aggregation are extremely stringent. The analytics of the
aggregation of multiple outputs in the presence of intermediate goods can be found in Hulten (1978). And, other
aspects of the aggregation problem makes exact aggregation even more difficult (e.g., the separability also noted
previously).



                                                                                                                  13
        Firms can be grouped into industries for purposes of analysis, though again, there are
aggregation issues. Indeed, many are similar to those encountered when aggregating the
internally generated “output” of activities within firms, but with the additional complication
posed by different ways of classifying industries (the company versus establishment problem).
However, these difficulties are not germane to the main interests of this paper, so we simply
group firm-level activities into industry-level activities (however industry is defined), and then
into an aggregate economy-wide activity set At whose elements include the totality of all
activities, {ai,t(Ki,t ,Hi,t,Mi,t)}. The significance of this formulation for the problem at hand is
that, at any point in time, the total capital requirements {Ki,t} and staffing needs {Hi,t} of the
economy are determined by the choice of activities at the firm level, the diversity of activities
across firms in an industry, and the diversity of industries in the larger economy.
        The mix of activities and skills can and does change over time, as witnessed by the
structural changes in the economy evident in Figures 1 and 2. This structural change is the
visible result of the shifting composition of the aggregate activity set At occurring in response to
the revolution in information and communication technology and the globalization of the world
economy. New or improved products have made older goods obsolete, new processes and
activities within firms have replaced older techniques, and new forms of product distribution
have displaced older outlets. New firms and industries have appeared in this process of creative
destruction, while older industries have declined and firms exited their industry or reinvented
themselves. The changes occurring in At have also changed the demands for labor and capital.
This has meant a larger demand for those higher-order skills, occupations, and education that
have been made necessary by the information revolution. One of the major implications of the
activity analysis framework, as it is set out above, is that the observed structural changes could
not have occurred without the parallel development of the appropriate skills. In other words, the
“necessary input” way of looking at structural change implies that skill development and the
associated contribution of education is an organic part of the dynamic evolution of the changing
economy.
        Education also contributes to this evolution in another way. Much of the underlying
innovation originates within firms through activities like R&D, product design, and strategic
planning. Much of the innovation that drives the dynamics of firms and the economy comes in
the form of product innovation. These activities are education-intensive (Nelson and Phelps



                                                                                                       14
(1966)), and some of the innovation may come in response to chronic deficits in some skill areas
(e.g., process automation). And, even when innovation does not originate in the firm, it is
implemented and sustained by the efforts of its management. The activities, and the people that
operate them, endogenize the innovation process (as in Romer (1986, 1990)), and, in turn, create
a demand for the skills and occupations of the digital economy.
        However, it is also important to stress (once more) that education by itself is not
sufficient for creating more output growth. Moreover, it should also be noted that, while
technical change and globalization have shifted the structure of activities toward those that
require more complex skills, there are still activities that do not require higher levels of
educational attainment (indeed, the large majority do not, as we will see in a subsequent section).
The activity-analysis framework focuses on the necessity of the appropriate skills for the activity
at hand, and this applies to the full range of activities in operation at any point in time, not just to
those involving more complex labor skills.

                            C. Activities and the Measurement of GDP

An output is associated with each activity in a firm’s activity set, Aj,t, even though some are
shadow outputs delivered to other activities within the firm. The value of the output sold
externally (intermediate and other) can be measured using market transaction prices and the
resulting revenue divided between deliveries to final demand and deliveries to intermediate
demand. This yields the accounting equation Pi,tQi,t = Pi,t QDi,t + Σj Pi,t QMi,j,t, where QMi,j,t is the
delivery of the intermediate good from activity i to the other activities, and QDi,t is the external
output delivered to final demand (for a one product firm). GDP is then defined as the summation
across deliveries to final demand, giving GDPt = Σi Pi,t QDi,t .
        On the input side, the cost of the inputs acquired externally -- labor, capital, and
intermediate inputs – can be summed to arrive at total cost, and this can be divided into the value
added of labor and capital, on the one hand, and the cost of acquiring intermediate inputs on the
other: Ci,t = PKi,tKi,t + PLi,t Li,t + Σj P j,t QMi,j,t. Gross Domestic Income is then the sum of the
value added components, yielding: GDIt = Σi PKi,t Ki,t + Σi PLi,t Li,t . Because the production and
use of intermediate inputs cancel out, the value of aggregate output equals the value of aggregate
factor income in each year, or, GDPt equals GDIt.




                                                                                                        15
         Of what significance is this accounting result for the issues of importance to this paper?
It can be used to show that the growth accounting results of BLS do not depend on the existence
of Solow’s aggregate neoclassical production function. The sources-of-growth decomposition in
equation (1) can be derived directly from the accounting identities of the preceding paragraph
that equates GDP and GDI, but only when each side of this equation is expressed in “real”
inflation-corrected terms (that is, when nominal prices are replaced with a base-year price index).
When this is done, GDP0,t = Σi Pi,0 QDi,t and GDI0,t = Σi PKi,0 Ki,t + Σi PLi,0 Li,t. where , GDP0,t
and GDI0,t are real GDP and real GDI in year t expressed in base-year prices. The base-year
final demand price indexes, PDi,0, and base-year factor prices, PKi,0 and PLi,0, may have different
time trends, and real GDP0,t does not in general equal real GDI0,t , except in the base year. In
other years, there is a wedge between the two that gives rise to a version of TFP. In its most
general formulation, TFP is defined as the ratio of output per unit of total factor input, or equally,
the ratio of real GDP to real GDI.: At = GDP0,t/GDI0,t = Σi Pi,0 QDi,t /[ Σi PKi,0 Ki,t + Σi PLi,0 Li,t ].
This, indeed, was the way growth accounting was formulated prior to Solow’s 1957 paper
(Hulten (2001)). 11 The larger point is that the neoclassical production function approach is not
necessary for the BLS-like growth accounting results to be obtained, and it is not the only way
the TFP results can be interpreted, particularly those relating to the role of skills and education.

                   V. Structural Changes in Education, Skills, and Occupations

The preceding sections are largely technical in nature. The three sections that follow are
empirical, and make use of the existing literature to examine the evidence on the trends in labor
and capital to see if they are consistent with the predictions of the activity-analysis framework.
The third of these sections shows the results of a version of the sources-of-growth account
expanded to include intangible capital, and interprets the role of skills and education in light of
the “necessary input” activity-analysis model.




11
   What Solow did in his 1957 paper was to provide an interpretation of the growth accounting ratio by assuming
the existence of an aggregate production function, Y = AF(K,L), in which case At = Yt /F(Kt,Lt). Solow’s
formulation of TFP is thus a special case of the more general formulation, one that summarizes and interprets the
messy world of the full activity set, At, but also one that loses sight of the messy way activities are organized and the
way different inputs and their characteristics actually relate to one another.



                                                                                                                      16
                                          A. Educational Attainment

A look back over the last half century reveals major changes in the educational status of the U.S.
population and work force. In 1960, only 40% of the non-institutionalized population 25 or
older had a high school degree or more, and only 8% had college degree, according to 2015 CPS
estimates; by 1985, these figures rose to 74% and 19%; and by 2013, almost 90% of this
population had at least a high school degree, and more than 30% had at least a bachelor’s degree.
Similar numbers are reported in Valletta (forthcoming) on an employment basis. From 1980 to
2015, the portion of the employed with a high school degree or more went from 80% to 90%;
those with a four-year college degree went from 16% to 25%; and those with a graduate degree
went from 7% to 14%. In any case, there has been a significant and on-going increase in
educational attainment over the last three to five decades. Valletta also reports that the increase
may have slowed in recent years. 12
         Many have noted that the growth in educational attainment coincides with a growth in the
return to a college education (Acemoglu and Autor (2012) provide an excellent in-depth look at
the data and survey of the associated literature). The estimates of Goldin and Katz (2010) show
that the college wage premium relative to a high school degree increased from 40% in 1960 to
almost 60% in 2005, and they attribute this growth to an imbalance in the demand for educated
workers and the supply. 13 Valletta’s estimates of wage-premia are, again, consistent with the
Goldin-Katz results, and they also point to a very large premium for graduate degrees
(particularly professional and doctorate degrees). A rising wage-premia is also consistent with

12
   While the quantity of education, as measured by the growth in degrees, has increased significantly, it should be
recognized that formal schooling is not identical to education or human capital accumulation (e.g., family and peer
environment also matter). There is also an open question about the quality of education. The 2013 NAEP report
card suggests that the literacy and numeracy skills of U.S. 12th graders has been stagnant in recent years, and that a
majority of students are stuck at skill levels that are rated below proficient, with one-quarter of students below
“basic” in reading and one-third below “basic” in mathematics. Similar results were reported in the 2015 NAEP
assessment. Indeed, the proportions have not changed significantly since the inception of the NAEP (1992 for
reading and 2005 for math). American students also lag those in many other countries. The 2013 Programme of
International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC) found that the U.S. ranked 16th of 23 countries in adult
literacy, 21st of 23 countries in numeracy, and 14th of 23 in problem solving. However, the same study also found
that the U.S. stood out from other countries in its propensity to reward those with the highest skills (Broecke et al.
(forthcoming)).
13
   The Goldin-Katz college wage premium reflects an average across those with college degrees. This should not
be confused with the marginal return to further education. Heckman et al. (2016) find that ability is a major
component of observed educational outcome differentials and argue that going to college is not necessarily a wise
choice for everyone.



                                                                                                                    17
an increase in the derived demand for more highly educated workers in conjunction with a
lagged response in the supply of college-educated people. Limited substitution possibilities
between skilled and under-skilled workers in many of the emerging activities of the knowledge
economy were a likely contributing factor. 14

                                   B. Task-Related Skills and Education

Structural changes in the distribution of task-related skills have received a great deal of attention
in recent years, following the publication of Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003). The authors
distinguish between non-routine and routine skills, and manual versus analytical skills, and show
that the non-routine analytical skills have grown in importance in the last five decades at the
expense of the others. An updated version of these results, from Autor and Price (2013), found
that the gap between non-routine cognitive and interpersonal skills and the other categories
(routine and manual) increased from an index of 100 in 1960 to around 150 in 2010. In studying
the college and graduate school wage premia associated with these different skill categories,
Valletta finds a growing premium for all skills, with the largest premia for non-routine cognitive
skills. The premia have increased over time, but have slowed in recent years.
         There is an intuitive similarity between the patterns observed for higher education and
higher-order skills, but the actual situation is more nuanced. Skill levels and education are not
identical, a point often made in the literature. 15 Skills are appropriately defined as adeptness
with respect to a specific task (complex or not), while education is a process though which
information is transferred and capabilities developed. Moreover, it is widely recognized that
education is only one of the channels through which skills are developed, and that other factors
like family background and peer environment, and idiosyncratic factors like health and cognitive
ability, also matter.


14
   The importance of educational externalities noted by Lucas (1988) is worth repeating here. Because of spillover
externalities, the social return to education exceeds the private wage premium, and it is the total return that affects
economic growth.
15
   Cappelli (2015) observes that, “The standard classification of job requirements into ‘knowledge, skills, and
abilities’ reminds us that education, which has served as a proxy for skills in most discussions, only maps onto part
of the “knowledge” category, leaving the other attributes of job requirements out of the picture. There are many
important reasons for being concerned about education, but seeing it as the equivalent of skill is certainly a
mistake.”




                                                                                                                     18
        Data from the recent BLS Occupational Requirements Survey (ORS) support this view.
The ORS develops a metric “Specific Vocational Preparation” (or SVP) that measures the time
spent in skill development, which is described as the time spent in pre-employment training
(formal education and certification and training programs), prior work experience in related jobs,
and the time needed in the job itself to get to average performance (Gittleman, Monaco, and
Nestoriak (forthcoming)). When these three types of preparation are cross-classified with the
actual time requirements, the authors report that post-employment training and prior work
experience are the most important components of SVP, with formal education in third place.
However, for those jobs requiring the highest levels of skills, formal education is in a distant
second place and behind prior work experience.
        That study presents another important finding: those jobs requiring a B.A. degree or
more account for less than 25% of all jobs (or less than 30% using the O*NET educational
classification). It is interesting to note, in this regard, that only about 30 percent of the adult
population has one of these degrees. Gittleman et al. also report that only 15 percent of jobs
were classified in the most complex category. This serves as a warning against an excessive
focus on higher education and complex skills, as well as a reminder that a broad range of skills is
needed for economic activity, and that those at the lower end are both economically and
numerically significant.
        However, while this evidence seems to downplay the importance of a college education,
the ORS study also finds that higher educational attainment is positively correlated with the
complexity of skills and choice of professional occupation. This comes from the part of the
study that looks at three mental and cognitive dimensions of job requirements: “task
complexity”, “work control”, and “regular contacts”. The first is broken into categories ranging
from very complex tasks to very simple; the second into categories ranging from very loose to
very close control; the third ranges from structured and very structured regular contacts to very
unstructured. One of the most interesting features of this analysis is the high correlation among
the higher skill segments of “task complexity”, “work control”, “regular contacts” dimensions, as
well as the higher skill components of educational attainment, SVP, and choice of occupation.
The fit is not perfect, but a high degree of collinearity does suggest that certain regularities exist
that characterize different jobs. Thus, while education is but one of several channels through
which skills and expertise are developed, the collinearity suggests a link between higher



                                                                                                      19
education and higher-order skill sets. The ORS also reports data on the wage-skill gradient
similar to those found in Autor and Handel (2013) and Goldin and Katz, and by Valletta. Those
in jobs with the highest task complex skills, the loosest degree of work control, and the least
structured interactions all earn significantly higher wages than those at the other end of these
scales. 16

                       C. Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics

Developments in science and technology are at the heart of the information revolution and thus
merit a close look. This is all the more important because STEM activities evoke highly
educated workers in research labs and computer facilities working on complex problems.
However, the 2013 study by Rothwell argues that there are actually two STEM economies. One
is a “professional” STEM economy associated with higher education and high levels of
compensation, which “plays a vital function in keeping American businesses on the cutting edge
of technological development and deployment. Its workers are generally compensated extremely
well”. The other STEM economy “draws from high schools, workshops, vocational schools, and
community colleges”, and its members are “less likely to be directly involved in invention, but
they are critical to the implementation of new ideas, and advise researchers on the feasibility of
design options, cost estimates, and other practical aspects of technological development”. They
“produce, install, and repair the products and production machines patented by professional
researchers, allowing firms to reach their markets, reduce product defects, create process
innovations, and enhance productivity”.
         Hanson and Slaughter (forthcoming) report that employment in the STEM professions
has grown from around 3.5% of the total hours worked in the U.S. in 1993 to around 6% in 2013.
In the broader view of STEM employment, Rothwell finds that 20% percent of all 2012 jobs
required a “high level of knowledge in any one STEM field” based on his index of the STEM

16
    Much attention has been given to the importance of cognitive skills. However, recent research has also focused
on the demand for non-cognitive skills, which include characteristics like self-discipline, perseverance,
attentiveness, dependability, orderliness, persistence in the pursuit of long-term goals, and the ability to get along
with others. Non-routine interpersonal skills were found by Autor and Price to have grown in importance relative to
non-routine cognitive skills. Deming (2017) also shows that the labor market increasingly rewards social skills, and
that jobs with high social skill requirements have shown greater relative growth throughout the wage distribution
since 1980. He also observes that the strongest employment and wage growth has occurred in jobs that require both
high levels of hard cognitive skills and soft social skills. The importance of non-cognitive skills is also noted in
Lundberg (2013), Heckman and Kautz (2012).



                                                                                                                   20
skill content of various occupations (up from around 8% in 1900 and around 15% in 1950). He
also finds that half of the STEM jobs are “available to workers without a four-year college
degree”.
       The domestic supply of new professionals to the first STEM “economy” has expanded in
recent years. NCES data on STEM degrees completed show an expansion from 1990 to 2011 in
B.A.s (39% for engineering, a doubling for science/math), in M.A.s (90% for engineering, 87%
science/math), and in Ph.D.s (76% for engineering, 60% science/math)). This domestic growth
in STEM skills has not, however, been sufficient to satisfy the demand for STEM workers.
Hanson and Slaughter report that foreign-born workers currently account for one-half of the
hours worked in STEM occupations among prime-age workers with an advanced degree, up
from one-quarter in the 1990s and one-fifth in the 1980s. In other words, immigration is an
important source of skills that supplements domestic efforts at skill development.

                     VI. Structural Change in the Composition of Capital

The activity-analysis model of Section IV ties labor of various skills to the capital appropriate to
those skills. The preceding section has documented the shift in the distribution of skills toward
more complexity, as well as the occupations that embody them, and linked these shifts to the
growth in educational attainment. This section documents a parallel shift on the capital side,
consistent with the complementarity between capital and labor in the activity-analysis view of
production.
       The last 40 years have seen a significant shift in the composition of investment in the
U.S. private business sector, away from tangible structures and equipment towards investments
in intangible capital. There has also been a shift within tangible capital toward information
technology (ICT) equipment. Intangible capital is highly firm-specific and produced in-house,
and includes such categories as computerized information, innovative property like R&D, and
economic competencies (the categories proposed by Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2005, 2009)).
The first is mainly software, and comprises 13% of the overall intangible investment rate in
2010. Innovative property is a diverse group that includes not only the conventional National
Science Foundation (NSF) type of R&D, with its orientation to science and technology, but also
other important forms of R&D such as investments in artistic originals (books, movies, and
music), development of new financial products, and architectural and engineering designs. The



                                                                                                  21
largest category of intangible capital is economic competencies, divided into brand equity
(advertising, marketing, customer support), firm-specific human capital (worker training), and
organizational structure, a rather amorphous grouping that includes investments in management
and human resource systems, strategic planning, and management consulting. Many of these
intangibles are the source of a firm’s intellectual property.
       The rate of investment in these intangibles over the period 1977 to 2010 is shown in
Figure 4. The rate rose significantly over the period, starting at just over 8% in 1977 and
reaching just under 14% by the end of the period. The growth in importance of this type of
capital is in sharp contrast to the declining rate of tangible capital investment shown in the
figure, falling from the 11% to 13% range in the late 1970s to around 8% by the end of the
period (9.6% in 2007, the last year before the Great Recession). The overall trends reflect the
decision by many companies to move up the global value-chain to higher valued added activities
like product design and marketing, all overhead activities, as well as the decline in tangible
capital-intensive manufacturing. It is interesting to note that the overall rate of investment,
tangible and intangible combined, remained relatively constant over the period, heightening the
importance of structural change for understanding dynamic changes in the economy, and not just
the growth of the economy.
       When the rate of investment of ICT capital is broken out of total tangible capital in
Figure 4 and shown separately, the ICT investment share is seen to have doubled between the
mid 1970s and mid 1980s, then remained relatively constant, and then surged again in the late
1990s before falling back to its post-1980 trend (while the intangible rate continued to increase,
though at a much slower pace). However, these patterns do not tell the whole story. While the
investment rate of the non-ICT tangible category (not shown) has declined in relative importance
in recent years, this category of capital is far from technologically stagnant. The digital
revolution has found its way into such non-ICT tangible capital goods as autos and trucks,
medical equipment, and machine tools (recall the 2007 paper by Bartel et al.), as well into some
structures. The extent to which technology is embodied in capital is hard to determine, but my
own rather dated estimate found a large embodiment effect for the period 1947-1983: the
unadjusted annual growth rate of equipment, as estimated by the BLS, was 4.4%, while the
quality-adjusted rate calculated in the paper was 7.3% (Hulten 1992)). The BEA does make a




                                                                                                  22
quality adjustment to some types of equipment, with those for computing equipment and
software being notably large.
         The time path of the intangible investment rate is shown again in Figure 5, with the 1960
value indexed to 100 in order to facilitate comparison with education and skill indicators. The
four variables included in this figure -- the rate of intangible investment, “expert” industry
employment, the college wage premium, and the Autor-Price gap between non-routine cognitive
and non-cognitive skills, each indexed to an initial 100 - all show upward trends. The visible
association of these trends over the course of the information revolution is far from dispositive,
but it does not require much of Solow’s suspension of disbelief to recognize in the aggregate data
that which is readily apparent at the level of the research lab, corporate headquarters, or the plant
floor.

                              VII. Growth Accounting and Activity Analysis

                       A. The Sources of Growth Model with Intangible Capital

What does the importance of intangible capital, skills and education in the activity analysis
parable imply for the sources of growth? While neoclassical and activity-analysis models
operate through different economic mechanisms, the sources-of-growth estimates associated with
the former are consistent with those of the latter, as discussed in Section IV. The conventional
BLS sources of growth estimates can thus be interpreted in light of either model. When this is
done, the activity analysis reinterpretation assigns a much greater role to education.
         The sources-of-growth estimates of this paper are shown in Table 1. Unlike the
conventional BLS growth accounts, the estimates of this table include the list of intangibles
studied by Corrado, Hulten and Sichel (2009). 17 The expanded growth rate of output per hour in
the U.S. Private Business sector over the period 1948 to 2007 (the last year before the financial
crisis) is decomposed into the contributions of tangible and intangible capital per labor hour,
labor composition, and TFP growth. 18 The top panel shows the percent contribution of the first


17
   The estimates shown in Table 1 are based on Corrado and Hulten (2010) and updates. When the list of inputs is
expanded to include the stock of intangible capital, the concept of output must be expanded to include the
corresponding output of intangible investment.
18
   When interpreting the capital-labor ratios in Table 1 in terms of activity analysis, it is important to recognize that
the table involves the ratio of different types of capital to total labor input; in the case of intangible capital, R, this is
R/L. This is not the ratio relevant for the activity analysis interpretation, which is, instead, the ratio of intangible


                                                                                                                           23
four to the growth in output per hour, measured as the growth rate of each multiplied by its
income share, with TFP measured as a residual. It is apparent that the sources of growth
changed appreciably over the course of the whole period. The contribution of intangible capital
increased almost threefold (10% to 27%) from the first sub-period, 1948-1973, to the last, 1995-
2007. ICT capital experienced a similar proportionate increase (4% to 13%) and the combined
contribution was 40% in the last period. TFP’s contribution fell from 60% to 42%. Labor
composition enjoyed a “boom” in the middle period that saw its contribution increase three-fold
to 17%, but this fell back to 7% during the last period. 19
         Figure 6 presents these trends in an annual time series format. The annual growth rate of
output per hour, shown at the top of the figure, follows a generally declining, but volatile, path.
The same is true of the TFP growth path below it, with the volatility of the former reflected in
the latter (no surprise, since TFP is measured as a residual). The growing importance in
knowledge capital deepening via intangibles is evident, increasing to the point where its
contribution to growth rivals that of the declining TFP trend. The relatively small contribution of
labor quality is also shown, indicating an upward surge in the 1980s, before falling back during
the 1990s.
         The neoclassical interpretation of Table 1 and Figure 6 suggests an important role for
capital deepening via the substitution of capital for labor, and a relatively small role for labor
composition change. The activity-analysis interpretation suggests a different view of the matter,
one that interprets the same patterns in terms of the structural change in the composition of
activities. In this alternative view, the large contributions of intangible and ICT capital per
worker hour evident in this table (and in Figure 6) were enabled by the growth in educational


capital to the labor actually used with intangible capital, R/Lr. The former is related to the latter by the equation R/L
= (R/Lr)(Lr/L). In pure activity analysis, R/Lr is given by the technology, and any growth in the ratio is zero.
Growth in R/L, as seen in Table 1, must therefore reflect a change in the employment ratio, Lr/L. The data on
employment patterns in Figure 2 show significant growth in the relative shares of both expert service and overhead
organizational services, suggesting that this indeed may have happened. These types of jobs are precisely those
most likely to be used with intangible capital, so it is not implausible that much of the observed change in R/L was
largely due to an increase in Lr/L. However, this is only a surmise, since there is no tight match between different
types of intangible of capital (which are quite heterogeneous) and the requisite types of labor skills (also
heterogeneous). Moreover, R/Lr itself may well have increased during the ICT Revolution as superior types of
intangible and ICT capital entered production and enabled new activities or, alternatively, as the mix of activities
shifted to those with a greater degree of capital intensity.
19
  Given the prominence of R&D spending in discussions of innovation, it is interesting to note the relatively small
(6%) role played by scientific “NSF” R&D from 1995 to 2007.



                                                                                                                      24
attainment, skills, and professional occupations. 20 Indeed, the latter were necessary for the
growth of the former, implying that education’s role in the growth process was almost certainly
much larger than the rather small amount assigned to it by the aggregate approach of neoclassical
growth accounting.
         The contribution of education may be even greater still, since some of its effects may be
suppressed in the residual measure of TFP. There are at least three channels through which this
can happen. One of the most important for this paper is the spillover externalities associated
with an educated workforce identified in Lucas (1988). In his model of economic development,
educated workers interact in ways not captured by private wage premia, leading to a social return
to education that exceeds the private return. The increase in GDP associated with the excess
return is not captured by the measured contribution of labor growth or the labor composition
term, and is thus suppressed into the TFP residual (which is thereby overstated).
         Much the same can be said of R&D spillovers (Romer (1986, 1990)). By its nature,
knowledge is non-rival and subject to diffusion, and the social rate of return may therefore
exceed the private rate of return to the original innovator. Hall et al. (2010) review the literature
on the relative private and social returns to R&D investment and conclude that the latter is
“almost always estimated to be substantially greater than the private returns (p. 1073).” This,
too, is suppressed into the TFP residual. Finally, Acemoglu and Autor (2011, 2012) show that
task-oriented skill-biased technical change may be suppressed into the TFP residual. Where the
conventional Solow model assumes that technical change has the Hicks’-neutral form and is thus
without a factor bias, they show that when there is a bias that favors skilled workers and
occupations, education’s observed contribution to growth may be understated and measured TFP
overstated.




20
   Beaudry et al. (2016) appeal to the link between knowledge capital and college-educated labor as an explanation
for a slowdown in the demand for higher-order skills and higher education after 2000, which they term the “Great
Reversal in the Demand for Skill and Cognitive Tasks”. They attribute the “reversal” to the slowing growth in ICT
equipment and software (which are treated as a general purpose organization technology within the firm). They use
a neoclassical optimization approach in their modeling of the link, and a more limited concept of intangible capital.
The focus of this paper is on the contribution of education and skills to economic growth and productivity, using a
much broader conception of knowledge capital (all intangible capital and ICT equipment) and stocks as well as
flows. The data underlying Figure 6 of this paper indicate that the contributions of ICT equipment and software did
decline after 2000, but also there was not much of a decline in the contribution of the rest of non-software intangible
capital (although there was a large amount of cyclical variability).



                                                                                                                    25
                          B. The Sources of Growth: Firm Dynamics

The statistics of Table 1 portray growth as a rather “bloodless” and formulaic process in which
inputs and technology are mathematically transformed into output. The actual process of growth
is anything but “bloodless”, involving, as it does, the birth and death of firms and the struggle for
survival and success of incumbent firms. Since this paper has emphasized the importance of
structural changes in the micro activities that underpin the aggregate flows of inputs and output,
and emphasized the importance of human agency in organizing and staffing these activities, a
closer look at the firm dynamics that underpin the evolution of these activities is warranted.
       The industries in the private economy are typically composed of both large and small
firms, as well as older and newer ones. Research has shown that all firms are not equal when it
comes to growth, and that those that are relatively young and rapidly growing are responsible for
a disproportionate amount of net job creation (Haltiwanger et al. (2010); Strangler, (2010); and
Sadeghi et al., (2012)). Strangler finds that, in a typical year, fast-growing young firms
(“gazelles”) made up less than 1% of all companies, but generated about 10% of all new jobs.
Sadeghi et al. report that the 0.5% of all companies classified as “high-growth firms” between
2008 and 2011 were responsible for a third of all gross job creation among firms whose
employment increased over the period. Moreover, smaller firms are also an important source of
R&D spending. According to NSF data, small companies with fewer than 500 employees in
2009 had an average R&D investment rate that was three times that of the largest firms and
employed a third of R&D workers, despite their much smaller sales and overall employment.
        Hathaway and Litan (2014) highlight the importance of firm births and deaths. They
note that one new business is born approximately every minute, and that another business fails
every eighty seconds. They go on to show that jobs are both created and destroyed in the
process, with net job creation of 600 thousand jobs in 2012. This “churn”, as they call it,
suggests a Schumpeterian view of firm dynamics in which growth is neither smooth nor
formulaic. It is a process in which good decisions and good luck tend to be rewarded and
inadequate or obsolete business models, punished. By implication, human agency and
competence in the formulation and execution of business models, and in making the investments
needed to enhance a firm’s capabilities and products, are critical in order for new entrants to
become gazelles and for incumbents to prosper.



                                                                                                   26
        The churning of firms through entry and exit has implications for economic growth. It is
an important mechanism through which new products and processes enter the economy, and
through which new markets are developed. Intangible capital and higher-order skills, cognitive
and non-cognitive, play a major role in this process. The most important asset of a successful
new enterprise is the capability (though not necessarily higher education) of those who start and
guide its development, who manage its operation, and who foster technological and
organizational innovation. The study by Kerr and Kerr (2017) shows that these key ingredients
are sometime “imported”, as witnessed by the finding that around a quarter of all entrepreneurs
in 2008 were immigrants, up from some 17% in 1995. 21 They also report that 38% of new firms
had at least one immigrant entrepreneur, and that the share of employees in new firms who were
immigrants was 26%.

                                    VIII. Summary and Conclusions

The neoclassical and activity-analysis models offer different windows on the role of education in
the process of economic growth, two ways of looking into the same complex processes involved.
The activity-analysis perspective provides insights into the role of skill-development and
education in the functioning of the economy, a perspective that is important because workers
with different skills and levels of education are not free-standing ingredients in a recipe for
making aggregate output. They are the necessary ingredients of the specific recipe for which
they are needed, in conjunction with the capital and other inputs required in order to operate the
activity at a given scale. A deficit in either the requisite skills or the associated capital limits the
operation or growth of those activities. To repeat, it is hard to imagine today’s emerging
knowledge economy operating with a work force in which less than half the workers had a high
school degree, and less than 10% had a college degree.
        What the future actually holds for continued economic growth and employment is a
matter of great conjecture. Powerful technological and global forces continue to shape the world
of work, and one can only guess where they will lead in the “Race against the machine” of
Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014). Looking backward at the data, the importance of the high
skill-occupation-education nexus for past economic growth seems well established. Looking

21
   The notion of “entrepreneur” used here is defined as someone who is among the top three initial earners in the
new business. Kerr and Kerr also report that their findings are roughly comparable to those in the large literature
they review, though a few report appreciably lower percentages.


                                                                                                                27
ahead, it may well be that robots will ultimately make most human work skills obsolete. It may
be that education will increasingly be seen as preparation for a productive life of leisure. But for
now, it seems reasonable to conclude that a strong educational system – one that provides a full
range of skill-development – remains an essential part of America’s economic prosperity. As
Levy and Murnane (2013, p. 5) put it: “For the foreseeable future, the challenge of ‘cybernation’
is not mass unemployment but the need to educate many more young people for the jobs
computers cannot do”.




                                                                                                  28
                                             REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor, “What Does Human Capital Do? A Review of Goldin and Katz’s
The Race between Education and Technology, Journal of Economic Literature, 50:2, 2012, 426–463

Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor, "Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment and
earnings," Handbook of Labor Economics 4, 2011, 1043-1171.

Autor, David H., “Skills, education, and the rise of earnings inequality among the ‘other 99 percent’,”
Science, Vol. 344 no. 6186, May 2014, 843-85. DOI: 10.1126/science.1251868

Autor, David H., and Michael J. Handel. 2013. “Putting Tasks to the Test: Human Capital, Job Tasks
and Wages.” Journal of Labor Economics, 31(2, pt.2), S59-S96.

Autor, D.H. and B. Price, The Changing Task Composition of the US Labor Market: An Update of Autor,
Levy and Murnane (2003), MIT working paper, June 21, 2013.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China syndrome: Local labor market effects
of import competition in the United States”, American Economic Review. 103, no. 6, 2013, 2121–68.

Autor, D. H., F. Levy and R. J. Murnane, “The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An
Empirical Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, Vol. 118(4), 2003, 1279-1333.

Bartel, Ann P., Casey Ichniowski, Kathryn L. Shaw, "How Does Information Technology Affect
Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation, Process Improvement, and
Worker Skills," Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2007, 122, 4, 1721-1758.

Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, Ben Sand, “The great reversal in the demand for skill and cognitive
tasks”, Journal of Labor Economics, Economics, 2016, vol. 34, no. 1, pt. 2, S199-S247.

Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen, “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms and
Nations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 122 (4), 2007, 1351-1408.

Broecke, Stijn, Glenda Quintini, and Marieke Vandeweyer, “Wage inequality and cognitive skills: Re-
opening the debate”,paper prepared for the NBER/CRIW conference Education, Skills, and Technical
Change: Implications for Future U.S. GDP Growth, Bethesda, Maryland, October 16-17, 2015
(forthcoming in conference volume).

Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee, Race Against The Machine: How the Digital Revolution is Accelerating
Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the Economy, Digital
Frontier Press, January 29, 2014.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, Education and training outlook for occupations, 2012–22, Division of
Occupational, Employment Projections, http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep_edtrain_outlook.pdf,

Bureau of Labor Statistics, Trends in Multifactor Productivity, 1948-81, Bulletin 2178, USGPO,
Washington D.C., September 1983, and updates.

Cappelli, Peter, "Skill Gaps, Skill Shortages, and Skill Mismatches," ILR Review, vol 68(2), 2015, 251-
290.



                                                                                                          29
Corrado, Carol A. and Charles R. Hulten, “How Do You Measure a Technological Revolution?,”
American Economic Review, May, 2010, 99-104.

Corrado, Carol A. and Charles R. Hulten, “Innovation Accounting”, in “Measuring Economic Progress
and Economic Sustainability,” in D.W. Jorgenson, J.S. Landefeld, and P. Schreyer, eds., Studies in
Income and Wealth, vol. 72, The University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic
Research, Chicago, 2014, 595-628

Corrado, C., C. Hulten and D. Sichel, “Intangible Capital and Economic Growth,” The Review of Income
and Wealth, Vol. 55 (3), 2009, 661-685.

Cowles Commission, Activity Analysis of Production and Allocation, Proceedings of a Conference, edited
by Tjalling C. Koopmans, in cooperation with Armen Alchian, George B. Danzig, Nicholas Georgescu-
Roegen, Paul A. Samuelson, and Alert W. Tucker, The Cowles Commission, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York, and Chapman & Hall, Limited, London, 1951.

Deming, David J., "The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market," The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol 132(4), 2017, 1593-1640.

Digest of Educational Statistics, Table 502.30, National Center for Educational Statistics, 2014
https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d14/tables/dt14_502.30.asp

Gittleman, Maury, Kristen Monaco, and Nicole Nestoriak, The Requirements of Jobs: Evidence from a
Nationally Representative Survey, paper prepared for the NBER/CRIW conference Education, Skills, and
Technical Change: Implications for Future U.S. GDP Growth, Bethesda, Maryland, October 16-17, 2015
(forthcoming in conference volume).

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz, The Race between Education and Technology, Belknap Press,
2010.

Hall, Bronwyn, Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen, “Measuring the Return to R&D,” Handbook of the
Economics of Innovation, Chapter 24, B. H. Hall and N. Rosenberg (eds.), Elsevier-North Holland, 2010,
1033-1082.

Haltiwanger, J. C., R. S. Jarmin and J. Miranda, “Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs. Young,” “Who
Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs. Young”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, 347-361.

Hanson. Gordon, and Matthew J. Slaughter, High Skilled Immigration and the Rise of STEM Occupations
in US Employment, paper prepared for the NBER/CRIW conference Education, Skills, and Technical
Change: Implications for Future U.S. GDP Growth, Bethesda, Maryland, October 16-17, 2015
(forthcoming in conference volume).

Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann, "The role of cognitive skills in economic
development," Journal of Economic Literature 46, no. 3, 2008, 607-668.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann, The Knowledge Capital of Nations: Education and the
Economics of Growth, 2015.

Harcourt, G. C., “Some Cambridge Controversies in the Theory of Capital”, Journal of Economic
Literature, Vol. 7, No. 2 (Jun., 1969), 369-405



                                                                                                     30
Haskel, Jonathan, Robert Z. Lawrence, Edward E. Leamer, and Matthew J. Slaughter, ‘Globalization and
U.S. Wages: Modifying Classic Theory to Explain Recent Facts”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Volume 26, Number 2 (Spring) 2012, 119–140.

Hathaway, Ian, and Robert E. Litan, “Declining Business Dynamism in the United States: A Look at
States and Metros”, Economic Studies, The Brookings Institution, May 2014.

Heckman, James J., John Eric Humphries, and Gregory Veramendi, Returns to Education: The Causal
Effects of Education on Earnings, Health and Smoking, NBER Working Paper 22291, May 2016,
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22291.

Heckman, James J., and Tim Kautz, "Hard evidence on soft skills." Labour economics, 2012, 451-464.

Hulten, Charles R., "Divisia Index Numbers," Econometrica, Vol. 41, No. 6, November 1973, 1017-25.

Hulten, Charles R., "Growth Accounting with Intermediate Inputs," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 45,
No. 3, October 1978, 511-518.

Hulten, Charles R., "Growth Accounting when Technical Change is Embodied in Capital," American
Economic Review, Vol. 82, No. 4, September 1992, 964-980.

Hulten, Charles R., "Total Factor Productivity: A Short Biography," in New Developments in
Productivity Analysis, Charles R. Hulten, Edwin R. Dean, and Michael J. Harper, eds., Studies in Income
and Wealth, vol. 63, The University of Chicago Press , Chicago, 2001, 1-47.

Hulten, Charles R., Stimulating Economic Growth through Knowledge-based Investment, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Working Papers, 2013/02, OECD Publishing.

Jorgenson, Dale W. and Zvi Griliches, "The Explanation of Productivity Change," Review of Economic
Studies, 34, July 1967, 349-83.

Kerr, Sari Pekkala, and William R. Kerr, “Immigrant Entrepreneurship”, in Measuring Entrepreneurial
Business: Current Knowledge and Challenges, John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda and
Antoinette Schoar, eds. Studies in Income and Wealth Number 75, Chicago, Chicago University Press for
the NBER, 2017, 187-249.

Levy, Frank, and Richard Murnane, Dancing with Robots: Human Skills for Computerized Work, Third
Way, June 1, 2013. http://content.thirdway.org/publications/714/Dancing-With- ubble-64671ed

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary Economics,
22, 1988, 3-42.

Lundberg, Shelly, “The College Type: Personality and Educational Inequality,” Journal of Labor
Economics, Vol. 31. No. 3, July 2013, 421-441

Nakamura, Leonard, “What is the U.S. Gross Investment in Intangibles? (At Least) One Trillion Dollars a
Year!” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 01-15, 2001..

National Assessment of Educational Progress, 2013, The Nation’s Report Card, Are the nation's twelfth-
graders making progress in mathematics and reading, 2013. Also, the Nation’s Report Card, Math and
Reading scores at Grade 12, 2015


                                                                                                     31
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES), Digest of Economic Statistics, 2015, Table 318.20,
Bachelor's, master's, and doctor's degrees conferred by postsecondary institutions, by field of study:
Selected years, 1970-71 through 2011-12.

National Science Foundation (2012), National Patterns of R&D Resources: 2009 Data Update, National
Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, Detailed Statistical Tables, NSF 12-321. June.

Nelson, Richard R., and Edmund S. Phelps, "Investment in Humans, Technological Diffusion, and
Economic Growth." The American Economic Review 56.1/2 (1966): 69-75.

Nelson, Richard R., and Sidney G. Winter, An evolutionary theory of economic change An Belknap Press,
August, 1982.

OECD, OECD Skills Outlook 2013: First Results from the Survey of Adult Skills, OECD Publishing,
2013. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264204256-en

OECD, PISA 2012 Results: Creative Problem Solving: Students’ Skills in Tackling Real-Life Problems
(Volume V), PI SA, OECD Publishing, 2014. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264208070-en

Prescott, Edward C., and Michael Visscher, “Organizational Capital,” Journal of Political Economy, 88,
3, 1980, 446-461.

Romer, Paul M., "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth," Journal of Political Economy, 94, No. 5,
1986, 1002-1037.

Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change”, Journal of Political Economy, 98, 5. Part 2,
October 1990, S71-S102.

Rothwell, Johnathan, The Hidden STEM Economy, Metropolitan Policy Program, Brookings, June 2013.

Ryan, Camille L., and Kurt Bauman, Educational Attainment in the United States: 2015: Population
Characteristics, Current Population Reports, P20-578, March 2016

Sadeghi, A., J. R. Spletzer and D. M. Talan (2012), High Growth Firms, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics,
unpublished, March 30.

Samuelson, Paul A., “Parable and Realism in Capital Theory: The Surrogate Production Function”, The
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 29, No. 3, June, 1962, 193-206.

Solow, Robert M., “A contribution to the theory of economic growth”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
70, February 1956, 65–94.

Solow, Robert M., "Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function", Review of Economics
and Statistics, 39, August 1957, 312-320.

Solow, Robert M., “We’d better watch out”, New York Times Book Review, July 12 1987.

Solow, Robert M., Growth Theory: An Exposition, Oxford University Press, New York and
Oxford, 1988.



                                                                                                         32
Solow, Robert M., James Tobin, C. C. von Weizsacker, and M. Yaari, “Neoclassical Growth
with Fixed Factor Proportions,” Review of Economic Studies, 33, 2, April 1966, 79-115.

Strangler, D. (2010), “High-Growth Firms and the Future of the American Economy, “Ewing Marion
Kauffman Foundation, March, www.kauffman.org/newsroom/high-growth-firms-account-for-
disproportionate-share-of-job-creation-according-to-kauffman-foundation-study.aspx.

U.S. Census Bureau, CPS Historical Time Series Tables , Table A.1 “Years of School Completed by
People 25 Years and Over, by Age and Sex: Selected Years 1940 to 2015”, 2015.

Valletta, Robert G., Recent Flattening in the Higher Education Wage Premium: Polarization, Skill
Downgrading, or Both?, paper prepared for the NBER/CRIW conference Education, Skills, and
Technical Change: Implications for Future U.S. GDP Growth, Bethesda, Maryland, October 16-17, 2015
(forthcoming in conference volume).

Wolfe, R. M., “Business R&D Performed in the United States Cost $291 Billion in 2008 and $282 Billion
in 2009,” InfoBrief, National Science Foundation, Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, NSF 12-
309, March 2012.

Zoghi, Cindy, Measuring Labor Composition: A Comparison of Alternate Methodologies,
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Office of Productivity and Technology, June, 2007.




                                                                                                  33
                                          Table 1

                      Sources of Growth in U.S. Private Business Sector
                              (average of annual growth rates)

                                      1948-       1948-      1973-        1995-
                                      2007        1973       1995         2007

 1. Output per hour                       2.41       2.99       1.56        2.76

 percentage point contribution to
 output per hour of:
 2. Tangible capital                      0.65       0.76       0.52        0.64
   a. ICT equipment                       0.23       0.11       0.28        0.36
   b. Non-ICT tangible capital            0.32       0.65       0.24        0.27
 3. Intangible capital                    0.42       0.30       0.39        0.74
   a. Computerized information            0.06       0.01       0.07        0.15
   b. Innovative property                 0.19       0.15       0.16        0.32
      (1) R&D (NSF/BEA)                   0.10       0.08       0.07        0.17
      (2) Other (incl. non-NSF            0.09       0.07       0.09        0.15
 R&D)
   c. Economic competencies               0.17       0.14       0.15        0.27
 4. Labor composition                     0.20       0.15       0.26        0.20
 5. TFP                                   1.14       1.78       0.39        1.16

 percent of total contribution to
 output per hour of:
 2. Tangible capital                   27%         25%       33%       23%
   a. ICT equipment                    10%          4%       18%       13%
   b. Non-ICT tangible capital         13%         16%       13%       10%
 3. Intangible capital                 17%         10%       25%       27%
   a. Computerized information          2%          0%        4%        5%
   b. Innovative property               8%          5%       10%       12%
      (1) R&D (NSF/BEA)                 4%          3%        4%        6%
      (2) Other                         4%          2%        6%        5%
   c. Economic competencies             7%          5%       10%       10%
 4. Labor composition                   8%          5%       17%        7%
 5. TFP                                47%         60%       25%       43%
ICT refers to Information and Communications Technology Equipment, BEA to the
Bureau of Economic Analysis, NSF to the National Science Foundation, TFP is Total
Factor Productivity. Detail may not add up due to rounding error.
Source: Corrado and Hulten (2010).

                                                                                    34
                                                               U.S. Private GDP Shares of Manufacturing, Expert Services, and
                                                                         Professional & Business Services, 1950-2015
                                      40%
                                      35%
                                      30%
                   % of Private GDP

                                      25%
                                      20%
                                      15%
                                      10%
                                               5%
                                               0%
                                                             1950        1960      1970      1980       1990      2000         2010

                                                                                PROF & BUS          EXPERT SERV          MFG


                                                                                          Figure 1
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, GDP-by-Industry, Industry Data, Value Added by Industry as a
Percentage of Gross Domestic Product. The “expert” service sectors include the NAICS industries 51,
52, 54, 55, 61, and 62, and organizational service sectors 54, 55, and 56. MFG denotes manufacturing.




                                                                      U.S. Private Employment Shares of Manufacturing,
                                                                        Expert, and Professional & Business Services,
                                                                                          1950-2015
                                                             45%
                                                             40%
                                      % Private Employment




                                                             35%
                                                             30%
                                                             25%
                                                             20%
                                                             15%
                                                             10%
                                                             5%
                                                             0%
                                                                   1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

                                                                             PROF &BUS SERV.           EXPERT SERV.             MFG

                                                                                           Figure 2
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Industry Economic Accounts, from various parts of Table 6.5,
Full-Time Equivalent Employees by Industry. See Figure 1.




                                                                                                                                      35
       K                                                                                              KB,KS


           Q

                                                                                                                            Q          Eb

                                                                                                                    b
               b
                         B
  KB                                                                                                 KB                 B

                                  b                                                                                                                           Ea
                                      a     A                                                                                    b a
  KA                                                                                                 KS                                                   Q
                                                                                                                                        A
                                                a                                                                                                     a
                                                           Q
   0                LB                     LA                       L                                 0                     LS            LU                       L S,LU


                    Figure 3A                                                                                                             Figure 3B
     Activity-Analysis Model                                                                                  Activity-Analysis Model
Two Activities and Malleable Inputs                                                                  Two Activities and non-Malleable Inputs

                                                            KB,KS




                                                                                Qb          Eb



                                                                        b

                                                           KB               B
                                                                                        b
                                                                                                               Ea
                                                                                        a
                                                           KS                                                 Qa
                                                                                            A
                                                                                                          a

                                                            0                 L     L                                   LS,LU
                                                                            Figure
                                                                                 S
                                                                                   3C            U



                                                          Activity-Analysis Model
                                          Two Activities and Malleable Inputs plus Different Outputs


                                          Investment in Intangible Capital, Tangible
                                            Capital, and ICT as a Share of Private
                                                  Business GDP, 1977-2010
                                  18%
                                  16%
                    % of Output




                                  14%
                                  12%
                                  10%
                                   8%
                                   6%
                                   4%
                                   2%
                                                    1980         1985                1990        1995          2000                2005        2010


                                                                Intangibles                      Tangibles                        ICT

                                                                            Figure 4
                   ICT is Information and Communications Technology Equipment
                                  Source: Data Underlying Corrado and Hulten (2010, 2011).




                                                                                                                                                                            36
                                                                    Expert Services Employment, Non-
                                                                  Routine Skill Gap, Intangible Investment,
                                                                   and College Wage Premia, During the
                                                                   Expansion of the Knowledge Economy

                                                                 260
                                                                 240
                                                                 220


                                                    1960 = 100
                                                                 200
                                                                 180
                                                                 160
                                                                 140
                                                                 120
                                                                 100
                                                                  80
                                                                         1960    1970     1980    1990   2000     2010
                                                                            Expert Serv. Emp.             Skill Gap
                                                                            Intangibles Rate              Wage Premium


                                                                                        Figure 5
Sources:
1. Expert Service Industries Employment: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Industry Economic Accounts,
Table 6.5, Full-Time Equivalent Employees by Industry (see Figure 2).
2. Skill Gap (ratio of non-routine cognitive and interpersonal indexes to the other indexes): Autor, D.H.
and B.M. Price, “The Changing Task Composition of the US Labor Market: An Update of Autor, Levy,
and Murnane (2003)”, MIT, June (2013).
3. Intangible investment rate; see Figure 4.
4. Wage premium based on Valletta (2016) (average of college-only and graduate premia, 1980 =100)



                                            Contribution to Labor Productivity Growth
                                                from TFP, Intangible Capital, and
                                                       Labor Composition

                                 5%
            4-yr moving avg growth rates




                                 4%
                                 3%
                                 2%
                                 1%
                                 0%
                                           1955   1960            1965    1970    1975     1980   1985   1990   1995     2000   2005   2010
                                -1%
                                -2%
                                                                             Years 1953 to 2010
                                                                         TFP    Intangibles   LP                         LComp
                                                                                        Figure 6
                                             Source: Data Underlying Corrado and Hulten (2010, 2011).
                                           (LP is output per hour, and LComp is the labor composition term)



                                                                                                                                              37
