                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MISVALUATION AND CORPORATE INVENTIVENESS

                                            Ming Dong
                                         David Hirshleifer
                                         Siew Hong Teoh

                                       Working Paper 24142
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24142


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2017


For helpful comments, we thank Malcolm Baker, Itzhak Ben-David, Justin Birru, Tony Cookson, Richard
Crowley, Peter DeMarzo, Robin Greenwood, Michael Hirshleifer, Ming Huang, Mark Kamstra, Byoung
Kang, Jung-Wook Kim, Dongmei Li, Chris Polk, Eric So, Sheridan Titman, John Wei, Mike Weisbach,
and Zhaoxia Xu; conference discussants, Tao Chen, Henrik Cronqvist, Jody Grewal, Adrien Matray,
Anywhere Sichochi, and Noah Stoffman; conference and seminar participants at the China International
Conference in Finance in Shenzhen, Financial Accounting and Reporting Section Meeting in Charlotte,
HBS IMO conference, NBER Behavioral Finance meeting, Ohio State University Alumni conference,
American Finance Association conference in Philadelphia, City University of London, Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, INSEAD, Laval University, McMaster University, Nanyang Technological
University, National University of Singapore, Singapore Management University, University of Glasgow,
University of Iowa, University of Notre Dame, University of Roma, USC, UT Austin, University of
Vienna, and Washington University. We thank Zheng Sun for help with the mutual fund flow measure.
We thank the National Center for the Middle Market (USA) and the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council (Canada) for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ming Dong, David Hirshleifer, and Siew Hong Teoh. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Misvaluation and Corporate Inventiveness
Ming Dong, David Hirshleifer, and Siew Hong Teoh
NBER Working Paper No. 24142
December 2017, Revised February 2020
JEL No. D22,D23,D25,G14,G3,G31,G32,G4,G41,O32

                                             ABSTRACT

We test how market overvaluation affects corporate innovation. Estimated stock overvaluation is very
strongly associated with measures of innovative inventiveness (novelty, originality, and scope), as
well as R&D and innovative output (patent and citation counts). Misvaluation affects R&D more via
a non-equity channel than via equity issuance. The sensitivity of innovative inventiveness to misvaluation
is increasing with share turnover and overvaluation. The frequency of exceptionally high innovative
inputs/outputs increases with overvaluation. This evidence suggests that market overvaluation may
generate social value by increasing innovative output and by encouraging firms to engage in highly
inventive innovation.


Ming Dong                                           Siew Hong Teoh
Schulich School of Business                         The Paul Merage School of Business
York University                                     University of Irvine
4700 Keele Street                                   Irvine, CA 92697-3125
Toronto, Ontario, CANADA M3J 1P3                    steoh@uci.edu
mdong@schulich.yorku.ca

David Hirshleifer
The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
4291 Pereira Drive
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
david.h@uci.edu
1. Introduction

       Both efficient and inefficient market theories imply that higher stock prices will be

associated with higher corporate investment. This includes both the creation of tangible assets

through capital expenditures, and the creation of intangible assets through research and

development (R&D). Under the Q-theory of investment (Tobin 1969), higher stock price

accurately reﬂects stronger growth opportunities, so high valuation ﬁrms invest more to exploit

better opportunities. If the incremental investment of a high-valuation firm is for innovative

purposes, as reflected in R&D expenditures, the firm should achieve greater innovative output,

in the form of new discoveries, techniques, or products.

       Similar effects arise when markets are inefficient and investors misvalue different firms

differently. Under what we call the misvaluation hypothesis of innovation, ﬁrms respond to

market overvaluation by engaging in more innovative activities, resulting in more risky and

creative forms of innovation, and higher innovative investment and future innovative output.

       With regard to the ambitiousness of firms’ innovative activities, the management of an

overvalued firm may have greater freedom to engage in more ambitious projects with radical

solutions to problems, breakthrough technology, and major scope for improving the welfare of

customers. Overvaluation can relax financing constraints on such projects, and can allow an

ambitiously innovating firm to maintain a high stock price. Overvaluation can therefore help

offset the limiting effect of managerial risk aversion on the riskiest forms of innovation. Indeed,

since innovative activities tend to create positive externalities, overvaluation may sometimes

be welfare-improving, as suggested by Keynes (1931), Gross (2009) and Shleifer (2000).

       To test for such effects, we measure both the amount of innovative output—number of

patents or patent citations—and the nature of the innovative activity. To evaluate the effects of

misvaluation on the nature of innovation, we test whether overvaluation is associated with three

aspects of innovativeness defined in previous literature. Innovative novelty is the number of


                                                1
citations per patent (Seru 2014). Innovative originality is defined as the extent to which a patent

cites previous patents spanning a wide range of technology classes; innovative scope is the

extent to which a patent is cited by future patents spanning a wide range of technology classes

(Trajtenberg, Henderson, and Jaffe 1997).1 We use the term inventiveness to refer collectively

to these three aspects of innovation; we consider projects with very high expected inventiveness

to be moon shots. We illustrate in Section 2 the co-occurrence of overvaluation and innovative

activity with the case examples of Tesla, SpaceX, and NetApp.

         Overvaluation can also potentially increase the level of investment---both in general,

and in innovative activity. For example, overvaluation can encourage the ﬁrm to raise more

equity capital (Stein 1996; Baker, Stein, and Wurgler 2003; Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and

Huberman 2005) to exploit new shareholders.2 If ﬁrms are inclined to invest the additional

funds, overvaluation encourages investment. For example, if the market overvalues a ﬁrm’s

new investment opportunities, the ﬁrm may commit to additional investment in order to obtain

favorable terms for new equity (or risky debt) financing.

         There are pathways other than the financing channel by which overvaluation can affect

innovation. For example, managers of an overvalued firm may feel insulated from board or

takeover discipline, and therefore may be more willing to undertake risky innovative activity—

a governance channel. Managers who desire publicity may also be attracted to ambitious,


1
  For a given total citation count, greater novelty suggests that a ﬁrm’s patents are important rather than being
‘least publishable units;’ see Seru (2014). Regarding originality, a patent that draws upon knowledge from a wide
range of technology areas is indicative of an innovation that deviates more from current technological trajectories.
Drawing upon diverse technologies may also reﬂect the ﬁrm’s ability to recombine technologies in an original
way. Previous literature refers to what we call “scope” as “innovative generality.” For applications of innovative
originality and scope, see also Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001), Lerner, Sørensen, and Strömberg (2011),
Custodio, Ferreira, and Matos (2013), and Hirshleifer, Hsu and Li (2018). Section 2 discusses in more depth the
motivation for and estimation of the three dimensions of innovation inventiveness.
2
  Since equity is more sensitive than debt to firm valuations, equity is a more attractive vehicle for exploiting
misvaluation. Several authors provide evidence suggesting that ﬁrms time new equity issues to exploit market
misvaluation, or manage earnings to incite such misvaluation—see, e.g., Ritter (1991), Loughran and Ritter
(1995), Teoh, Welch, and Wong (1998a, 1998b), Teoh, Wong, and Rao (1998), Baker and Wurgler (2000),
Henderson, Jegadeesh, and Weisbach (2006) and Dong, Hirshleifer, and Teoh (2012). There is also evidence that
overvaluation is associated with greater use of equity as a means of payment in takeovers (Dong et al. 2006), as
predicted by the behavioral model of Shleifer and Vishny (2003).


                                                         2
glamorous and attention-grabbing projects.

         There is also a possible catering channel. Managers who prefer high current stock prices

may spend heavily, even at the expense of long-term value, to cater to short-term investor

optimism about those investment opportunities that investors find appealing (Stein 1996;

Jensen 2005; Polk and Sapienza 2009). Also, managers may be motivated to maintain high

stock prices (Jensen 2005), possibly in part because high prices serve as a reference point for

investor perceptions (Baker, Pan, and Wurgler 2012; Li and Yu 2012; George, Hwang, and Li

2018).

         Crucially, even if investor optimism is transient, in the catering theory it affects current

levels of ‘long-term’ investment such as capital expenditures, because managers desire credit

for generating long-term value.3 We expect such incentives to be especially strong for

innovative spending, as innovative activities are exciting to investors and especially hard for

the market to value. Subsection 3.2 documents that there are long-run effects of overvaluation

on innovation.

         Two other behavioral mechanisms can also induce an association between misvaluation

and innovative activity. Managers themselves may share in the positive sentiment of investors

that is the source of overvaluation. If, for example, managers overestimate innovative growth

opportunities, the firm will undertake more such activity. Second, managers may be rationally

cognizant of overvaluation, but the positive sentiment of consumers, suppliers or potential

employees may improve the firm’s opportunities in factor and product markets, making

innovative activity more profitable. This positive feedback effect is modeled, for example, in

Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam, and Titman (2006). We refer to these two mechanisms as shared

sentiment effects.



3
  Several empirical papers document investor sensitivity to 52-week highs, and some also provide evidence that
this influences managerial behavior (Baker, Pan, and Wurgler (2012), Li and Yu (2012), Birru (2015), and George,
Hwang, and Li (2018)).

                                                       3
       These considerations motivate testing whether misvaluation predicts innovative input,

in the form of R&D expenditures, and innovative output, in the form of patents and patent

citations. Understanding how misvaluation affects R&D and resulting innovative output is

important, since R&D is a key source of technological innovation (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg

2005), and is a major component of aggregate corporate investment (higher than capital

expenditures since 1997 in our sample).

       A key challenge for estimating the relationship between inventiveness, and innovative

inputs and outputs to misvaluation is that valuation is endogenous; in an efficient market, firms

with strong opportunities for innovative investment will rationally have high prices. In

consequence, high valuation measures should predict high innovative investment, and

subsequently, high innovative output. In other words, there is possible reverse causality. We

address this issue by using a measure of misvaluation that is designed to exclude, as much as

possible, this rational component of valuation.

       Our misvaluation measure, MFFlow, uses mutual fund hypothetical sales of stocks as

a function of investor outflows, following Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2012) (building on

Coval and Stafford (2007)). These papers find that mutual fund outflows (excluding sector

funds) lead to selling pressure on stocks held in the funds, thereby temporarily depressing the

prices of fund stock holdings for non-fundamental reasons. Because MFFlow is not based on

market price, it is especially helpful for addressing the abovementioned endogeneity problem,

that high price reflects opportunities for innovative investment. Firms with high MFFlow are

on average undervalued relative to other firms, and firms with low MFFlow are on average

overvalued relative to other firms (see also the discussion in Subsection 2.3).

       Although our misvaluation proxy is designed to exclude the contaminating effects of

growth prospects that are unrelated to misvaluation, we include several controls for such

opportunities in all our tests, as well as performing robustness checks based on conservative


                                                  4
filtering of the MFFlow variable.4 If market participants tend to overvalue firms with good

growth prospects, the inclusion of growth controls in our regressions will eliminate some of

the misvaluation effect we seek to measure. Nevertheless, the effects of misvaluation that we

document are strong.

        MFFlow exerts a downward shock to misvaluation that is greater for some firms than

others, but this does not mean that all firms with an MFFlow shock are undervalued. MFFlow

shifts the distribution of misvaluation across firms by making overvalued firms less overvalued,

and making undervalued firms more undervalued. So letting x be the level of overvaluation

(possibly negative), firms with low MFFlow will have a higher distribution of x (in the sense

of First Order Stochastic Dominance) than firms with high MFFlow. So crucially, the measure

captures variation in misvaluation even within the deep overvaluation range, not just in the

undervaluation range.

        Moreover, our MFFlow measure is immune to the criticism of the original Edmans,

Goldstein, and Jiang (2012) measure of a possible mechanical correlation with

contemporaneous returns (Wardlaw 2018); see Appendix A for details.5 Wardlaw (2018) also

suggests that the fund flow measure may be influenced by share turnover. It is unclear whether

this is a drawback or a strength of this measure, since past studies have provided evidence that

share turnover is associated with misvaluation (e.g., Lee and Swaminathan 2000; Baker and

Stein 2004), which is what the flow measure is intended to capture. Nonetheless, to investigate

whether the effects we identify are incremental to share turnover effects, we perform tests using

residual MFFlow, or fund flow that is orthogonal to turnover. These tests, reported in the



4
  Our results are similar using industry-adjusted or R&D-adjusted MFFlow (see the Internet Appendix, Tables
IA-8 and IA-9), or MFFlow filtered by growth-related return factors (the residual from the regression of MFFlow
on the Fama-French high-minus-low book-to-market factor or a high-minus-low R&D factor).
5
  Outflows are multiplied by market values at the end of the quarter, not the beginning of the quarter as in the
original Edman et al (2012) measure, and then scaled by volume at the end of the quarter. Because the market
values and volume are measured at the end of the quarter, there is no mechanical contemporaneous return
embedded in the measure. Other studies also use a similar fund flow-based price pressure measure that is free of
contemporaneous returns; see Section 2.

                                                       5
Internet Appendix, confirm that our findings are robust to controlling for turnover.

         As a further robustness check, we perform tests using an alternative misvaluation proxy,

VP, defined as the ratio of ‘intrinsic value’ (V) to market price P (also reported in the Internet

Appendix). V is a forward-looking measure of fundamental value derived from the residual

income model of Ohlson (1995) using analyst forecasts of future earnings.6 Notably, we obtain

very similar results using a misvaluation proxy that is motivated and constructed very

differently from MFFlow.

         We perform four types of tests. First, we examine how misvaluation affects innovative

investment in the form of R&D, and innovative output and inventiveness using patent-related

measures. Second, we estimate whether the relation between misvaluation and innovative

spending operates more through equity issuance versus other mechanisms, such as shared

sentiment or direct catering to investor misperceptions. Third, we examine how the sensitivity

of innovative activities to misvaluation varies with share turnover, which as we indicated above

is a proxy for catering incentives; and with misvaluation itself. Fourth, we perform quantile

regressions to test whether misvaluation affects the propensity toward extremes of high

innovation.

         We find that overvaluation has a very strong and robust association with higher

intangible investments and resulting outputs (R&D, patents, and patent citations). For example,

the sensitivity of R&D to misvaluation (variables scaled by their standard deviations) is much

larger than the sensitivity to book-to-price, and is larger or comparable to the sensitivity to

growth in sales and cash flow. Furthermore, the sensitivity of R&D to misvaluation is about 5

times greater than the sensitivity of capital expenditures to misvaluation.7


6
  This measure has been used as a proxy for misvaluation in several studies (D’Mello and Shroﬀ 2000; Dong et
al. 2006; Dong, Hirshleifer, and Teoh 2012; Ma, forthcoming). A key advantage of V as a measure of fundamental
value as compared, for example, to book value, is that V incorporates earnings growth prospects. As such, it filters
such prospects from market price, except insofar as such prospects are associated with misvaluation rather than
just growth.
7
  A previous literature examines the eﬀects of misvaluation on equity issuance and on capital expenditures. With

                                                         6
        With regard to inventiveness, we find that overvaluation is strongly associated with

greater innovative novelty, originality, and scope. The patents of overvalued firms are heavily

cited, draw from a wider range of technology classes, and are cited by patents in a greater range

of technology classes. So misvaluation affects the qualitative nature, as well as the quantity, of

innovative activity.

        Second, to assess the relative importance of equity and debt financing versus other

channels through which misvaluation can affect innovation, we conduct a path analysis of the

R&D response to misvaluation; see Badertscher, Shanthikumar and Teoh (2019). We find over

two thirds of the total effect of misvaluation on R&D spending derives from the non-financing

channel. The remaining misvaluation effect operates mostly through equity issuance, with

risky debt financing the least important channel in influencing innovation.

        The evidence that overvaluation induces ﬁrms to raise cheap equity capital to ﬁnance

intangible investment is consistent with the models of Stein (1996) and Baker, Stein, and

Wurgler (2003). The evidence that misvaluation eﬀects operate outside the equity channel is

consistent with both the catering theory of Jensen (2005) and Polk and Sapienza (2009), and

with the shared sentiment effects discussed above. The larger magnitudes of the non-financing

channel suggest that catering and/or shared sentiment eﬀects of misvaluation may be

particularly strong.

        With regard to the third issue, we dig more deeply into the misvaluation effect by testing

whether catering incentive and overvaluation itself affect the sensitivities of innovative

spending and outcomes to misvaluation. We first interact our misvaluation measure with an

indicator for ﬁrms in the highest quintile for equity catering pressure as proxied by share

turnover. We ﬁnd that the three types of innovative inventiveness, as well as R&D spending


respect to R&D, Polk and Sapienza (2009) use the ﬁrm characteristic of high versus low R&D as a conditioning
variable in some of their tests of the relation between misvaluation and capital expenditures. Baker, Stein, and
Wurgler (2003) examine several measures of investment, one of which is the sum of capital expenditures and
R&D, but they do not specifically examine whether misvaluation aﬀects R&D.

                                                       7
and innovative output measures, are more sensitive to overvaluation among high turnover

firms. This evidence is consistent with the idea that the effects of misvaluation on innovation

activity and inventiveness are especially important among firms with higher catering incentives

(Polk and Sapienza 2009).

        Furthermore, our results suggest that the relations of misvaluation with innovative

inputs, outputs, and inventiveness measures are convex. We find that overvaluation promotes

innovation more strongly than undervaluation reduces innovation, which suggests that the ex

ante prospect of strong misvaluation may on average increase social welfare.

        Finally, we provide further verification of our findings by running quantile regressions,

which are less sensitive to influences of outliers and distributional assumptions. The results are

robust, and further indicate that variation in misvaluation has an especially strong effect in

increasing the frequency of unusually high innovative outcomes. Collectively, these findings

indicate that overvaluation encourages ﬁrms to engage in ‘moon shot’ projects in the sense of

very high inventiveness and expected innovative output.8

        The potentially positive effect of overvaluation on innovation contrasts with the adverse

effects of overvaluation in inducing questionable capital expenditures (Polk and Sapienza

2009) and acquisitions (Dong et al. 2006). Our findings do not speak to whether the benefits

of higher innovation are worth the cost. However, these findings do reinforce other evidence

that behavioral biases, such as managerial overconfidence, sometimes promote innovation

(Hirshleifer, Low, and Teoh 2012).

        A previous literature tests whether market valuations, or proxies for misvaluation, affect

investment by examining whether these have incremental predictive power after controlling

for proxies for the quality of growth opportunities.9 Most of these studies are focused on capital


8
  In discussing what he viewed as a period of overvaluateion by many firms, Keynes (1931) wrote that “[w]hile
some part of the investment which was going on … was doubtless ill judged and unfruitful, there can, I think, be
no doubt that the world was enormously enriched by the constructions of the quinquennium from 1925 to 1929...”
9
  See Barro (1990), Blanchard, Rhee, and Summers (1993) Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1990), Welch and

                                                       8
expenditures rather than innovative activity, and earlier tests do not distinguish the Q-theory

of investment from the misvaluation hypothesis. Our approach differs from these papers in

focusing on misvaluation effects on innovation, including innovative outcomes; and in our

measures of misvaluation. We compare our misvaluation proxies to others used in previous

literature in Section 2. Finally, a large literature investigates the economic factors that drive

innovation (see, e.g., Acharya and Xu (2017) and references therein). Building on this

research, our paper additionally describes how market misvaluation affects innovation.


2. Data, Empirical Measures and Test Design

        Our sample includes U.S. ﬁrms listed on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ that are covered

by CRSP and COMPUSTAT and are subject to the following restrictions. We require ﬁrms to

have mutual fund flows measure (MFFlow) from CDA/Spectrum and CRSP. Consequently,

our sample starts from 1981 CDA/Spectrum reporting begins. Finally, we exclude ﬁnancial

ﬁrms (ﬁrms with one-digit SIC of 6) and utility ﬁrms (two-digit SIC of 49). Our ﬁnal sample

has 63,488 total ﬁrm-year observations with non-missing MFFlow measure from 1981 to 2012.

        We examine the relation between ﬁrm innovation (innovative input as measured by

R&D, and innovative output and inventiveness variables described below) and the

misvaluation level of the ﬁrm’s equity. We relate a ﬁrm’s innovation activity during each ﬁscal

year to the ﬁrm’s misvaluation measure calculated at the end of the preceding ﬁscal year. For

example, for a ﬁrm with December ﬁscal year end, the misvaluation measure is calculated at

the end of December 2010 and the innovation activity is measured for the ﬁscal year ending in

December 2011. Our sample includes ﬁrms with different ﬁscal year-ends.


2.1 Measures of Innovative Output and Inventiveness



Wessels (2000), Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003), Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and Huberman (2005), Polk and
Sapienza (2009), Hau and Lai (2013), Parise (2013), Alti and Tetlock (2014), and Warusawitharana and Whited
(2015).

                                                    9
       Patent and citation data are constructed from the November 2011 edition of the patent

database of Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman (see Kogan et al. 2017). This database

covers U.S. patent grants and patent citations up to 2010. On average, there is a two-year lag

between patent application and patent grant. Since the latest year in the database is 2010, we

end our observations of patents and citations in 2008 to reduce measurement bias caused by

the application-grant period lag.

       Following the innovation literature, we use two measures of innovative output. The ﬁrst

and simplest measure is the number of patents applied for in a fiscal year (Pat) that are

ultimately successful (even if the grant occurs subsequent to the application fiscal year).

However, simple patent counts imperfectly capture innovation success as patent innovations

vary widely in their technological and economic importance. Following Hall, Jaffe, and

Trajtenberg (2001, 2005)), we measure the importance of patents by their citation counts Cites,

measured as the sum of raw citation counts ultimately received by patents applied for each year

(even if those citations are obtained subsequent to the patent application year), scaled by the

average citation counts of all patents applied in the same year and technology class. In our

regression tests, we use log transformed values of Pat and Cites to limit the effects of outliers.

       We use three measures of innovative inventiveness based on patent and citation

outcomes. Following Seru (2014), Novelty is the average (technological class and year

adjusted) citations per patent that are received over time (including subsequent years). It is a

natural way to capture the importance of the innovations generated by the firm.

       Following Trajtenberg, Henderson, and Jaffe (1997), we define Originality of a patent

as one minus the Herfindahl concentration index for the fraction of citations made by the patent

to patents in other technological classes. If a patent cites previous patents that span a wide

(narrow) set of technologies, the originality score will be high (low). This is based on the idea

that innovation is a process of recombinant search (e.g., Schumpeter 1934; Basalla 1988;


                                               10
Romer 1990; Weitzman 1998; Singh and Fleming 2010). Under this view, useful new ideas

come from combining existing ones in novel ways. An example is the discovery of the double

helix structure of DNA by James Watson and Francis Crick. Crick’s knowledge of X-ray

crystallography helped Watson understand the famous X-ray diffraction image of DNA as a

double helix structure.

         Also following Trajtenberg, Henderson, and Jaffe (1997), Scope of a patent is defined

as one minus the Herfindahl index across technological classes of future citations of the patent.

This reflects the extent to which a patent has a wide influence. It is a natural way of measuring

the extent to which an innovation is broad in scope, making it is useful in a wide range of

different technological applications. Each of the three inventiveness measures is firm-level

average over the patents’ respective inventiveness scores. The innovative output (Pat and

Cites) and inventiveness (Novelty, Originality, and Generality) measures are for a given patent

application year and so include the grant and citations received subsequent to the application

year. This allows for the lags between patent application, patent granting, and patent citations.

         Tesla and SpaceX, founded by celebrity entrepreneur Elon Musk, are two current

examples (outside our sample period) of possible irrational investor enthusiasm promoting

moon shot innovation.10 Tesla aims to disrupt the automobile industry with electric vehicles

affordable to the average consumer. Cornell and Damodoran (2014) and Cornell (2016)

perform case valuation analyses of the approximately 7-fold run-up in Tesla during a period of

under a year during 2013-14, and conclude that this is hard to justify as a rational response to

news.

         SpaceX, although not literally in the business of moon shots, comes close, as its purpose

is to monetize space travel, with a long-term goal of colonization of Mars. SpaceX is a private


10
   NetApp, a multinational storage and data management company, is an example within our sample. Just prior to
fiscal year 2000, NetApp had a very low VP, and other indications of overvaluation such as heavy recent equity
issuance. In fiscal 2000, it ranked in the top quintile in our sample for R&D, patents, patent citations, and in the
patent-based measures of inventiveness that we examine.

                                                        11
firm valued at $21 billion as of 10/16/17 (Sorkin 2017). Gornall and Strebulaev (2017) point

out that the valuations of many unicorns such as SpaceX are grossly inflated owing to

valuations being based upon recently-issued shares with special cash flow rights.11


2.2 Investment and Control Variables

         We measure ﬁrms’ investment activities using the research and development (XRD)

and capital expenditure (CAPX) items from the COMPUSTAT annual ﬁles. Our investment

variables, RD and CAPX, are scaled by previous year total assets (item AT). All ratio variables,

include the ones described below, are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile to mitigate the

inﬂuence of outliers.

         We need equity issuance and debt issuance to examine the financing channels of the

effect of misvaluation on innovative investment. Following Baker and Wurgler (2002), equity

issuance (EI) is calculated as [∆Book Equity (COMPUSTAT item CEQ) + ∆Deferred Taxes

(item TXDB) − ∆Retained Earnings (item RE)] scaled by lagged assets, and debt issuance (DI)

is the change in assets minus the change in book equity [Δ total assets (item AT) – Δ book

equity (item CEQ) – Δ deferred taxes (item TXDB)] scaled by lagged assets. These are net

issuance variables.

         In the multivariate tests, we control for other investment determinants. These control

variables include growth rate in sales in the past three years (GS), book equity to price ratio

(BP), cash ﬂow [item IB + item DP + item XRD] scaled by lagged assets [missing XRD is set

to zero to conserve non-missing cash flow observations], to control for the ability of the firm

to generate cash from operations to fund investment. We include leverage (Leverage) defined



11
   Since these ‘valuations’ are not based on market prices for common shares, such ‘overvaluation’ need not imply
any investor misperception. However, it almost surely does. It is common for managers and other employees in
innovative start-ups to receive option compensation for their efforts, and these investors typically lack the financial
sophistication needed to adjust reported firm valuations for subtle biases. Indeed, according to Strebulaev, “These
financial structures and their valuation implications can be confusing and are grossly misunderstood not just by
outsiders, but even by sophisticated insiders.” Strebulaev also points out that “SpaceX’s value actually fell in
2008” during a period when its reported valuation increased (Sorkin 2017).

                                                          12
as (item DLTT + item DLC)/(item DLTT + item DLC + item SEQ). Finally, we control for

firm age and size (logarithm of lagged total assets) per DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Stulz’s

(2010) finding that mature ﬁrms are less likely to issue new equity. Following DeAngelo,

DeAngelo, and Stulz (2010), we deﬁne Age as the number of years between the listing date and

the beginning of the ﬁscal year, truncated at 50 (results are not sensitive to this truncation).

        Polk and Sapienza (2009) provide and test a catering theory in which the investment

sensitivity to misvaluation is higher when there is a higher fraction of short-term investors.

They document that the sensitivity of capital expenditures to misvaluation is higher for stocks

with high share turnover. We measure turnover using monthly trading volume as a percentage

of total number of shares outstanding.12

        Table 1 reports summary statistics of these control variables, while Table 2 reports

yearly descriptive information for our sample during 1981-2012. Capital expenditures are

relatively stable over time, but there is a marked decrease after 2001, suggesting that companies

generally cut capital spending after the collapse of the stock market bubble. This decrease in

CAPX is coupled with a drastic drop in cash ﬂow in 2002 (untabulated). R&D activities, on the

other hand, have wider fluctuations but generally increase over time, and decline slightly after

2001. As mentioned in the Introduction, after 1996, RD overtakes CAPX as the larger

component of corporate investment, growing much larger toward the end of the sample period.

These facts highlight the importance of studying R&D activity.


2.3 Mispricing Proxy

        Our primary proxy for equity misvaluation is the mutual fund outflow price pressure

measure, MFFlow. We summarize estimation procedures here concisely; further details, which

are drawn from previous literature, are provided in Appendix A. To verify the robustness of


12
  As is standard, to ensure comparability we divide the NASDAQ trading volume by 2 (LaPlante and Muscarella
1997).


                                                    13
our conclusions, we also use several alternative measures described below.

         The misvaluation measure, MFFlow, is derived from mutual fund outflows (Coval and

Stafford 2007; Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang 2012). The motivation for this measure is that

outflows put immediate pressure on fund managers to sell the underlying fund holdings to meet

redemptions, causing temporary downward price pressure on the stocks held within the fund.

To ensure that the outflow measure is unrelated to fund manager’s private information about

the underlying securities, Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2012) refine the measure of Coval

and Stafford (2007) by focusing on the hypothetical trades made by a fund assuming it sells in

equal proportion to its current holdings.

         In validation of their proxy, Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2012) find that stocks with

large mutual fund outflows have lower contemporaneous stock returns, and that these low

returns are later reversed. The effects are substantial, as discussed below. So a larger outflow

indicates greater undervaluation of stocks held by the fund. Inflows are more likely than

outflows to reflect private information if fund managers wait to allocate inflows to stocks that

they believe have better prospects.13 We therefore follow Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2012)

and include outflows only.14

         As argued in Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2012), the MFFlow measure likely reflects

an exogenous source of mispricing that is unrelated to firm characteristics such as extent of

innovative activity. It is possible in general that fund flows are correlated with news that relates

to firms’ innovative investment strategies. Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang use hypothetical fund

flows to address this potential concern. For example, a firm might have strong growth



13
   Several studies, such as Jeng, Metrick, and Zeckhauser (2003) and Lakonishok and Lee (2001) find that insider
buying reflects private information but insider selling does not, and even recent work that does identify some
information in insider selling (Ali and Hirshleifer 2017) finds that buying is much more informative. Furthermore,
individual investors are more likely to buy attention-grabbing stocks than sell such stocks (Barber and Odean
2008), consistent with the tendency of buying triggered by viewpoint-changing events.
14
   Several other papers employ mutual fund price pressure measure in studying the relationship between
misvaluation and investment (e.g., Hau and Lai 2013; Parise 2013; Camanho 2015; Lou and Wang 2018; Dessaint
et al. forthcoming;). Li (2019) also finds evidence supporting the idea that fund flows induce mispricing.

                                                       14
opportunities, but this does not explain why the funds that hold this firm would receive

unusually high inflows. Similarly, an entire industry might have strong investment

opportunities, but, following Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2012), we exclude funds that

specialize in a given industry, and in robustness tests, we also subtract industry MFFlow or

R&D-matched MFFlow to further remove any possible industry effects. Furthermore, in

regression tests we also include BP, sales growth, or analyst long-term earnings growth

forecasts as additional controls for growth.

       MFFlow observations are set to be positive reflecting outflows, so the variable is

decreasing with overvaluation. So a high value of MFFlow indicates undervaluation. When

mutual funds have zero or close to zero holdings of a stock, MFFlow is mechanically equal to

zero. We set MFFlow to missing in this case as it has little ability to distinguish degrees of

misvaluation among such stocks. Consequently, our measure of MFFlow has a considerably

stronger price pressure effect than documented in Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2012). For

example, the highest-MFFlow decile experiences a market-adjusted return of roughly −12%

about two quarters after the MFFlow measurement. In contrast, Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang

(2012) document a peak price pressure of about −6.5% market-adjusted return for the decile

with the highest outflows.

       As discussed in the Introduction, our measure of MFFlow is not subject to a concern

raised by Wardlaw (2018) of a possible mechanical relation with contemporaneous returns in

the flow measure of Edmans et al. (2018). Our modification, which removes any such

mechanical effect, is similar to the fund flow misvaluation measures of Lou and Wang (2018),

Li (2019), and Dessaint et al. (forthcoming). For further verification that our MFFlow effects

are not just picking up effects of turnover, we also perform tests using the residual of the annual

regression of MFFlow on turnover instead of MFFlow.

       As a further robustness check, we perform tests using an alternative misvaluation proxy


                                                15
that involves the estimation of fundamental value of equity, based on the residual income model

(Ohlson 1995). The residual income value V is estimated as the sum of book value of equity

and the stream of discounted analyst forecasted earnings in excess of the firm’s cost of equity

capital, where the discount rate is the firm’s cost of equity.

         The residual income value has several advantages over book value as a fundamental

measure. It is designed to be invariant to accounting treatments (to the extent that the ‘clean

surplus’ accounting identity obtains; see Ohlson (1995). Unlike the book-to-price ratio (BP),

VP does not have a mechanical relation with R&D.15 Furthermore, since V, like market price

and unlike book value, reflects future growth prospects, the VP ratio filters out growth effects

contained in BP that are unrelated to mispricing. If market participants overvalue firms with

good growth prospects, VP is designed to capture that misvaluation, and therefore can be

correlated with growth prospects. However, unlike BP, VP is not mechanically increased by

the sheer fact that a firm is growing. In our sample, the correlation of BP with VP is fairly low,

0.22. The Internet Appendix shows results are robust to using either VP or residual MFFlow as

an alternative mispricing proxy.

         Some misvaluation proxies used in past studies include discretionary accruals (Polk and

Sapienza 2009) and dispersion in analyst forecasts of earnings (Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and

Huberman 2005).16 The intuitions for these variables are appealing. However, it is also useful

to test for misvaluation effects using MFFlow, which arguably captures an exogenous shock to




15
   Accounting rules require expensing R&D, which reduces book values, but the market capitalizes the R&D so
that high R&D firms tend to have low BP. In contrast, since V incorporates analyst forecasts of future earnings, V
reflects the future-profit-creation side of R&D expenditures, not just the expense side.
16
   Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1990) use CAPM alpha as their misvaluation proxy and find that it is unrelated to
capital expenditures. Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and Huberman (2005) use dispersion in analyst forecasts of earnings
as their misvaluation proxy in testing for a relation with aggregate capital expenditures. Two studies use mutual
fund fire sales as proxies for undervaluation, and find that it is associated with cuts in capital expenditures (Hau
and Lai 2013) or R&D (Parise 2013). Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003) examine the relation between financial
constraints and valuations in determining capital expenditures. Several studies use structural methods to identify
misvaluation effects on capital expenditures, with mixed conclusions (Chirinko and Schaller (2001, 2012),
Campello and Graham (2013), Alti and Tetlock (2014), Warusawitharana and Whited (2015)).

                                                        16
misvaluation.17 More importantly, our paper differs from this previous work in focusing on the

effects on innovative inputs, outputs, and inventiveness.


2.4 Relation between R&D, Misvaluation, and Future Returns

        Past research has explored whether R&D predicts future abnormal returns. The results

are somewhat mixed, with some studies findings positive return predictive power and some

finding no significant effect. It might seem that such tests provide insight into whether

overvaluation encourages innovation. However, the misvaluation hypothesis does not have a

clear-cut prediction about whether R&D positively or negatively predicts returns, so such tests

do not get at the issues explored in our study.

        Specifically, even if, as hypothesized, misvaluation affects R&D, we expect much

variation in R&D to derive from other sources, notably including rational managerial responses

to growth opportunities. Existing theories suggest that such variation can induce misvaluation.

As suggested by Lev and Sougiannis (1996) and formally modelled in (Hirshleifer and Teoh

2003; Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh 2011), high R&D firms will be undervalued, if investors form

expectations based upon earnings without adjusting for the fact that R&D, an economic

investment which generates future cash flows, is expensed. In contrast, as we suggest here,

high R&D may derive from overvaluation, and therefore be associated with overvaluation. A

general sample will include both sources of variation in R&D, making the prediction for future

returns ambiguous. So whether R&D predicts returns is not a test of whether misvaluation

induces innovative activity.


3. Results

        Our tests are based upon MFFlow as the misvaluation measure; results using VP as an



17
  Alternatively, it can be informative to use a more inclusive measure of misvaluation such as VP, as in our
robustness checks, as VP is designed to measure the overall misvaluation of the ﬁrm’s equity rather than the
components of misvaluation that derive from earnings management or disagreement.

                                                    17
alternative proxy for misvaluation reinforce our conclusions (see the Internet Appendix).


3.1 The Relation between Misvaluation and Innovation Measures

       We report the regression test results in Table 3 for the relation between year t + 1

innovative inputs and outputs, with year t misvaluation. The dependent variables are the

measures of R&D expenditures (RD), patents (Log(1+Pat)), citations (Log(1+Cites)), and

inventiveness (Novelty, Originality, and Scope). The independent variable of primary interest

is misvaluation (beginning-of-year MFFlow). The control variables include proxies for growth

opportunities (either BP or 3 year sales growth GS), cash flow (CF) measured as net income

before depreciation and R&D expense scaled by lagged assets, leverage (Leverage), the ﬁrm

age truncated at 50 (Age), and log of lagged assets. All independent variables (except for the

indicator variables) are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one.

Following the innovation literature (e.g., Phillips and Zhdanov 2013; Seru 2014; Tian and

Wang 2014; Acharya and Xu 2017), we control for year and industry ﬁxed effects using the 2-

digit SIC industry classification of Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999). All standard errors in the

regressions are simultaneously clustered by both firm and year.

       As a reminder, the timing of our variable definitions is important for interpreting these

tests. A patent or citation attributed to year t + 1 is associated with a patent that was applied

for in year t + 1, but the relevant patent grant or citation could be, and often is, received in a

later year. We are therefore measuring long-term innovation over an extended period associated

with patent applications in year t + 1.

       We report two regression speciﬁcations for each dependent variable. Model (1) uses the

book-to-price ratio (BP) as the control for growth opportunities, while model (2) uses the 3-

year sales growth rate (GS). The use of BP as a growth control is likely conservative as it

contains information about misvaluation. In subsequent tests, we report results using only GS

as the growth control; results are also robust using BP.

                                               18
3.1.1 Innovative Input

        The ﬁrst set of columns describes the relationship of misvaluation with R&D. Column

1 shows a highly signiﬁcant negative coefficient of −1.47 (t = −7.72). Since high MFFLow

indicates equity undervaluation, this finding indicates that greater overvaluation (or less

undervaluation) is strongly associated with higher innovative expenditures. A one standard

deviation increase in overvaluation is associated with an increase in R&D of 16.3% relative to

the R&D sample mean (9%). Column 2, which uses GS as the control for growth opportunities,

indicates a similar sensitivity of R&D to MFFlow; the R&D coefficient is −1.51 (t = −7.77).

The effect of misvaluation on R&D is roughly comparable to the effect of a one standard

deviation increase in growth prospects (proxied by BP or GS), and far stronger than the effect

of a one standard deviation increase in cash flow.

        A general possible concern for tests of whether how misvaluation affects innovative

activities such as R&D is reverse causality—investors may overvalue firms with high

innovation activity. Two considerations help alleviate this concern. First, MFFlow is a shock

that is arguably exogenous to the firm’s innovative project opportunities. It is based on investor

outflows from mutual funds, and is not based on whether a mutual fund is specifically selling

the given firm. (As a reminder, MFFlow is based on the hypothetical selling of a given firm

that a fund would engage in if it were to sell its current holdings in proportion to current weights

in the firm’s portfolio.)

        Second, there is no evidence in the literature that suggests investors systematically

overvalue R&D. To the contrary, since R&D is expensed, it has been argued that investors who

are fixated on earnings tend to undervalue firms with high R&D (e.g., Lev and Sougiannis

1996). Furthermore, the evidence that R&D predicts abnormal returns is mixed, and it is, if

anything, a positive return predictor (e.g., Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis 2001; Eberhart,

Maxwell, and Siddique 2004).

                                                19
3.1.2 Innovative Output Measures

         We next examine innovative output measures. Log(1+Pat) measures the ﬁrm’s success

in obtaining patents; Log(1+Cites) indirectly reﬂects the number and importance of the patents.

The regressions again indicate significant misvaluation effects on innovative output and with

alternative controls for growth prospects, suggesting an increase in innovative output that is

commensurate with the increased innovative input that is associated with stock overvaluation.

From Column 2, a one standard deviation increase in overvaluation (measured by MFFlow)

leads to a 0.08 increase of Log(1+Pat), which would boost the patent count by 1.15, to 13.93,

for a firm with a patent count at the sample mean. This is 9% of the sample mean number of

patents, or a more than 20% increase over the sample median patent count of 5 for firms with

a positive patent count.18 A similar calculation suggests that for a firm with the mean Cites

(11.59), a one standard deviation increase in overvaluation leads to an increase in the year and

technology class adjusted citation count of 0.51, which is 4.4% of the sample mean.

        Turning to innovative inventiveness, we observe that greater overvaluation is also

associated with all three proxies for inventiveness. A one standard deviation increase in

overvaluation leads to an increase of 9.8%, 7.8%, and 9.6% in Novelty, Originality, and Scope,

respectively, relative to the sample mean values. This suggests that overvalued ﬁrms are more

prone to engage in ‘moon shot’ projects.


3.1.3 Robustness

        The tests in Table 3 are designed to remove the effects of growth opportunities as much

as possible to focus sharply on misvaluation effects. Our measure of misvaluation (MFFlow)

is designed to be exogenous to growth opportunities, but our results are robust to including



18
  For a firm with the mean patent count (12.78), a one standard deviation decrease in MFFlow leads to a new Pat
value N, where log(1+N) – log(1+12.78) = 0.08. Solving for N yields the new patent count of 13.93, which is an
increase of 9% relative to the sample mean.

                                                      20
additional growth controls such as BP, GS, or analyst long-term earnings growth rate forecast

(LTG; results using LTG as a control are unreported for brevity). Also, as mentioned in footnote

3, we use an industry adjusted MFFlow measure to remove any possible remaining industry

growth effects from MFFlow; and, alternatively, we filter growth-related return factors from

MFFlow by using the residual from regressing MFFlow on the Fama-French high-minus-low

(book-to-market) factor or a high-minus-low R&D factor. Finally, to address the concern that

firms acquire innovation through takeovers, we remove all firms involved in acquisition

activities in the prior three years; again all of our results remain robust.

        The sample for the regressions using R&D is smaller, because R&D is missing in

Compustat for many firms. Some studies retain observations with missing R&D and set its

value in those cases to zero. In unreported tests, we find that our findings are robust to setting

missing R&D values to zero (MFFlow still significantly affects R&D, though the effects are

slightly weaker) or to restricting the sample to non-zero R&D observations (where the

misvaluation effects on R&D and innovative output are even stronger).

        There are also perceptible differences between the earlier and later periods of our

sample. In the earlier years there is a lower level of R&D relative to total assets and higher

inflation. In more recent years, many firms hold much higher levels of cash, which could affect

the scaling of capital and R&D expenditures. In addition, in later years of the sample, there is

a more severe truncation bias in the measurement of citations and inventiveness. In unreported

tests, we split the sample into two roughly equal periods (before and after December 1994).

Most of the misvaluation effects on R&D, innovative output, and inventiveness are significant

in the earlier time period, and all are highly significant in the later period. The strength of the

effects in the later period is more than double that in the earlier period. The stronger

misvaluation effects on innovation may be related to greater importance of corporate

innovation, increased use of equity financing, increased catering incentives of managers, or


                                                 21
heightened shared sentiment effects, in more recent times.19


3.2 Long-Term Effects of Overvaluation on Innovation

         It may take some time for the investment in innovation to generate any output,

especially relatively fundamental innovations such as moon shot projects. On the other hand,

equity overvaluation tends to be transient (e.g., on the order of a few years), and managers may

want to take advantage of overvaluation in a timely manner. So it is interesting to look at the

long-term effects of overvaluation on innovation.

         We therefore examine the long-term overvaluation effects by regressing innovation

variables on lagged misvaluation. This repeats the tests in Table 3 using lagged misvaluation

(MFFlow) by one, two, or three years (hereafter, we use GS as a growth control; using BP

produces similar results). Table 4 reports the results when we lag misvaluation by three years;

results using shorter lags follow a similar pattern. While the misvaluation effect on RD

moderately decreases moving from the immediate next year to three years after, misvaluation

significantly predicts future innovative output (Pat and Cites) and inventiveness (Novelty,

Originality and Scope) up to three years ahead, with even a slightly higher strength (for most

output and inventiveness measures) than the immediate effect—possibly because of lags in the

effect of misvaluation on innovative output. Therefore, the misvaluation effect on innovation

is persistent.

         The finding that misvaluation affects long-term investment in innovation is consistent

with the catering theory, which is about how transient variations in stock prices motivate

managers who care about the short-term prices to take action that affect long-term value. It is

also consistent with other corporate finance studies that find enduring effects of misvaluation



19
   The stronger effects of misvaluation on innovation is not mainly driven by the technology boom of the late
1990s, as the effects are quite similar between the late 1990s and the period after 2000. Also, our results are not
driven by truncation of patent data near the end of the sample period as the results remain strong even if we end
the sample in 2000.

                                                        22
on corporate policy (e.g., Baker and Wurgler (2002) on valuation and capital structure). In

addition, the financing channel is influenced by transient mispricing, because, as is well-

documented in the corporate finance literature, short-term financial constraints influence long-

term investment. Indeed, financing constraints are especially important for R&D activities (Li

2011).

         It could be argued that for misvaluation to affect innovation, it must persist long enough

for firms to react to it. We provide some evidence in the Internet Appendix to suggest that

misvaluation is not too transient for firms to use it in making innovation decisions.20 To see

whether the effect of MFFlow on innovation is stronger when the MFFlow is more persistent,

we conduct tests for subsamples sorted by MFFlow autocorrelation. Specifically, we create an

indicator for a firm being in the top autocorrelation quintile and interact it with 3-year lagged

MFFlow in the long-run innovation regression. Table 5 shows that this interaction variable has

a significant and negative coefficient in most of the innovative output and inventiveness

regressions, suggesting that MFFlow has a stronger long-run effect on innovation when the

misvaluation is more persistent. Interestingly, the interaction variable is insignificant when the

dependent variable is innovative input (R&D). One possible interpretation of these results is

that overvaluation promotes R&D spending regardless of whether mispricing is persistent; but

when mispricing is persistent, firms tend to engage in more productive and inventive

innovation.


3.3 Financing versus Non-Financing Channels

         Misvaluation can affect investment in general, either through equity issuance, risky debt



20
   MFFlow—which is measured by summing quarterly outflows in the previous four quarters—has a mean
autocorrelation of 0.254, indicating some persistence. Table IA-12 suggests evidence that misvaluation is
sufficiently slow moving to affect firm innovative investment. It reports how MFFlow evolves over time for the
top and bottom MFFlow quintiles, i.e., the mean MFFlow values for firms currently ranked in the top and bottom
MFFlow quintile over the past five years. Firms in the top quintile have higher MFFlow in the past five years than
firms in the bottom quintile.

                                                       23
issuance, or via catering or shared sentiment (Stein 1996; Baker, Stein, and Wurgler 2003;

Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and Huberman 2005; Jensen 2005; Polk and Sapienza 2009;

Badertscher, Shanthikumar and Teoh, 2019). To estimate the extent to which misvaluation

affects investment via the equity and debt channels, we perform a path analysis following

Badertscher, Shanthikumar, and Teoh (2019). Path analysis is a method of comparing an

independent variable’s direct effect on the dependent variable to the indirect effects that operate

via intermediate variables. Of course, the ability to disentangle paths of effects relies on a test

variable such as MFFlow to identify causation. We estimate the following regressions:

                    RDit = a1 + b1 MFFlowit + c1EIit + d1DIit +θ1 X1it + u1it

                           EIit = a2 + b2 MFFlowit + θ2 X2it + u2it,

                            DIit = a3 + b3 MFFlowit + θ3 X2it + u3it,

where i indexes firms and t denotes years. All regressions include year and 2-digit SIC industry

ﬁxed effects in addition to the control variables in the vectors X1 and X2 (such as GS, CF or

ROA, Leverage, Age, and Size), with standard errors clustered by firm and year.

       Panels A and B of Table 6 indicate the control variables for each regression. The

estimated value of b1 captures the non-financing effect of MFFlow on investment, and the

estimated value of b2 × c1 captures the effect of MFFlow through the equity issuance channel.

Similarly, the estimated value of b3 × d1 captures the effect of MFFlow through the debt

issuance channel. We interpret the non-financing effect as likely coming from either catering

or shared sentiment.

       Intuitively, if the relation of equity issuance to investment is similar regardless of

whether this issuance was induced by MFFlow, the effect of MFFlow operating through the

equity channel is captured by the corresponding coefficient in the ﬁrst equation, with the direct

effect captured by the MFFlow coefficient. The second equation gives the coefficient needed

to rescale the EI coefficient in the ﬁrst equation to reﬂect the sensitivity of the financing


                                                24
variable to MFFlow. A similar remark applies to debt issuance.

       Firm overvaluation (as measured by equity overvaluation) can lead to a reduction in

both the cost of equity financing and cost of debt financing. There are, however, some reasons

to expect the effect on debt financing to be relatively weak. As documented in Dong,

Hirshleifer, and Teoh (2012), debt issuance is not nearly as sensitive as equity issuance to

equity misvaluation. On the one hand, the factors that drive high equity valuation may similarly

also drive high debt valuation, which reduces the cost of debt and therefore increase the

incentive to issue debt. On the other hand, there is a substitution effect between equity and debt

financing, and since equity is more sensitive to equity valuation than debt, an increased level

of equity financing may lead to a reduction of debt financing. So the net effect of equity

misvaluation on debt issuance should be weak or perhaps even reversed.

       Table 6 reports key coefficient estimates from the regressions. The percentages at the

bottom of Panel C summarize the portion of the total effect of MFFlow that is through the

equity issuance, debt issuance, and the non-financing channels. The preponderance of the total

effect of MFFlow on R&D, 72.12%, comes from the non-financing channel. The equity

channel contributes 27.06%, with debt issuance contributing the remaining 0.82%. Additional

tests (reported in Internet Appendix Table IA-4) confirm that, using VP instead of MFFlow to

measure mispricing, we obtain the same conclusion that non-financing is the primary channel

through which stock misvaluation affects R&D spending.

       According to the pecking order theory, debt issuance is supposed to be preferred to

equity financing. Our finding that equity issuance is more important than debt financing in

innovative investment is therefore inconsistent with the pecking order. Other research also

finds evidence inconsistent with the pecking order. For example, Graham and Harvey (2001,

p. 222) find that “asymmetric information does not seem to cause the importance of these

[pecking-order] factors, as it should if the pecking-order model is the true model of capital


                                               25
structure choice.” One interpretation of our finding is that the existence of equity overvaluation

in effect reduces the cost of equity, which consists of the main form of external financing

associated with innovation. We should expect this reduction to be especially important for

firms that engage in R&D activity, since equity is the main form of external financing for firms

that engage in R&D. This is also consistent with the evidence from Huang and Ritter (2019)

that debt financing is associated with short-term cash needs while equity financing is associated

with long-term R&D investment.


       We also perform a path analysis for subsamples sorted by yearly aggregate

misvaluation (measured by the mean MFFlow of the sample firms) and catering incentive

(proxied by share turnover). Tables IA-13 and IA-14 show that the total MFFlow effect on

R&D, as well as the effect through each individual channel, is much higher in high valuation

years (i.e,, below-median aggregate MFFlow) than in low valuation markets. In fact, the direct

effect accounts for a larger portion of the total effect in high valuation markets (77.3%) than in

low valuation markets (71.1%). Likewise, Tables IA-15 and IA-16 confirm that the total effect,

as well as component effects, of MFFlow on R&D is much higher among high turnover firms.

However, the equity channel effect is also stronger among high turnover firms, so that overall,

the portion of effect through the direct channel is slightly lower for high turnover firms (73.9%)

that among low turnover firms (74.7%).



3.4 Effect of Turnover

       Table 7 tests for interaction effects of overvaluation and catering incentives on

innovative investments and output. We test the hypothesis that misvaluation has a stronger

marginal effect on innovation among high turnover ﬁrms by including an interaction between

MFFlow and an indicator for a ﬁrm being in the top turnover quintile.

       Consistent with the hypothesis that misvaluation effects on innovation are stronger


                                               26
when firms have a strong catering incentive, the sensitivity of R&D expenditure to MFFlow is

much stronger among high turnover ﬁrms, with an interaction coefficient of −1.43 (t = −2.73),

which is larger than the baseline coefficient of −1.25 (t = −7.44). An even stronger pattern

holds for innovative output and inventiveness. In the top turnover quintile, the effect of

overvaluation on innovative output (Pat and Cites) is 3.9-5.2 times greater, and the effect on

inventiveness (Novelty, Originality, and Scope) is 3.4-3.8 times greater, than the baseline

effect.

          In the full sample, a one standard deviation increase in overvaluation as measured by

MFFlow leads to an increase of 16.8% in R&D, 9% in patent count, 4.4% in citations, 9.8% in

novelty, 7.8% in originality, and 9.6% in scope relative to the sample mean values. However,

the effects are much stronger in the top turnover quintile. According to the coefficient estimates

in Table 6, among the top turnover quintile, a one standard deviation boosts RD, Pat, Cites,

Novelty, Originality, and Scope by 29.8%, 39.2%, 15.1%, 27.4%, 21.2%, and 28.1% relative

to the sample mean, respectively. The results conﬁrm that the sensitivity of R&D, patents and

citations to overvaluation is greater in the top turnover quintile. Furthermore, the sensitivity of

innovative novelty, originality and scope to overvaluation is also much stronger among high

turnover ﬁrms, consistent with catering taking the form of undertaking moon shot projects.21



3.5 Convexity of Overvaluation Effects

          Are the misvaluation effects on innovation stronger among overvalued or undervalued

firms? On the one hand, it is easier to cut than to increase innovation, which implies stronger

effects when firms are undervalued. However, there are also several economic reasons to

believe that the misvaluation effect on innovation is stronger among overvalued than among



21
  In unreported tests we find that the effects of MFFlow on innovation are generally stronger among firms with
the least financial constraints (i.e., with the lowest Kaplan-Zingales (1997) index), confirming that MFFlow does
affect innovation through the non-financing channel.

                                                       27
undervalued firms. First, when there are fixed costs of issuing equity, overvalued firms should

be more likely to issue than undervalued firms. Second, when there are positive

complementarities in innovation, overvaluation will tend to have a nonlinear increasing effect

on innovation. Third, overvaluation can insulate managers from career concerns if such

overvaluation is associated with favorable assessment of managerial skill. Such overvaluation

can therefore encourage undertaking risky innovative projects. Therefore, the direction of

nonlinearity is an empirical question.

       Table 8 tests for nonlinear effects of overvaluation on innovative investments and

output. We test the nonlinear effect of misvaluation by including an interaction between

MFFlow and an indicator for a ﬁrm being in the bottom MFFlow (top overvaluation) quintile.

Consistent with the hypothesis that misvaluation effects on innovation are convex, the

sensitivity of R&D expenditure to MFFlow is much stronger among overvalued ﬁrms, with a

large interaction coefficient of −5.39 (t = −9.42), which is nearly 5 times larger than the baseline

coefficient of −1.18 (t = −7.78). A similar conclusion holds for innovative output and

inventiveness using either of the misvaluation proxies. In the most overvalued quintile, the

effect of overvaluation on innovative output (Pat and Cites) is 6.7-8.7 times greater, and the

effect on inventiveness (Novelty, Originality, and Scope) is 4.4-6.3 times greater, than the

baseline effect.

       This nonlinear effect of misvaluation continues to hold when we use VP to measure

misvaluation (Table IA-10). When we repeat the test using turnover-orthogonalized fund flow

(MFF_r) to measure misvaluation, the convexity result does not hold (Tables IA-11 and IA-

12). However, MFF_r is overly restrictive as we describe in the introduction because it

removes all effects of turnover, a valid source of misvaluation, from the MFFlow measure. So,

we infer overall, that the misvaluation effect on innovation is convex.




                                                28
3.6 Effect of Misvaluation on Likelihood of Being an Innovator

        Since the majority of firms do not have positive patent and citation counts (Table 1),

we also examine whether overvaluation increases the probability that a firm has a positive

number of patents, or the likelihood of being an innovator. Logistic regressions (unreported)

indicate that overvaluation increases the probability that the firm has a positive patent count.

The interaction between overvaluation and turnover is also positively associated with the

probability that the firm has a positive patent count, consistent with overvaluation increasing

the likelihood of being an innovator. Since most firms have zero patents, getting a positive

patent count is an indicator of going for a big win.


3.7 Quantile Regressions

        Our results so far are based on the least squares regressions. We run quantile

regressions, which are more robust to influences of outliers and distributional assumptions of

the error process than linear regressions, to provide further robustness of our findings.22 Our

purpose is to explore whether overvaluation has an especially strong effect in promoting

unusually high innovative input, output and inventiveness. For RD, we run quantile regressions

for the 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.8 quantiles of the dependent variable. For Pat, Cites, Novelty,

Originality, and Scope, since the median is zero, we choose quantile values of 0.65, 0.7, 0.75,

and 0.8. If overvaluation promotes unusually high levels of innovative input, output or

inventiveness, then we expect to see stronger overvaluation effects at higher quantiles.

        The results are reported in Table 9. For brevity, we only report the coefficients of the

misvaluation proxy (MFFlow). If overvaluation is especially important in driving the highest

R&D outcomes and innovative outputs (moon shots), we ought to observe stronger MFFlow



22
  The quantile regression parameter estimates the change in a specified quantile (Q) of the response variable
produced by a one unit change in the predictor variable. For example, quantile regressions for different RD
quantiles allow us to compare how some percentiles of RD may be more affected by misvaluation than other
percentiles using the change in coefficient estimates of misvaluation across the different quantiles.

                                                     29
effects for higher quantile cutoffs. This is indeed what we observe. For example, for R&D,

although the quantile regressions show statistically significant effect of MFFlow at all

quantiles, the effect of MFFlow increases from –0.103 at quantile 0.2 to –1.427 at quantile 0.8,

with the difference in MFFlow coefficients highly significant.

       In all cases, the effect of misvaluation increases monotonically from lower to higher

quantiles, with the difference in misvaluation coefficient between the top and bottom quantiles

highly significant. These results are therefore consistent with the conclusion that extreme

overvaluation especially promotes moon shots in the sense of unusually high innovative

investment, output, and inventiveness.


4. Conclusion

       We test how market overvaluation affects corporate innovative inventiveness,

spending, and success. We employ patents-based measures of innovative inventiveness

(novelty, originality and scope) from previous literature to evaluate how misvaluation affects

the propensity to engage in ‘moon shot’ projects, and the success of such efforts. We also use

number of patents or patent citations as measures of innovative output, and R&D expenditures

as a proxy for innovative spending.

       We use a proxy for equity misvaluation that is designed to focus on variations in

mispricing unrelated to the firm’s growth prospects. This misvaluation measure uses

hypothetical mutual fund outflows, like the fund flow measure of Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang

(2012), but is unrelated to contemporaneous returns. Extensive additional controls for growth

opportunities are also included as a failsafe. We verify that our results are robust to using a

very different proxy for misvaluation based on a price-to-fundamentals ratio, as well as a price

pressure measure that is orthogonal to turnover.

       The tests reveal a strong positive association between equity overvaluation and

subsequent R&D spending, patent and patent citation production, and inventiveness.

                                              30
Furthermore, quantile regression indicates that higher valuation (i.e., less undervaluation or

greater overvaluation) has an especially strong effect on the frequency of extreme levels of

innovative input, output, and inventiveness.

       The effect of misvaluation operates partly via the association of misvaluation with

equity issuance, and more strongly via the non-financing channel, which includes managerial

catering to investor optimism about innovation, or alternatively overoptimism that is shared by

managers, customers, suppliers, and/or employees as well as investors. The sensitivity of

innovative inventiveness to misvaluation is greater among high turnover firms, consistent with

catering or shared sentiment effects, especially in the form of taking more inventive projects.

Furthermore, our evidence suggests that the effect of misvaluation on innovation is nonlinear,

with stronger effects among the most overvalued firms.

       In sum, we ﬁnd that strong evidence that high overvaluation is associated with a greater

propensity of firms to engage in inventive projects, and with greater innovative expenditures

that are rewarded with high innovative output. Overvaluation, especially among the most

catering-sensitive and perhaps the most overvalued firms, encourages moon shot activities.




                                               31
Appendix A. Calculation of Mutual Fund Outflow Price Pressure (MFFlow)

        We follow Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2012) to calculate the hypothetical mutual
fund outflow price pressure measure, with one modification (see below). Quarterly mutual fund
holdings data are obtained from CDA Spectrum/Thomson and mutual fund returns are from
CRSP.
        First, in each quarter t, we estimate mutual fund flows for all U.S. funds that are not
specialized in a given industry using CRSP mutual funds data as

                                            𝑇𝐴𝑗,𝑡−1 (1 + 𝑅𝑗,𝑡 ) − 𝑇𝐴𝑗,𝑡
                           𝑂𝑢𝑡𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑗,𝑡 =                                 ,
                                                      𝑇𝐴𝑗,𝑡−1

where TAj,t is the total asset value of fund j (= 1, …, m) at the end of quarter t and Rj,t is the
return of fund j in quarter t, computed by compounding monthly fund returns. Outflowj,t is
therefore the total outflow experienced by fund j in quarter t as a percentage of its asset value
at the beginning of the quarter.
        Second, we calculate the dollar holdings of stock i by fund j at the end of quarter t using
data from CDA Spectrum/Thomson. CDA Spectrum/Thomson provides the number of stocks
held by all US funds at the end of every quarter. The total dollar value of the participation held
by fund j in stock i at the end of quarter t in year t is

                                       𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 × 𝑃𝑅𝐶𝑖,𝑡 ,

where Sharei,j,t is the number of stocks i held by fund j at the end of quarter t, and PRCi,t is the
price of stock i at the end of quarter t.
        Third, we compute the quarterly mutual fund flow
                                      𝑚
                                           𝑂𝑢𝑡𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑗,𝑡 × 𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 × 𝑃𝑅𝐶𝑖,𝑡
                    𝑄𝑀𝑓𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑖,𝑡 = ∑                                          ,
                                                       𝑉𝑂𝐿𝑖,𝑡
                                     𝑗=1


where the summation is only over funds j for which Outflowj,t ≥ 0.05, and where VOLi,t is the
total dollar trading volume of stock i in quarter t. This variable corresponds to the hypothetical
selling pressure of stock i by all mutual funds subject to large outflows.
        Finally, we calculate the annual MFFlow for stock i in quarter t by recursively summing
up QMFFlow across the four quarters up to quarter t.
        Importantly, Wardlaw (2018) noted that the original Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang
measure use PRCi,t-1 in the above formula, which together with VOLi,t in the denominator,
induces a mechanical correlation between MFFlow and contemporaneous returns. We use
PRCi,t and VOLi,t measured in the same quarter, which removes the mechanical correlation, and
so our MFFlow measure is immune to this critique.




                                                 32
References
Acharya, Viral, and Zhaoxia Xu, 2017, Financial dependence and innovation: The case of
    public versus private firms, Journal of Financial Economics 124, 223-243.
Ali, Ashiq, Lee-Seok Hwang, and Mark A. Trombley, 2003, Residual-income-based valuation
     predicts future stock returns: Evidence on mispricing versus risk explanations, Accounting
     Review 78, 377–396.
Ali, Usman, and David A. Hirshleifer, 2017, Opportunism as a managerial trait: Predicting
     insider trading profits and misconduct. Journal of Financial Economics 126, 490-515.
Alti, Aydogan, and Paul C. Tetlock, 2014, Biased beliefs, asset prices, and investment: A
     structural approach, Journal of Finance 69, 325-361.
Badertscher, Brad, Devin Shanthikumar, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2019, Private ﬁrm investment
    public peer misvaluation, The Accounting Review 94-6, 31-60.
Baker, Malcolm, Xin Pan, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2012. A reference point theory of mergers and
    acquisitions. Journal of Financial Economics 106, 49-71.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeremy Stein, 2004, Market liquidity as a sentiment indicator, Journal
    of Financial Markets 7, 271–299.

Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C. Stein, and Jeffery Wurgler, 2003, When does the market matter?
    Stock prices and the investment of equity-dependent ﬁrms, Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 118, 969–1005.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffery Wurgler, 2000, The equity share in new issues and aggregate
    stock returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2219–2257.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffery Wurgler, 2002, Market timing and capital structure, Journal of
    Finance 57, 1–32.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2008, All that glitters: The effect of attention and news
    on the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors, Review of Financial
    Studies 21, 785-818.
Barro, Robert J., 1990, The stock market and investment, Review of Financial Studies 3, 115–
    131.
Basalla, George, 1988, The Evolution of Technology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
    MA.
Blanchard, Olivier, Changyong Rhee, and Lawrence Summers, 1993, The stock market, profit,
    and investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 115–136.
Camanho, Nelson, 2015, The effects of fund flows on corporate investment: A catering view,
   Working Paper, Catolica Lisbon School of Business & Economics.
Campello, Murillo, and John R. Graham, 2013, Do stock prices influence corporate decisions?
   Evidence from the technology bubble, Journal of Financial Economics 107, 89-110.
Chan, Louis K.C., Josef Lakonishok, and Theodore Sougiannis, 2001, The stock market
    valuation of research and development expenditures, Journal of Finance 56, 2431–2456.

                                              33
Chirinko, Robert S., and Huntley Schaller, 2001, Business ﬁxed investment and “bubbles”: The
     Japanese case, American Economic Review 91, 663–680.
Chirinko, Robert S., and Huntley Schaller, 2012. Do bubbles lead to overinvestment? A
     revealed preference approach. In D. D. Evanoff, G. G. Kaufman, and A. G. Malliaris,
     eds., New Perspectives on Asset Price Bubbles: Theory, Evidence, and Policy, pp. 433–
     453. (Oxford University Press, New York, NY).
Cornell, Bradford, 2013, Discounted cash flow and residual earnings valuation: A comparison
    in the context of valuation disputes, Business Valuation Review 31, 10–20.
Cornell, Bradford, 2016, The Tesla run-up: A follow-up with investment implications, Journal
    of Portfolio Management 43, 1-4.
Cornell, Bradford, and Aswath Damodaran, 2014, Tesla: Analysis of a run-up, Journal of
    Portfolio Management 41, 139-151.
Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford, 2007, Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets,
    Journal of Financial Economics 86, 479–512.
Custodio, Claudia, Miguel A. Ferreira, and Pedro P. Matos, 2013, Do general managerial skills
    spur innovation?, Darden Business School Working Paper.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and Rene M. Stulz, 2010, Seasoned equity offerings,
   market timing, and the corporate lifecycle, Journal of Financial Economics 95, 275–295.
Dessaint, Olivier, Thierry Foucault, Laurent Fresard, and Adrien Matray, forthcoming, Noisy
    stock prices and corporate investment. Review of Financial Studies.
D’Mello, Ranjan, and Pervin K. Shroff, 2000, Equity undervaluation and decisions related to
   repurchase tender offers: An empirical investigation, Journal of Finance 55, 2399–2424.
Dong, Ming, David Hirshleifer, Scott Richardson, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2006, Does investor
   misvaluation drive the takeover market?, Journal of Finance 61, 725–762.
Dong, Ming, David Hirshleifer, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2012, Overvalued equity and ﬁnancing
   decisions, Review of Financial Studies 25, 3645–3683.
Eberhart, Allan C., William F. Maxwell, and Akhtar R. Siddique, 2004, An examination of
    long‐term abnormal stock returns and operating performance following R&D increases,
    Journal of Finance 59, 623-650.
Edmans, Alex, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2012, The real effects of financial markets: The
   impact of prices on takeovers. Journal of Finance 67, 933–971.
Frankel, Richard, and Charles M. C. Lee, 1998, Accounting valuation, market expectation, and
    the book-to-market eﬀect, Journal of Accounting and Economics 25, 283–321.
George, Thomas J., Chuan-Yang Hwang, and Yuan Li, 2018, The 52-week high, Q theory and
    the cross section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 128 148-163.
Gilchrist, Simon, Charles P. Himmelberg, and Gur Huberman, 2005, Do stock price bubbles
    inﬂuence corporate investment?, Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 805–827.
Gornall, Will, and Ilya Strebulaev, 2017, Squaring venture capital valuations with reality,

                                             34
    Working Paper, University of British Columbia and Stanford University.
Gross, Daniel, 2009, Pop! Why bubbles are great for the economy. Harper Collins.
Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance:
    Evidence from the field. Journal of Financial Economics 61, 187-243.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2001, The NBER patent citations
     data ﬁle: Lessons, insights and methodological tools, NBER Working Paper No.8498,
     University of California at Berkeley.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2005, Market value and patent
     citations, RAND Journal of Economics 36, 16–38.
Hau, Harald, and Sandy Lai, 2013, Real effects of stock underpricing, Journal of Financial
    Economics 108, 392-408.
Henderson, Brian J., Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2006, World markets
    for raising new capital, Journal of Financial Economics 82, 63–101.
Hirshleifer, David A., Po-Hsuan Hsu, and Dongmei Li, 2018, Innovative originality,
    profitability, and stock returns. Review of Financial Studies 31, 2553-2605.
Hirshleifer, David A., Sonya Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2011, Limited investor attention and
    stock market misreactions to accounting information, Review of Asset Pricing Studies 1,
    35-73.
Hirshleifer, David A., Angie Low, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2012, Are overconfident CEOs better
    innovators? Journal of Finance 67, 1457–1498.
David Hirshleifer, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Sheridan Titman, 2006, Feedback and the
    success of irrational investors, Journal of Financial Economics 81, 311-338.
Hirshleifer, David A., and Siew Hong Teoh, 2003, Limited attention, information disclosure,
    and financial reporting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 36, 337-386.
Huang, Rongbing and Ritter, Jay R., 2019. Corporate Cash Shortfalls and Financing Decisions.
    Working Paper.
Jeng, Leslie A., Andrew Metrick, and Richard Zeckhauser, 2003, Estimating the returns to
    insider trading: A Performance-Evaluation Perspective, Review of Economics and
    Statistics 85, 453-471.
Jensen, Michael C., 2005, Agency costs of overvalued equity, Financial Management 34, 5–
    19.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do financial constraints explain why investment
    is correlated with cash flow? Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169–216.
Katz, Michael, and Carl Shapiro, 1986, Technology adoption in the presence of network
    externalities, Journal of Political Economy 94, 822–841.
Keynes, John Maynard, 1931, An economic analysis of unemployment, in Collected Writings,
    vol. XIII (Macmillan, London, 1973).


                                             35
Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoffman, 2017, Technological
   innovation, resource allocation, and growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 665-
   712.
Lakonishok, Josef, and Inmoo Lee, 2001, Are Insider Trades Informative? Review of Financial
    Studies, 14, 79–111.
LaPlante, Michele, and Chris J. Muscarella, 1997, Do institutions receive comparable
    execution in the NYSE and Nasdaq markets? A transaction study of block trades, Journal
    of Financial Economics 45, 97–134.
Lee, Charles M.C., James Myers, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 1999, What is the intrinsic
     value of the Dow?, Journal of Finance 54, 1693–1741.
Lee, Charles M. and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2000, Price Momentum and Trading Volume.
     Journal of Finance 55, 2017-2069.
Lerner, Josh, Morten Sørensen, and Per Strömberg, 2011, Private equity and long-run
    investment: The case of innovation, Journal of Finance 66, 445–477.
Lev, Baruch, and Theodore Sougiannis, 1996, The capitalization, amortization, and value-
    relevance of R&D, Journal of Accounting and Economics 21, 107–138.
Li, Dongmei, 2011, Financial constraints, R&D investment, and stock returns, Review of
    Financial Studies 24, 2974-3007.
Li, Jiacui, 2019, Fund flows, slow-moving liquidity provision, and common factors in stock
     returns, Stanford University Working Paper.
Li, Jun, and Jianfeng Yu, 2012, Investor attention, psychological anchors, and stock return
     predictability, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 401-419.
Lou, Xiaoxia, and Yan Albert Wang, 2018, Flow-induced trading pressure and corporate
    investment, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 53, 171-201.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23–52.
Ma, Yueran, forthcoming, Non-financial firms as cross-market arbitrageurs, Journal of
    Finance.
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1990, The stock market and
   investment: Is the market a sideshow, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1990, 157–
   202.
Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Mark Grinblatt, 1999, Do industries explain momentum?, Journal
   of Finance 54, 1249–1290.
Ohlson, James, 1995, Earnings, book values, and dividends in equity valuation, Contemporary
    Accounting Research 11, 661–687.
Parise, Gianpaolo, 2013, Do underpriced firms innovate less? Swiss Finance Institute Research
     Paper No. 14-12.
Phillips, Gordon M., and Alexei Zhdanov, 2013, R&D and the Incentives from merger and
     acquisition activity, Review of Financial Studies 26, 34-78.

                                             36
Polk, Chris, and Paola Sapienza, 2009, The stock market and corporate investment: A test of
    catering theory, Review of Financial Studies 22, 187–217.
Ritter, Jay R., 1991, The long-run performance of initial public offerings, Journal of Finance
     46, 3–27.
Romer, Paul M., 1990, Endogenous Technological Change, Journal of Political Economy 96,
   S71-S102.
Seru, Amit, 2014, Firm boundaries matter: Evidence from conglomerates and R&D activity,
    Journal of Financial Economics 111, 381–405.
Schumpeter Joseph A., 1934, The Theory of Economic Development, Harvard University Press:
    Cambridge, MA.
Shiller, Robert J., 2014, Speculative asset prices, American Economic Review 104, 1486-1517.
Shleifer, Andrei, 2000, Are markets efficient? No, arbitrage is inherently risky. Wall Street
    Journal CCXXXVI:A10.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 2003, Stock market driven acquisitions, Journal of
     Financial Economics 55, 2219-2258.
Singh, Jasjit, and Lee Fleming, 2010, Lone inventors as sources of breakthroughs: Myth or
     reality? Management Science 56, 41–56.
Sorkin, Andrew Ross, 2017, How valuable is a unicorn? Maybe not as much as it claims to be.
     New York Times, Oct. 16, 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/16/business/how-
     valuable-is-a-unicorn-maybe-not-as-much-as-it-claims-to-be.html.

Stein, Jeremy, 1996, Rational capital budgeting in an irrational world, Journal of Business 69,
     429–455.
Teoh, Siew Hong, Ivo Welch, and T. J. Wong, 1998a, Earnings management and the long-
    term market performance of initial public offerings, Journal of Finance 53, 1935–1974.
Teoh, Siew Hong, Ivo Welch, and T. J. Wong, 1998b, Earnings management and the
    underperformance of seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 50, 63–
    99.
Teoh, Siew Hong, T. J. Wong, and Gita Rao, 1998, Are accruals during an initial public
    offering opportunistic?, Review of Accounting Studies 3, 175–208.
Tian, Xuan, and Tracy Wang, 2014, Tolerance for Failure and Corporate Innovation, Review
    of Financial Studies 27, 211-255.
Tobin, James, 1969, A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory, Journal of Money,
    Credit, and Banking 1, 15–29.
Trajtenberg, Manuel, Rebeca Henderson, and Adam Jaffe, 1997, University versus corporate
     patents: A window on the basicness of invention, Economics of Innovation and New
     Technology 5, 19–50.
Wardlaw, Malcolm, 2018, Measuring mutual fund flow pressure as shock to stock returns,


                                              37
    University of Michigan Working Paper.

Warusawitharana, Missaka, and Toni M. Whited, 2016, Equity market misvaluation,
   financing, and investment, Review of Financial Studies 29, 603–654.
Weitzman, Martin L., 1998, Recombinant growth, Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 331–
    360.
Welch, Ivo, and David Wessels, 2000, The cross-sectional determinants of corporate capital
    expenditures, Schmalenbach Business Review 52, 103–136.




                                            38
           Table 1. Summary Statistics of Innovation Input and Outputs, Valuation, and Control Variables
The sample includes U.S. non-financial firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and
CDA/Spectrum mutual fund flows data during 1981-2012. Patent and citation counts data (November 2011 version) is
provided by Kogan et al. (2013); we end the patent and citation data in 2008 to reduce truncation biases caused by the
delay in patent approval and citation counts. Innovation input is R&D expenditure scaled by lagged total assets (RD).
Capital expenditures scaled by lagged total assets (CAPX) is also reported for comparison. Variables for the patents
applied for in a fiscal year include: number of patents (Pat); number of citations adjusted for the effects of year and
technological class (Cites); Novelty measured by number of citations per patent; Originality and Scope are patent-citation
quality measures as defined by Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001). MFFlow is the mutual fund price pressure measure
following Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2012). VP is the residual-income-value to price ratio. BP is the book equity to
price ratio. CF is cash flow (income before extraordinary items + depreciation + RD) over the fiscal year scaled by lagged
assets (missing RD is set to zero in the CF calculation). Leverage is defined as (long-term debt + current liabilities)/(long-
term debt + current liabilities + shareholders’ equity). Age is the number of years between the beginning of the fiscal year
and the listing date of the firm in CRSP, truncated at 50. GS is the growth rate of sales in the 3 years prior to each fiscal
year. LTG is the long-term analyst earnings growth rate forecast. Equity issuance (EI) and debt issuance (DI) are equity
and debt issuances during the fiscal year constructed from the balance sheet scaled by lagged assets. Turnover is monthly
trading volume scaled by the number of shares outstanding. Except for the innovation input and output variables, and cash
flow (CF), and equity issuance (EI), which are measured over each fiscal year, all other control variables, valuation
variables, and valuation sensitivity variables are measured in the month preceding the beginning of each fiscal year. Total
assets and sales figures are in 2012 dollars. All ratio variables are winsorized at the 1 st and 99th percentiles.

                                N             Mean           Std Dev         Median           P1                  P99
                                         Innovation Input and Output Variables
 RD (%)                       40,111           9.00           14.08            4.09          0.00                71.97
 CAPX (%)                     62,893           7.07            8.40            4.54          0.11                43.30
 Pat                          53,629          12.78           88.11            0.00          0.00                247.00
 Cites                        52,315          11.59           78.32            0.00          0.00                225.25
 Novelty                      52,315           0.39            0.74            0.00          0.00                 3.12
 Originality                  53,550           0.17            0.25            0.00          0.00                 0.80
 Scope                        52,315           0.15            0.23            0.00          0.00                 0.78
                                                   Valuation Variables
 MFFlow (%)                   63,488           3.52            6.01            1.65          0.01                30.52
 VP                           48,352           0.59            0.53            0.55         -1.09                 2.39
                              Control or Conditioning Variables for Innovation Regressions
 BP                           63,187           0.65            0.69            0.46         -0.24                4.11
 GS                           57,401           0.80            2.28            0.31         -0.75               11.54
 CF (%)                       63,315          11.33           16.41           11.60        -45.80               56.68
 Leverage                     63,041           0.28            0.27            0.24          0.00                1.24
 Age                          63,488          16.25           13.46           12.25          1.25               50.00
 Total Assets ($M)            63,435         3300.17        18072.30         395.31        12.16               49856.18
 LTG                          40,107           0.18            0.10            0.15          0.04                0.51
 EI (%)                       63,309           8.45           35.05            0.94        -14.64               163.35
 DI (%)                       63,435           6.51           23.49            2.16        -34.52               112.83
 Turnover (%)                 63,422          13.21           14.87            7.85          0.39               73.13




                                                             39
                   Table 2. Corporate Investment, Innovative Output, and Equity Valuations by Year
This table reports the time pattern of selected variables. The yearly mean values are reported, except for the valuation
ratios (BP and VP) for which the medians are shown. The sample includes U.S. non-financial firms listed on NYSE,
AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and CDA/Spectrum mutual fund flows data during 1981-2012. Patent and
citation data is from Kogan et al. (2016) (November 2011 version); we end the patent and citation data in 2008 to reduce
truncation biases.

Year        N           RD          CAPX        Pat         Cites       Novelty      Originali   Scope       MFFlow
                        (%)         (%)                                              ty                      (%)
  1981          295       3.98        13.91       38.16        36.15       0.56        0.23        0.25        1.31
  1982          707       3.98         9.99       20.44        19.36       0.54        0.20        0.24        5.12
  1983          689       4.25         8.43       19.65        18.65       0.50        0.20        0.24        4.36
  1984          686       5.73        11.23       18.96        18.45       0.53        0.19        0.23        1.48
  1985          1,186     6.00        10.06       12.32        12.36       0.47        0.17        0.21        4.16
  1986          1,229     6.18         9.15       11.40        11.53       0.46        0.18        0.21        4.33
  1987          1,333     6.26         8.34       11.17        11.13       0.48        0.18        0.21        4.51
  1988          1,346     5.85         8.69       12.20        12.15       0.46        0.17        0.20        2.71
  1989          1,300     6.07         8.58       13.47        13.45       0.45        0.18        0.21        1.98
  1990          1,329     6.80         8.33       13.76        13.87       0.49        0.18        0.21        1.56
  1991          1,781     6.38         7.16       10.75        10.96       0.39        0.16        0.18        10.18
  1992          1,813     6.91         7.39       11.08        11.52       0.40        0.16        0.18        4.18
  1993          1,926     7.73         7.93       11.15        11.51       0.40        0.16        0.18        3.53
  1994          2,211     8.18         8.40       10.77        11.15       0.39        0.17        0.18        3.26
  1995          2,563     9.23         8.87       11.39        11.55       0.40        0.17        0.18        1.96
  1996          2,415     8.86         9.17       12.03        12.44       0.40        0.17        0.17        2.37
  1997          2,358     9.65         8.93       14.54        15.13       0.46        0.19        0.19        2.08
  1998          2,653     10.13        8.63       13.00        13.32       0.42        0.18        0.17        2.16
  1999          2,929     10.97        7.79       12.67        12.80       0.40        0.17        0.16        4.17
  2000          2,819     11.33        7.73       13.98        13.95       0.40        0.17        0.15        9.24
  2001          2,664     9.20         6.02       15.62        14.93       0.42        0.19        0.14        4.74
  2002          2,781     9.80         4.90       15.67        13.76       0.41        0.20        0.13        1.57
  2003          2,810     10.39        4.87       15.03        11.84       0.40        0.20        0.10        2.70
  2004          2,489     9.40         5.46       15.43        10.83       0.38        0.20        0.08        2.06
  2005          2,493     9.55         5.71       14.21        8.30        0.33        0.18        0.06        2.11
  2006          2,523     10.68        6.20       11.23        5.27        0.29        0.17        0.04        3.71
  2007          2,403     10.12        6.35        7.58        2.85        0.22        0.14        0.02        2.93
  2008          2,444     9.69         5.97        3.41        0.94        0.14        0.10        0.01        3.21
  2009          2,497     9.64         3.99           -          -           -           -           -         4.21
  2010          2,322     9.74         4.86           -          -           -           -           -         3.36
  2011          2,265     9.38         5.52           -          -           -           -           -         2.85
  2012          2,229     10.07        5.54           -          -           -           -           -         3.25
   All       63,488       9.00         7.07       12.78        11.59       0.39        0.17        0.15        3.52




                                                          40
                                         Table 3. Regressions of Investments and Innovative Output on Stock Misvaluation
The variables are defined in Table 1. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. All regressions include 2-
digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by firm and year. The sample includes
U.S. non-financial, non-utility firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and CDA/Spectrum mutual fund flows data during 1981-2012.
The patent and citation (Pat and Cites) data sample period is 1981-2008.

                           (1)            (2)        (1)      (2)          (1)       (2)           (1)             (2)     (1)         (2)        (1)           (2)
                                   RD                 Log(1+Pat)            Log(1+Cites)                 Novelty             Originality                Scope

MFFlow                    -1.47          -1.51      -0.07      -0.08      -0.03       -0.04       -3.53        -3.82      -1.19       -1.33      -1.37       -1.44
                         (-7.72)        (-7.77)    (-7.13)    (-7.10)    (-7.80)     (-7.88)     (-7.09)      (-7.49)    (-6.30)     (-6.69)    (-7.30)     (-7.67)
BP                        -1.61                     -0.08                 -0.04                   -4.88                   -1.78                  -1.28
                         (-6.86)                   (-5.95)               (-6.42)                 (-6.66)                 (-6.20)                (-5.05)
GS                                         1.15                  0.02                  0.02                      3.14                  0.74                   0.67
                                          (6.43)                (3.43)                (4.35)                    (5.40)                (4.67)                 (4.64)
CF                         0.28            1.07       0.09       0.13       0.04       0.06        3.89          5.53       1.02       1.76        1.29       1.83
                          (1.04)          (4.11)     (6.43)     (8.73)     (6.80)     (9.23)      (5.11)        (7.14)     (3.91)     (7.32)      (4.49)     (6.21)
Leverage                  -1.22           -0.97      -0.18      -0.17      -0.08      -0.07       -7.22         -6.55      -2.76      -2.50       -2.65      -2.48
                         (-7.96)         (-6.51)   (-12.63)   (-11.65)   (-12.80)   (-11.79)    (-11.23)      (-10.10)   (-11.33)   (-10.39)    (-10.14)    (-9.82)
Log(Age)                  -1.60           -1.64       0.12       0.15       0.04       0.05       -0.03          0.45       1.24       1.54        1.15       1.43
                         (-9.92)         (-8.07)     (5.41)     (5.26)     (4.28)     (4.48)     (-0.03)        (0.46)     (3.31)     (3.53)      (3.20)     (3.67)
Log(Assets)               -3.96           -3.36       0.63       0.65       0.23       0.23       12.27         12.80       5.51       5.69        4.50       4.61
                        (-14.43)        (-13.03)   (18.06)     (18.16)    (18.73)    (18.92)     (14.72)       (15.32)    (19.04)    (19.53)     (10.25)    (10.06)
Intercept                  8.21            8.05      -0.16      -0.18      -0.09      -0.09       -2.03         -0.67       1.89       2.21       -4.62      -4.73
                         (56.94)        (54.22)     (-9.16)    (-8.20)   (-11.79)    (-9.73)     (-3.07)       (-0.76)     (7.90)     (7.33)     (-9.11)    (-8.31)

N                        39,773         35,911     53,150     47,986     51,853      46,802      51,853       46,802     53,072      47,917     51,853      46,802
R2                       0.3024         0.2838     0.3747     0.3850     0.3438      0.3552      0.1228       0.1252     0.1777      0.1808     0.2158      0.2260




                                                                                    41
          Table 4. Long-Term Misvaluation Effects: Regressions of Innovative Input, Output and Inventiveness on 3-Year Lagged Stock Misvaluation
The misvaluation measure (MFFlow) is lagged by 3 years. The variables are defined in Table 1. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean of zero
and standard deviation of one. Novelty, Originality, and Scope are in percentage. All regressions include 2-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. T-
statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by firm and year. The sample includes U.S. non-financial, non-utility firms listed on NYSE,
AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and CDA/Spectrum mutual fund flows data during 1981-2012. The patent and citation data (Pat, Cites, Novelty,
Originality, and Scope) sample period is 1981-2008.

                                 RD                 Log(1+Pat)            Log(1+Cites)             Novelty               Originality              Scope

MFFflow                          -1.42                  -0.09                  -0.04                  -4.27                  -1.53                  -1.23
                               (-7.08)                (-6.17)                (-6.61)                (-6.25)                (-7.08)                (-4.85)
GS                                1.83                  -0.01                  0.00                   2.03                   0.56                   0.39
                                (5.78)                (-0.85)                 (0.27)                 (1.85)                 (1.82)                 (1.36)
CF                                1.01                  0.16                   0.07                   6.29                   2.21                   2.20
                                (3.32)                 (7.62)                 (7.92)                 (6.17)                 (6.56)                 (5.44)
Leverage                         -0.80                  -0.17                  -0.07                  -5.86                  -2.21                  -2.13
                               (-4.77)               (-10.08)                (-9.93)                (-8.00)                (-8.22)                (-7.92)
Log(Age)                         -1.93                  0.17                   0.05                   -0.85                  1.44                   1.15
                               (-8.67)                 (4.49)                 (3.62)                (-0.69)                 (2.57)                 (2.33)
Log(Assets)                      -3.28                  0.68                   0.24                  13.08                   5.89                   4.52
                              (-12.07)                (17.20)                (17.94)                (15.23)                (18.52)                 (9.31)
Intercept                         8.51                  -0.29                  -0.13                  -1.21                  1.78                   -5.17
                              (48.02)                 (-8.95)                (-9.58)                (-1.21)                 (4.57)                (-7.11)

N                              28,147                 36,089                 35,058                 35,058                 36,034                 35,058
R2                             0.2831                 0.4009                 0.3762                 0.1385                 0.1909                 0.2517




                                                                                   42
                                     Table 5. Persistence of Misvaluation and Long-Term Misvaluaton Effects on Innovation
The 3-year lagged misvaluation measure (MFFlow) is interacted with an indicator for the highest quintile of MFFlow autocorrelation, HighAuto. The other
variables are defined in Table 1. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. Novelty, Originality, and Scope
are in percentage. All regressions include 2-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are
clustered by firm and year. The sample includes U.S. non-financial, non-utility firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and
CDA/Spectrum mutual fund flows data during 1981-2012. The patent and citation data (Pat, Cites, Novelty, Originality, and Scope) sample period is 1976-2008.

                                   RD                 Log(1+Pat)             Log(1+Cites)             Novelty             Originality               Scope

MFFlow                             -1.40                   -0.08                 -0.04                 -3.94                 -1.30                  -1.14
                                  (-7.13)                (-5.89)                (-6.48)               (-6.06)               (-6.67)                (-5.00)
MFFlow*HighAuto                    -0.18                   -0.09                 -0.03                 -2.62                 -1.75                  -0.71
                                  (-0.70)                (-2.61)                (-2.63)               (-1.95)               (-2.57)                (-1.30)
GS                                  1.83                   -0.01                  0.00                  2.04                  0.56                   0.39
                                   (5.78)                (-0.85)                 (0.28)                (1.86)                (1.82)                 (1.36)
CF                                  1.01                    0.16                  0.07                  6.27                  2.19                   2.19
                                   (3.32)                 (7.57)                 (7.88)                (6.14)                (6.50)                 (5.43)
Leverage                           -0.80                   -0.17                 -0.07                 -5.84                 -2.20                  -2.13
                                  (-4.77)               (-10.05)                (-9.90)               (-7.98)               (-8.18)                (-7.93)
Log(Age)                           -1.92                    0.17                  0.05                 -0.81                  1.46                   1.16
                                  (-8.66)                 (4.53)                 (3.66)               (-0.66)                (2.62)                 (2.36)
Log(Assets)                        -3.28                    0.68                  0.24                 13.08                  5.89                   4.52
                                 (-12.07)               (17.20)                 (17.93)               (15.24)               (18.57)                 (9.31)
Intercept                           8.51                   -0.29                 -0.13                 -1.28                  1.74                  -5.19
                                  (47.73)                (-9.01)                (-9.63)               (-1.27)                (4.45)                (-7.08)

N                                28,147                 36,089                  35,058                35,058                36,034                 35,058
R2                               0.2831                 0.4013                  0.3766                0.1386                0.1914                 0.2518




                                                                                 43
               Table 6. Path Analysis of the Effects of Misvaluation on R&D: Allowing Debt Issuance

This analysis is based on a sample during 1981-2012. The variables in Panel A are defined in Table 1. In Panel B, ROA is
operating income before depreciation and R&D expenses scaled by total assets for the prior fiscal year, and ΔCR is
change in the current ratio (total current assets divided by total current liabilities). All variables are not standardized. All
regressions include industry and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered
by firm and year. We break the total effect of MFFlow on R&D into three parts: the direct catering effect, and the indirect
effects through the equity issuance and debt issuance channels.

Panel A. RD Regression                                              Panel B. Equity Issuance (EI) and Debt Issuance (DI)
                                                                    Regressions
                                  RD                                                          EI                   DI
MFFlow                        -18.4757                              MFFlow               -46.2833              -8.7069
                                (-6.30)                                                    (-9.91)              (-5.54)
EI                              0.1498                              GS                     1.0165               0.5847
                                (16.12)                                                     (7.56)               (6.94)
DI                              0.0240                              ROA                   -0.3178               0.0487
                                 (3.55)                                                    (-9.61)               (5.20)
GS                              0.2926                              ΔCR                    3.8549              -1.6203
                                 (4.57)                                                     (5.03)              (-8.58)
CF                              0.1085                              Leverage              -0.3374              -4.3868
                                 (9.13)                                                    (-0.23)              (-5.66)
Leverage                       -4.1511                              Log(Age)              -2.0671              -1.1200
                                (-8.06)                                                    (-6.30)              (-5.64)
Log(Age)                       -1.2128                              Size                  -2.6969               0.1615
                                (-7.48)                                                   (-13.15)               (1.58)
Size                           -1.2091                              Intercept             34.5739               8.3476
                               (-11.32)                                                    (15.15)             (14.12)
Intercept                      16.3468
                                (21.60)

N                              35,876                               N                       55,320                  55,405
R2                             0.4476                               R2                      0.1488                  0.0428

Panel C. Path analysis results for the effects of MFFlow on RD
                                                                         Coefficient                       T-stat
(1) Direct Effect of MFFlow on RD
MFFlow → RD                                                               -18.4757                        (-6.30)

(2) Indirect Effect of MFFlow on RD via Equity Channel
MFFlow → EI                                                               -46.2833                        (-9.91)
EI → RD                                                                     0.1498                        (16.12)
Equity Path Effect                                                         -6.9332

(3) Indirect Effect of MFFlow on RD via Debt Channel
MFFlow → DI                                                                -8.7069                        (-5.54)
DI → RD                                                                     0.0240                         (3.55)
Debt Path Effect                                                          -0.20897

(4) Total MFFlow Effect on RD                                             -25.6179
% Direct Path                                                              72.12%
% Equity Path                                                              27.06%
% Debt Path                                                                 0.82%

                                                              44
                     Table 7. Regressions of Innovative Input, Output and Inventiveness on Stock Misvaluation: Interaction with Turnover
The misvaluation measure (MFFlow) is interacted with an overvaluation indicator. HighTurn) is an indicator variable for the highest Turnover quintile. The
variables are defined in Table 1. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. Novelty, Originality, and Scope
are in percentage. All regressions include 2-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are
clustered by firm and year. The sample includes U.S. non-financial, non-utility firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and
CDA/Spectrum mutual fund flows data during 1981-2012. The patent and citation data (Pat, Cites, Novelty, Originality, and Scope) sample period is 1976-2008.

                                   RD                 Log(1+Pat)             Log(1+Cites)             Novelty             Originality               Scope

MFFlow                             -1.25                   -0.06                 -0.03                  -2.79                -1.07                   -1.15
                                  (-7.44)                (-6.52)                (-7.39)                (-6.39)              (-6.23)                 (-7.30)
MFFlow*HiTurnover                  -1.43                   -0.25                 -0.10                  -7.88                -2.53                   -3.06
                                  (-2.73)                (-5.21)                (-4.91)                (-4.45)              (-4.60)                 (-3.98)
GS                                  1.03                    0.02                  0.01                   2.56                 0.61                    0.53
                                   (5.90)                 (2.35)                 (3.29)                 (4.72)               (3.90)                  (3.82)
CF                                  1.01                    0.13                  0.06                   5.26                 1.70                    1.77
                                   (4.07)                 (8.90)                 (9.39)                 (7.02)               (7.18)                  (6.32)
Leverage                           -0.94                   -0.17                 -0.07                  -6.34                -2.45                   -2.42
                                  (-6.89)               (-11.60)               (-11.84)               (-10.37)             (-10.67)                (-10.11)
Log(Age)                           -1.39                    0.16                  0.06                   1.22                 1.71                    1.61
                                  (-6.61)                 (5.67)                 (5.00)                 (1.23)               (3.88)                  (4.11)
Log(Assets)                        -3.79                    0.63                  0.22                  11.33                 5.36                    4.28
                                 (-13.43)                (18.07)                (18.64)                (12.25)              (16.71)                  (9.78)
Turnover                            1.05                    0.03                  0.02                   3.99                 0.84                    0.80
                                   (4.14)                 (1.06)                 (1.88)                 (3.84)               (2.35)                  (2.18)
Intercept                           7.59                   -0.22                 -0.12                  -5.14                 1.24                   -5.70
                                  (43.23)                (-5.75)                (-7.18)                (-3.46)               (2.32)                 (-7.06)

N                                35,911                 47,986                  46,802                46,802                47,917                  46,802
R2                               0.2919                 0.3878                  0.3589                0.1293                0.1828                  0.2286




                                                                                 45
      Table 8. Regressions of Innovative Input, Output and Inventiveness on Stock Misvaluation: Interaction with High Valuation Indicator (LowFlow)
The misvaluation measure (MFFlow) is interacted with an overvaluation indicator. LowFlow is an indicator variable for the lowest MFFlow quintile. The variables
are defined in Table 1. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. Novelty, Originality, and Scope are in
percentage. All regressions include 2-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by
firm and year. The sample includes U.S. non-financial, non-utility firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and CDA/Spectrum mutual
fund flows data during 1981-2012. The patent and citation data (Pat, Cites, Novelty, Originality, and Scope) sample period is 1976-2008.

                                     RD                 Log(1+Pat)             Log(1+Cites)               Novelty             Originality                Scope

MFFlow                              -1.18                    -0.06                  -0.03                   -3.09                 -1.11                   -1.11
                                   (-7.78)                 (-7.15)                 (-8.05)                (-6.65)                (-6.75)                 (-8.11)
MFFlow*LowFlow                      -5.39                    -0.46                  -0.17                  -12.71                 -3.82                   -5.83
                                   (-9.42)                 (-7.09)                 (-7.44)                (-4.42)                (-3.89)                 (-7.59)
GS                                   1.10                     0.02                   0.01                    3.00                  0.70                    0.61
                                    (6.22)                  (2.90)                  (4.01)                 (5.36)                 (4.53)                  (4.31)
CF                                   1.17                     0.14                   0.06                    5.71                  1.82                    1.92
                                    (4.58)                  (9.67)                  (9.99)                 (7.45)                 (7.71)                  (6.64)
Leverage                            -1.01                    -0.17                  -0.07                   -6.63                 -2.53                   -2.51
                                   (-6.87)                (-11.73)                (-11.91)               (-10.14)               (-10.38)                (-10.02)
Log(Age)                            -1.60                     0.15                   0.05                    0.54                  1.56                    1.47
                                   (-7.80)                  (5.45)                  (4.65)                 (0.54)                 (3.59)                  (3.81)
Log(Assets)                         -3.07                     0.67                   0.24                  13.37                   5.87                    4.88
                                  (-13.15)                 (18.89)                 (19.99)                (16.21)                (19.77)                 (10.94)
Intercept                            7.72                    -0.20                  -0.10                   -1.30                  2.02                   -5.03
                                   (46.22)                 (-9.35)                (-10.85)                (-1.46)                 (6.46)                 (-8.79)

N                                  35,911                 47,986                   46,802                 46,802                 47,917                  46,802
R2                                 0.2909                 0.3892                   0.3586                 0.1263                 0.1817                  0.2283




                                                                                    46
                                             Table 9. Quantile Regressions
We perform quantile regressions of R&D, innovative output (Pat and Cites) and inventiveness variables (Novelty,
Originality and Scope) on misvaluation (measured by MFFlow) and control variables with industry and year fixed effects.
We choose quantile values of Q to be 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.8 for RD; and quantile values of 0.65, 0.7, 0.75, and 0.8 for
innovative output and inventive measures because these variables have a median value of zero. We report only the
coefficient on MFFlow. T-statistics of the MFFlow coefficient of the quantile regressions are reported in parentheses,
with p-values of the F-test for the difference in the coefficients between the top or bottom quantiles shown in square
brackets.

                                                                                              Q(0.8)-Q(0.2)
                    Q(0.2)            Q(0.4)            Q(0.6)             Q(0.8)               [p-value]
RD                  -0.103            -0.497            -0.923             -1.427                -1.324
                   (-11.74)          (-20.61)          (-22.08)            (-19.70)              [0.000]

                                                                                             Q(0.8)-Q(0.65)
                   Q(0.65)            Q(0.7)            Q(0.75)            Q(0.8)              [p-value]
Pat                 -0.067            -0.078            -0.089             -0.100                -0.032
                   (-10.98)           (-9.26)           (-9.89)            (-9.81)               [0.000]
Cites               -0.033            -0.037            -0.041             -0.051                -0.018
                   (-11.59)          (-10.26)          (-11.30)            (-12.31)              [0.000]
Novelty             -1.509            -2.146            -3.202             -4.278                -2.769
                    (-8.36)           (-7.62)           (-7.70)            (-7.49)               [0.000]
Originality         -0.113            -0.605            -1.469             -2.089                -1.976
                    (-6.89)           (-6.48)           (-6.47)            (-7.15)               [0.000]
Scope               -0.676            -1.290            -2.018             -2.345                -1.669
                   (-11.11)          (-12.32)          (-14.54)            (-15.52)              [0.000]




                                                          47
                           Internet Appendix of “Stock Market Overvaluation, Moon Shots, and Corporate Innovation”
In this Appendix, we provide regression results using two alternative misvaluation measures: the residual income value-to-price ratio (VP) and residual MFFlow
(MFF_r). The estimation procedures for VP is provided at the end of this appendix. MFF_r is defined as the residual from the annual regression of MFFlow on
Turnover. VP observations start 1976, while MFF_r observations start 1981. Both variables end 2012. In Table IA-8 we report results using industry-adjusted MFFlow
as the misvaluatino proxy.

IA-A. Test Results on Sample with Non-Missing VP Observations

                                       Table IA-1. Regressions of Investments and Innovative Output on Stock Misvaluation
The variables are defined in Table 1. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. All regressions include 2-
digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by firm and year. The sample includes
U.S. non-financial, non-utility firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and I/B/E/S coverage during 1976-2012. The patent and citation
(Pat and Cites) data sample period is 1976-2008.
                                      (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)        (1)          (2)     (3)          (4)        (1)        (2)      (3)          (4)
                                                          RD                                        Log(1+Pat)                                Log(1+Cites)


               VP                    -2.57      -2.46                                -0.09         -0.10                          -0.09      -0.10
                                    (-14.86)   (-12.74)                             (-5.53)    (-4.95)                           (-6.27)    (-5.45)
               MFF_r                                           -0.98      -1.04                             -0.06      -0.06                            -0.06      -0.06
                                                               (-5.25)   (-5.50)                           (-5.76)    (-5.84)                          (-5.74)    (-5.85)
               BP                    -0.48                     -1.73                 -0.06                  -0.08                 -0.06                 -0.08
                                    (-2.75)                    (-6.91)              (-4.02)                (-6.11)               (-4.41)               (-6.43)
               GS                               0.92                      1.20                     0.03                0.03                  0.04                  0.04
                                                (5.49)                    (6.63)                (4.39)                 (3.83)                (5.50)                (4.53)
               CF                    1.51       2.14            0.26      1.08       0.13          0.19     0.09       0.13       0.14       0.19       0.09       0.13
                                     (5.50)     (8.62)         (0.96)     (4.11)     (9.49)    (11.67)      (6.37)     (8.75)     (9.16)    (10.71)     (6.33)     (8.23)
               Leverage              -1.69      -1.35          -1.26      -0.99      -0.20         -0.21    -0.18      -0.17      -0.20      -0.21      -0.18      -0.17
                                    (-13.18)   (-10.78)        (-8.05)   (-6.49)    (-11.58)   (-11.41)    (-12.72)   (-11.71)   (-11.79)   (-11.43)   (-12.27)   (-11.33)
               Log(Age)              -0.83      -0.81          -1.69      -1.74      0.09          0.18     0.11       0.15       0.08       0.17       0.10       0.13
                                    (-7.03)    (-5.17)     (-10.31)      (-8.45)     (5.94)     (6.94)      (5.22)     (5.09)     (4.95)     (6.49)     (4.59)     (4.70)
               Log(Assets)           -3.00      -2.48          -3.83      -3.21      0.69          0.72     0.63       0.65       0.67       0.69       0.60       0.62
                                    (-11.33)   (-10.38)    (-13.93)      (-12.57)   (19.10)    (19.61)     (18.17)    (18.32)    (17.35)    (17.50)    (15.58)    (15.55)
               Intercept             7.42       7.09            8.21      8.07       -0.27         -0.35    -0.16      -0.18      -0.39      -0.47      -0.25      -0.27
                                    (41.70)    (56.57)         (58.31)   (58.39)    (-12.26)   (-14.32)    (-8.88)    (-7.84)    (-17.40)   (-18.34)   (-12.96)   (-11.23)

               N                    40,206     34,658          39,773    35,911     55,048     47,295      53,150     47,986     53,935     46,296     51,853     46,802
               R2                   0.3271     0.3233          0.2975    0.2778     0.3909     0.4103      0.3737     0.3838     0.3735     0.3956     0.3562     0.3676



                                                                                               1
                                            Table IA-2. Regressions of Innovative Inventiveness on Stock Misvaluation
The variables are defined in Table 1. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. Novelty, Originality, and
Scope are in percentage. All regressions include 2-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are
clustered by firm and year. The sample includes U.S. non-financial, non-utility firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT, I/B/E/S, and
patent-citation data coverage during 1976-2008.

                                      (1)        (2)             (3)     (4)        (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)        (1)        (2)           (3)     (4)
                                                       Novelty                                    Originality                                     Scope


                VP                   -6.13      -5.98                              -2.06         -2.12                          -1.88      -1.77
                                     (-9.54)   (-7.64)                            (-7.27)    (-6.21)                           (-8.96)    (-6.93)
                MFF_r                                        -2.18      -2.48                             -0.87      -1.00                            -0.92      -1.01
                                                            (-5.15)    (-5.52)                           (-5.26)    (-5.78)                           (-5.64)    (-6.04)
                BP                   -2.04                   -5.15                 -0.68                  -1.86                 -0.38                 -1.37
                                     (-2.64)                (-6.78)               (-2.11)                (-6.28)               (-1.41)                (-5.21)
                GS                              3.35                    3.27                     0.59                0.78                  0.66                   0.72
                                                (5.73)                  (5.61)                (3.25)                 (4.90)                (3.92)                (4.98)
                CF                    6.29      8.07         3.85       5.57       1.90          2.54     1.01       1.78       2.05       2.58           1.27    1.85
                                     (7.87)    (10.41)       (5.02)     (7.17)     (7.51)    (10.44)      (3.86)     (7.35)     (6.89)     (8.06)     (4.41)     (6.23)
                Leverage             -8.34      -7.54        -7.30      -6.61      -2.94         -2.79    -2.79      -2.52      -3.07      -2.95      -2.68      -2.50
                                    (-11.80)   (-10.95)     (-11.25)   (-10.13)   (-11.22)   (-10.55)    (-11.33)   (-10.38)   (-11.91)   (-11.13)   (-10.14)    (-9.81)
                Log(Age)              1.19      3.38         -0.23      0.23       1.57          2.56     1.18       1.47       1.36       2.42           1.08    1.36
                                     (1.50)     (3.33)      (-0.26)     (0.24)     (5.98)     (6.55)      (3.15)     (3.38)     (4.91)     (6.34)     (2.97)     (3.46)
                Log(Assets)          13.34      13.44        12.55      13.12      5.53          5.50     5.59       5.79       5.09       5.00           4.60    4.73
                                     (14.67)   (14.04)      (14.99)    (15.83)    (17.26)    (16.20)     (19.27)    (19.88)    (12.14)    (11.40)     (10.33)    (10.19)
                Intercept            -6.07      -6.10        -1.99      -0.53      1.32          1.09     1.91       2.26       -6.50      -7.31      -4.59      -4.68
                                     (-9.00)   (-7.93)      (-2.81)    (-0.56)     (4.43)     (3.67)      (7.77)     (7.19)    (-14.11)   (-13.57)    (-8.85)    (-8.04)

                N                    53,935    46,296       51,853     46,802     54,968     47,228      53,072     47,917     53,935     46,296      51,853     46,802
                R2                   0.1328    0.1432       0.1217     0.1240     0.1904     0.1963      0.1770     0.1799     0.2220     0.2368      0.2144     0.2245




                                                                                             2
        Table IA-3. Long-Term Misvaluation Effects: Regressions of Innovative Input, Output and Inventiveness on 3-Year Lagged Stock Misvaluation
The misvaluation measure (VP or MFF_r) is lagged by 3 years. The variables are defined in Table 1. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean of
zero and standard deviation of one. Novelty, Originality, and Scope are in percentage. All regressions include 2-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed
effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by firm and year. The sample includes U.S. non-financial, non-utility firms listed on
NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and I/B/E/S coverage during 1976-2012. The patent and citation data (Pat, Cites, Novelty, Originality, and
Scope) sample period is 1976-2008.

                     (1)             (2)        (1)        (2)         (1)         (2)         (1)                (2)      (1)          (2)        (1)               (2)
                              RD                  Log(1+Pat)             Log(1+Cites)                  Novelty                Originality                   Scope


VP                  -2.45                      -0.10                  -0.09                    -5.27                       -2.00                  -1.27
                   (-11.81)                   (-5.12)                (-5.53)                  (-6.70)                     (-5.84)                (-5.63)
MFF_r                               -0.95                 -0.06                   -0.06                          -2.85                 -1.03                        -0.78
                                   (-5.17)                (-4.93)                 (-5.04)                    (-5.02)                   (-5.63)                      (-3.92)
GS                   1.49           1.91       -0.03      -0.01       -0.02        0.00        2.18              2.17      0.53         0.62      0.40               0.42
                    (5.05)          (6.30)    (-2.04)     (-0.69)    (-1.17)      (0.02)      (2.14)             (1.92)   (1.84)       (1.92)     (1.70)            (1.44)
CF                   1.79           1.00       0.20        0.16       0.20         0.17        7.33              6.28      2.61         2.21      2.57               2.19
                    (7.39)          (3.27)     (9.79)     (7.57)      (8.97)      (6.96)      (7.59)             (6.12)   (8.00)       (6.49)     (6.36)            (5.40)
Leverage            -0.63           -0.83      -0.17      -0.17       -0.17       -0.17        -6.05             -5.95     -2.19       -2.24      -2.55             -2.16
                    (-4.05)        (-4.89)    (-9.52)    (-10.17)    (-9.61)      (-9.79)     (-7.77)        (-8.05)      (-7.59)      (-8.21)   (-9.69)            (-8.02)
Log(Age)            -0.93           -2.05      0.19        0.16       0.16         0.14        1.89              -1.19     2.60         1.31      2.10               1.04
                    (-4.71)        (-9.15)     (5.51)     (4.24)      (4.88)      (3.78)      (1.72)         (-0.96)      (5.49)       (2.34)     (4.58)            (2.10)
Log(Assets)         -2.86           -3.13      0.73        0.69       0.70         0.65        13.22             13.45     5.41         6.02      4.76               4.63
                    (-9.82)        (-11.57)   (18.75)    (17.34)     (16.54)      (14.21)     (12.76)        (15.67)      (15.02)      (19.12)   (10.37)            (9.40)
Intercept            7.69           8.36       -0.42      -0.27       -0.53       -0.36        -5.59             -0.25     1.33         2.13      -7.21             -4.90
                   (51.86)         (47.60)    (-16.07)    (-7.84)    (-17.85)     (-9.84)     (-6.80)        (-0.23)      (4.27)       (5.21)    (-10.99)           (-6.64)

N                   28,852         28,113     38,367      36,068     37,497       35,040      37,497         35,040       38,313       36,013    37,497             35,040
R2                  0.3135         0.2776     0.4111      0.3992     0.3981       0.3860      0.1429         0.1370       0.1957       0.1896    0.2462             0.2505




                                                                                    3
                        Table IA-4. Path Analysis of the Effects of Misvaluation (VP) on R&D

This analysis is based on a sample during 1976-2012, using VP instead of MFFlow to measure misvaluation. The
variables in Panel A are defined in Table 1. In Panel B, ROA is operating income before depreciation and R&D expenses
scaled by total assets for the prior fiscal year, and ΔCR is change in the current ratio (total current assets divided by total
current liabilities). All variables are not standardized. All regressions include industry and year fixed effects. T-statistics
are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by firm and year. We break the total effect of MFFlow on R&D
into three parts: the direct catering effect, and the indirect effects through the equity issuance and debt issuance channels.

Panel A. RD Regression                                             Panel B. Equity Issuance (EI) and Debt Issuance (DI)
                                                                   Regressions
                                  RD                                                         EI                   DI
MFFlow                        -15.3534                             MFFlow               -28.9719              -4.4143
                                (-5.10)                                                   (-8.73)              (-3.15)
EI                              0.1512                             GS                     1.0648               0.5948
                                (16.47)                                                    (7.51)               (7.01)
DI                              0.0242                             ROA                   -0.3165               0.0489
                                 (3.56)                                                   (-9.42)               (5.24)
GS                              0.3041                             ΔCR                    3.8641              -1.6183
                                 (4.74)                                                    (4.99)              (-8.53)
CF                              0.1095                             Leverage              -0.4384              -4.4071
                                 (9.16)                                                   (-0.29)              (-5.65)
Leverage                       -4.2067                             Log(Age)              -2.2359              -1.1561
                                (-8.10)                                                   (-6.19)              (-5.78)
Log(Age)                       -1.2682                             Size                  -2.5526               0.1917
                                (-7.81)                                                  (-12.83)               (1.89)
Size                           -1.1582                             Intercept             32.5107               7.9510
                               (-11.01)                                                   (14.71)             (13.75)
Intercept                      15.5408
                                (21.12)

N                              35,876                              N                       55,320                  55,405
R2                             0.4458                              R2                      0.1444                  0.0424

Panel C. Path analysis results for the effects of MFFlow on RD
                                                                        Coefficient                       T-stat
(1) Direct Effect of MFFlow on RD
MFFlow → RD                                                              -15.3534                        (-5.10)

(2) Indirect Effect of MFFlow on RD via Equity Channel
MFFlow → EI                                                              -28.9719                        (-8.73)
EI → RD                                                                    0.1512                        (16.47)
Equity Path Effect                                                        -4.3806

(3) Indirect Effect of MFFlow on RD via Debt Channel
MFFlow → DI                                                               -4.4143                        (-3.15)
DI → RD                                                                    0.0242                         (3.56)
Debt Path Effect                                                         -0.10683

(4) Total MFFlow Effect on RD                                            -19.8408
% Direct Path                                                             77.38%
% Equity Path                                                             22.08%
% Debt Path                                                                0.54%

                                                              4
                      Table IA-5. Path Analysis of the Effects of Misvaluation (MFF_r) on R&D

This analysis is based on a sample during 1981-2012. The variables in Panel A are defined in Table 1. In Panel B, ROA is
operating income before depreciation and R&D expenses scaled by total assets for the prior fiscal year, and ΔCR is
change in the current ratio (total current assets divided by total current liabilities). All variables are not standardized. All
regressions include industry and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered
by firm and year. We break the total effect of MFFlow on R&D into three parts: the direct catering effect, and the indirect
effects through the equity issuance and debt issuance channels.

Panel A. RD Regression                                              Panel B. Equity Issuance (EI) and Debt Issuance (DI)
                                                                    Regressions
                                  RD                                                          EI                   DI
MFF_r                          -3.5020                              MFF_r                 -5.4387              -0.3437
                               (-11.49)                                                    (-6.78)              (-0.89)
EI                              0.1302                              GS                     1.0296               0.6159
                                (11.44)                                                     (9.38)               (7.79)
DI                              0.0185                              ROA                   -0.1611               0.0669
                                 (2.73)                                                    (-6.01)               (6.10)
GS                              0.2331                              ΔCR                    3.3297              -1.6798
                                 (3.47)                                                     (4.11)              (-7.85)
CF                              0.1235                              Leverage              -3.0156              -3.1460
                                (10.39)                                                    (-2.49)              (-4.48)
Leverage                       -5.3987                              Log(Age)              -1.2193              -1.0151
                               (-10.73)                                                    (-4.14)              (-6.15)
Log(Age)                       -0.6293                              Size                  -1.9367               0.0151
                                (-4.83)                                                   (-11.78)               (0.18)
Size                           -0.9512                              Intercept             27.0351               8.2442
                                (-8.58)                                                    (13.28)             (11.65)
Intercept                      14.5921
                                (17.77)

N                              34,626                               N                       53,524                  53,598
R2                             0.4360                               R2                      0.1232                  0.0445

Panel C. Path analysis results for the effects of MFF_r on RD
                                                                         Coefficient                       T-stat
(1) Direct Effect of MFF_r on RD
MFF_r → RD                                                                 -3.5020                        (-11.49)

(2) Indirect Effect of MFF_r on RD via Equity Channel
MFF_r → EI                                                                 -5.4387                        (-6.78)
EI → RD                                                                     0.1302                        (11.44)
Equity Path Effect                                                         -0.7081

(3) Indirect Effect of MFF_r on RD via Debt Channel
MFF_r → DI                                                                 -0.3437                        (-0.89)
DI → RD                                                                     0.0185                         (2.73)
Debt Path Effect                                                           -0.0064

(4) Total MFF_r Effect on RD                                               -4.2165
% Direct Path                                                              83.06%
% Equity Path                                                              16.79%
% Debt Path                                                                 0.15%

                                                               5
                  Table IA-6. Regressions of Investments and Innovative Output on Stock Misvaluation: Interaction with Growth or Turnover
The misvaluation measure (VP or MFF_r) is interacted with share turnover (Turnover). HighTurn is an indicator variable for the highest Turnover quintile. The
variables are defined in Table 1. Novelty, Originality, and Scope are in percentage. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard
deviation of one. All regressions include 2-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are
clustered by firm and year. The sample includes U.S. non-financial, non-utility firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and I/B/E/S
coverage during 1976-2012. The patent and citation (Pat and Cites) data sample period is 1976-2008.
                          (1)             (2)        (1)        (2)        (1)        (2)           (1)                (2)       (1)          (2)       (1)              (2)
                                   RD                  Log(1+Pat)           Log(1+Cites)                    Novelty                Originality                  Scope


VP                        -2.47                     -0.08                 -0.08                    -4.93                        -1.89                  -1.58
                        (-12.94)                   (-4.66)               (-4.99)                  (-6.30)                      (-5.48)                (-6.08)
VP*HighTurn               0.14                      -0.06                 -0.06                    -3.18                        -0.98                  -0.80
                         (0.51)                    (-2.11)               (-1.96)                  (-2.77)                      (-2.92)                (-2.27)
MFF_r                                    -1.25                 -0.06                    -0.06                         -2.79                  -1.07                      -1.21
                                        (-7.44)                (-6.52)                  (-6.60)                   (-6.39)                   (-6.23)                     (-7.98)
MFF_r*HighTurn                           -1.43                 -0.25                    -0.26                         -7.88                  -2.53                      -4.12
                                        (-2.73)                (-5.21)                  (-5.13)                   (-4.45)                   (-4.60)                     (-4.36)
GS                        0.83           1.03       0.03        0.02      0.04           0.03      2.83               2.56      0.50         0.61      0.63              0.60
                         (5.00)          (5.90)     (3.70)     (2.35)     (4.66)        (3.08)     (5.22)             (4.72)    (2.96)      (3.90)     (3.83)           (4.28)
CF                        2.09           1.01       0.18        0.13      0.19           0.13      7.64               5.26      2.48         1.70      2.57              1.81
                         (8.77)          (4.07)    (11.97)     (8.90)    (11.11)        (8.42)    (10.04)             (7.02)   (10.10)      (7.18)     (8.23)           (6.32)
Leverage                  -1.36          -0.94      -0.21      -0.17      -0.21         -0.17      -7.61              -6.34     -2.82        -2.45     -2.99            -2.44
                        (-10.88)        (-6.89)    (-11.16)   (-11.60)   (-11.17)   (-11.29)      (-11.25)        (-10.37)     (-10.72)    (-10.67)   (-11.03)          (-9.78)
Log(Age)                  -0.80          -1.39      0.18        0.16      0.16           0.14      3.63               1.22      2.60         1.71      2.36              1.50
                         (-5.23)        (-6.61)     (6.99)     (5.67)     (6.66)        (5.43)     (3.50)             (1.23)    (6.38)      (3.88)     (6.15)           (3.90)
Log(Assets)               -2.70          -3.79      0.72        0.63      0.69           0.59      12.57              11.33     5.37         5.36      4.97              4.50
                        (-10.42)        (-13.43)   (18.90)    (18.07)    (17.07)        (15.60)   (12.06)         (12.25)      (14.59)      (16.71)   (11.39)           (10.34)
Turnover                  0.65           1.05       0.03        0.03      0.04           0.03      3.54               3.99      0.56         0.84      0.09             -0.00
                         (3.48)          (4.14)     (1.06)     (1.06)     (1.50)        (1.22)     (3.89)             (3.84)    (1.58)      (2.35)     (0.44)           (-0.02)
Intercept                 6.85           7.59       -0.39      -0.22      -0.52         -0.32     -10.24              -5.14     0.42         1.24      -7.35            -4.93
                         (51.43)        (43.23)    (-9.53)     (-5.75)   (-11.93)       (-7.87)   (-7.30)         (-3.46)       (0.80)      (2.32)    (-10.43)          (-6.92)

N                        33,945         35,911     46,152      47,986    45,155         46,802    45,155          46,802       46,085       47,917    45,155            46,802
R2                       0.3276         0.2919     0.4131      0.3878    0.3992         0.3726    0.1468          0.1293       0.1974       0.1828    0.2392            0.2277




                                                                                    6
                                            Table IA-7. Quantile Regressions
We perform quantile regressions of R&D, and innovative output (Pat and Cites) and inventiveness variables (Novelty,
Originality and Scope) on misvaluation (measured by VP as in Panel A, or by MFF_r as in Panel B) and control variables
with industry and year fixed effects. We choose quantile values of Q to be 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.8 for RD; and quantile
values of 0.65, 0.7, 0.75, and 0.8 for innovative output and inventive measures because these variables have a median
value of zero. We report only the coefficient on VP (Panel A) or MFF_r (Panel B). T-statistics of the VP or MFF_r
coefficient of the quantile regressions are reported in parentheses, with p-values of the F-test for the difference in the
coefficients between the top or bottom quantiles shown in square brackets.

Panel A. Misvaluation measured by VP.
                                                                                                        Q(0.8)-Q(0.2)
                          Q(0.2)              Q(0.4)               Q(0.6)               Q(0.8)            [p-value]
RD                        -0.414              -1.105               -1.637               -2.038              -1.624
                         (-33.11)             (-43.04)            (-39.66)             (-29.53)             [0.000]

                                                                                                        Q(0.8)-Q(0.65)
                         Q(0.65)              Q(0.7)              Q(0.75)               Q(0.8)            [p-value]
Pat                       -0.079              -0.098               -0.121               -0.134              -0.055
                         (-10.71)             (-11.68)            (-12.03)             (-12.82)             [0.000]
Cites                     -0.039              -0.050               -0.061               -0.069              -0.030
                         (-11.85)             (-14.40)            (-14.52)             (-17.65)             [0.000]
Novelty                   -2.147              -3.604               -5.805               -7.781              -5.634
                          (-9.23)             (-11.96)            (-12.81)             (-12.59)             [0.000]
Originality               -0.427              -1.477               -2.799               -3.760              -3.333
                         (-10.00)             (-10.76)            (-11.60)             (-13.36)             [0.000]
Scope                     -0.893              -1.936               -2.963               -3.300              -2.407
                          (-9.44)             (-15.15)            (-18.57)             (-20.26)             [0.000]




                                                            7
Panel B. Misvaluation measured by MFF_r.
                                                                                Q(0.8)-Q(0.2)
                       Q(0.2)               Q(0.4)         Q(0.6)     Q(0.8)      [p-value]
RD                     -0.065               -0.339         -0.692     -1.119        -1.054
                       (-7.00)             (-14.15)       (-18.16)   (-17.47)      [0.000]

                                                                                Q(0.8)-Q(0.65)
                       Q(0.65)              Q(0.7)        Q(0.75)     Q(0.8)      [p-value]
Pat                    -0.054               -0.063         -0.074     -0.080        -0.025
                       (-9.34)              (-8.31)        (-8.75)    (-8.81)      [0.000]
Cites                  -0.026               -0.028         -0.034     -0.038        -0.012
                       (-9.36)              (-9.73)       (-10.02)   (-11.05)      [0.000]
Novelty                -1.141               -1.649         -2.467     -3.355        -2.214
                       (-7.21)              (-6.73)        (-6.72)    (-6.83)      [0.000]
Originality            -0.085               -0.496         -1.225     -1.817        -1.732
                       (-6.49)              (-5.76)        (-6.44)    (-7.74)      [0.000]
Scope                  -0.511               -1.006         -1.543     -1.827        -1.316
                       (-9.28)             (-11.23)       (-11.80)   (-14.10)      [0.000]




                                                      8
                                       Table IA-8. Regressions of Investments and Innovative Output on Stock Misvaluation
MFFlow_I is the industry-adjusted mutual fund flow based misvaluation measure (raw MFFlow minus 2-digit-SIC industry mean MFFlow). The variables are
defined in Table 1. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. Novelty, Originality, and Scope are in
percentage. All regressions include industry and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by firm and year. The
sample includes U.S. non-financial, non-utility firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and I/B/E/S coverage during 1976-2012. The
patent and citation data (Pat, Cites, Novelty, Originality, and Scope) sample period is 1996-2008.

                    (1)            (2)        (1)        (2)        (1)         (2)         (1)             (2)      (1)          (2)        (1)              (2)
                            RD                  Log(1+Pat)            Log(1+Cites)                Novelty               Originality                  Scope


MFFlow_I           -1.31          -1.24      -0.07      -0.07       -0.03       -0.03       -3.71        -3.43      -1.22        -1.20      -1.34             -1.27
                  (-6.85)        (-6.53)    (-5.60)    (-5.51)     (-6.23)     (-6.18)     (-5.92)      (-5.98)    (-4.21)      (-4.35)    (-5.91)           (-5.94)
BP                 -0.72                     -0.05                  -0.02                   -2.82                   -1.03                   -0.54
                  (-3.74)                   (-3.37)                (-3.26)                 (-3.52)                 (-2.84)                 (-1.66)
GS                                 1.04                  0.03                   0.02                      3.72                    0.77                     0.76
                                  (5.51)                (3.39)                 (4.43)                    (5.81)                  (3.89)                   (4.20)
CF                  1.28           1.87        0.13      0.18        0.06       0.08         6.11         7.63        1.62        2.27        1.87         2.34
                   (4.88)         (6.92)      (7.78)    (9.93)      (7.86)     (9.91)       (6.88)       (8.82)      (5.37)      (8.31)      (5.45)       (6.67)
Leverage           -1.62           -1.39      -0.22      -0.21      -0.09       -0.08       -7.85         -7.20      -3.01        -2.78      -2.89         -2.67
                 (-11.95)        (-10.39)   (-11.35)   (-10.86)   (-11.87)    (-11.29)    (-10.95)      (-10.07)   (-10.57)     (-9.88)    (-10.36)      (-10.15)
Log(Age)           -1.45           -1.27       0.10      0.15        0.04       0.06        -0.03         1.48        1.57        2.20        1.37         1.92
                  (-9.33)         (-6.69)     (4.37)    (4.95)      (3.79)     (4.68)      (-0.03)       (1.29)      (3.83)      (4.53)      (3.47)       (4.43)
Log(Assets)        -3.32           -2.88       0.70      0.72        0.24       0.25        12.33        12.70        5.22        5.28        4.46         4.49
                 (-12.06)        (-11.16)    (17.39)   (17.54)     (18.23)    (18.45)      (12.54)      (12.73)     (14.32)     (14.31)      (9.64)       (9.39)
Intercept           7.49           7.28       -0.16      -0.19      -0.08       -0.10       -0.00         0.54        3.06        3.04       -4.64         -5.06
                  (47.39)        (49.43)     (-7.01)    (-7.53)    (-9.49)     (-9.12)     (-0.00)       (0.51)     (10.63)      (8.89)     (-8.53)       (-8.27)

N                 31,084         27,982     40,692     36,598      39,714      35,701      39,714       35,701     40,633       36,544     39,714            35,701
R2                0.3131         0.3095     0.3980     0.4112      0.3651      0.3803      0.1355       0.1428     0.1899       0.1954     0.2325            0.2459




                                                                                  9
                        Table IA-9. Regressions of Investments and Innovative Output on Stock Misvaluation: R&D-Adjusted MFFlow
MFFlow_RD is the R&D-adjusted mutual fund flow measure Specifically, we sort firms into R&D quintiles, with the bottom quintile having zero R&D, and the
top quintile being the highest R&D quartile of positive R&D firms. MFFlow_RD is the difference between MFFlow and the mean MFFlow of the firm’s R&D
quintile. The variables are defined in Table 1. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. Novelty,
Originality, and Scope are in percentage. All regressions include industry and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are
clustered by firm and year. The sample includes U.S. non-financial, non-utility firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and I/B/E/S
coverage during 1976-2012. The patent and citation data (Pat, Cites, Novelty, Originality, and Scope) sample period is 1996-2008.

                   (1)             (2)        (1)        (2)       (1)         (2)         (1)             (2)     (1)          (2)        (1)             (2)
                            RD                  Log(1+Pat)           Log(1+Cites)                Novelty              Originality                  Scope


MFFlow_RD         -0.49           -0.63      -0.05      -0.06     -0.02       -0.03       -1.77         -2.39     -0.43        -0.67      -0.78         -0.98
                 (-4.01)         (-5.39)    (-4.49)    (-5.27)   (-5.11)     (-5.91)     (-3.16)       (-4.03)   (-2.45)      (-3.46)    (-4.55)       (-5.17)
BP                -1.78                      -0.12                -0.05                   -6.91                   -2.19                   -1.75
                 (-7.32)                    (-6.71)              (-6.94)                 (-6.65)                 (-5.87)                 (-4.75)
GS                                  1.22                  0.04                 0.02                       3.80                   0.90                     0.77
                                   (6.67)               (4.68)                (5.12)                    (5.79)                 (4.82)                   (4.42)
CF                  0.22            1.07      0.05        0.10     0.03        0.05        3.25           4.81     0.72          1.43      0.97           1.50
                   (0.79)          (4.02)    (3.97)     (6.46)    (4.95)      (7.46)      (3.99)        (5.44)    (2.80)       (5.44)     (3.51)        (4.96)
Leverage           -1.29            -1.00    -0.18       -0.17    -0.07        -0.07      -6.83          -5.88    -2.29         -1.92     -2.56          -2.32
                  (-8.30)         (-6.49)   (-9.80)    (-8.85)   (-9.56)     (-8.52)     (-7.26)       (-6.17)   (-7.05)      (-5.98)    (-8.23)       (-7.78)
Log(Age)           -1.73            -1.76     0.15        0.19     0.05        0.06       -1.48          -1.38     1.16          1.35      1.15           1.30
                 (-10.44)         (-8.40)    (5.58)     (5.40)    (4.06)      (4.18)     (-1.28)       (-1.08)    (2.50)       (2.48)     (2.56)        (2.62)
Log(Assets)        -3.87            -3.27     0.84        0.86     0.30        0.30       14.73         15.22      6.44          6.57      5.17           5.24
                 (-13.36)        (-12.06)   (20.59)    (20.74)   (21.62)     (21.95)     (14.51)       (14.93)   (19.47)      (19.17)    (10.52)       (10.37)
Intercept           8.26            8.10     -0.02       -0.04    -0.04        -0.04       3.76           6.55     5.69          6.32     -4.35          -4.23
                  (57.97)         (55.40)   (-0.94)    (-1.29)   (-4.02)     (-3.31)      (3.50)        (4.83)   (12.62)      (11.62)    (-7.38)       (-6.71)

N                39,271          35,493     33,356     30,014    32,276      29,039      32,276        29,039    33,292       29,959     32,276        29,039
R2               0.2951          0.2737     0.4499     0.4607    0.3938      0.4064      0.1003        0.1016    0.1507       0.1533     0.2345        0.2477




                                                                                10
     Table IA-10. Regressions of Innovative Input, Output and Inventiveness on Stock Misvaluation: Interaction with High Valuation Indicator (LowVP)
The misvaluation measure (VP) is interacted with an overvaluation indicator. LowVP is an indicator variable for the lowest VP quintile. The variables are defined in
Table 1. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. Novelty, Originality, and Scope are in percentage. All
regressions include 2-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by firm and year.
The sample includes U.S. non-financial, non-utility firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and I/B/E/S coverage during 1976-2012. The
patent and citation data (Pat, Cites, Novelty, Originality, and Scope) sample period is 1976-2008.

                                 RD                  Log(1+Pat)             Log(1+Cites)               Novelty               Originality                Scope

VP                              -0.19                   -0.04                    -0.02                   -3.09                   -1.08                   -0.93
                               (-0.98)                 (-1.96)                  (-2.86)                 (-4.04)                 (-3.56)                 (-3.70)
VP*LowVP                        -6.53                   -0.19                    -0.07                   -9.23                   -3.33                   -2.67
                              (-13.45)                 (-7.38)                  (-6.89)                 (-7.00)                 (-7.38)                 (-5.74)
GS                               0.78                    0.03                     0.02                    3.00                    0.50                    0.58
                                (5.36)                  (3.86)                   (4.81)                  (5.46)                  (2.90)                 (3.61)
CF                               2.56                    0.19                     0.08                    8.13                    2.59                    2.58
                               (11.97)                 (12.61)                  (12.54)                (11.21)                  (11.59)                 (8.50)
Leverage                        -1.23                   -0.19                    -0.08                   -6.81                   -2.51                   -2.65
                              (-11.31)                (-11.66)                 (-12.28)                (-11.19)                (-10.78)                (-11.27)
Log(Age)                        -0.63                    0.20                     0.08                    3.82                    2.77                    2.60
                               (-4.28)                  (7.30)                   (7.17)                  (3.66)                  (6.96)                 (6.64)
Log(Assets)                     -1.92                    0.70                     0.25                   13.39                    5.45                    4.94
                               (-9.74)                 (19.98)                  (21.15)                (14.77)                  (16.80)                (11.70)
Intercept                        5.42                   -0.22                    -0.12                   -3.46                    2.05                   -6.37
                               (30.98)                (-10.25)                 (-14.29)                 (-3.94)                  (6.61)                (-12.51)

N                              34,658                  47,295                  46,296                  46,296                  47,228                   46,296
R2                             0.3690                  0.4127                  0.3819                  0.1454                  0.1987                   0.2384




                                                                                    11
           Table IA-11. Regressions of Innovative Input, Output and Inventiveness on Stock Misvaluation: Interaction with Low MFF_r Indicator
The misvaluation measure (MFF_r) is interacted with an overvaluation indicator. LowMFF_r is an indicator variable for the lowest MFF_r quintile. The variables
are defined in Table 1. All independent variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. Novelty, Originality, and Scope are in
percentage. All regressions include 2-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by
firm and year. The sample includes U.S. non-financial, non-utility firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with COMPUSTAT and CDA/Spectrum mutual
fund flows data during 1981-2012. The patent and citation data (Pat, Cites, Novelty, Originality, and Scope) sample period is 1976-2008.

                                     RD                 Log(1+Pat)             Log(1+Cites)               Novelty             Originality                Scope

MFF_r                               -1.20                    -0.05                  -0.03                  -2.97                  -1.22                   -1.13
                                   (-8.85)                 (-4.24)                 (-5.69)                (-6.19)                (-6.19)                 (-7.60)
MFF_r*LowMFF_r                       0.89                    -0.06                  -0.00                   2.96                   1.34                    0.74
                                    (1.58)                 (-1.48)                 (-0.30)                 (2.54)                 (3.08)                  (1.60)
GS                                   1.20                     0.03                   0.02                   3.25                   0.77                    0.72
                                    (6.63)                  (3.96)                  (4.79)                 (5.60)                 (4.87)                  (4.95)
CF                                   1.07                     0.13                   0.06                   5.53                   1.76                    1.84
                                    (4.09)                  (8.86)                  (9.29)                 (7.14)                 (7.25)                  (6.22)
Leverage                            -0.98                    -0.17                  -0.07                  -6.59                  -2.51                   -2.49
                                   (-6.49)                (-11.74)                (-11.88)               (-10.12)               (-10.37)                 (-9.80)
Log(Age)                            -1.71                     0.14                   0.05                   0.28                   1.50                    1.37
                                   (-8.46)                  (5.05)                  (4.29)                 (0.29)                 (3.43)                  (3.48)
Log(Assets)                         -3.27                     0.65                   0.24                  12.98                   5.72                    4.69
                                  (-12.43)                 (18.63)                 (19.40)                (15.31)                (19.52)                 (10.16)
Intercept                            8.17                    -0.18                  -0.09                  -0.29                   2.37                   -4.62
                                   (50.80)                 (-8.26)                 (-9.52)                (-0.31)                 (7.51)                 (-8.02)

N                                  35,911                 47,986                   46,802                 46,802                 47,917                  46,802
R2                                 0.2782                 0.3840                   0.3536                 0.1241                 0.1801                  0.2245




                                                                                    12
     Table IA-12. The Evolution of MFFlow Over a Five-Year Period for Top and Bottom MFFlow Quintiles

This table reports the mean value of MFFlow or lagged MFFlow (each lag is 1-year long) for the current-year top and
bottom quintiles of MFFlow. The sample mean MFFlow is 3.52% (as reported in Table 1).

 No. of Lags of           0 (Current
 MFFlow                      Year)            1             2          3                   4              5
                                                        Top MFFlow Quintile
 Mean MFFlow (%)             10.95          7.60          6.61        6.14              5.58            5.36
 N                          12,692         10,993        9,845       8,906              7,997          7,267
                                                       Bottom MFFlow Quintile
 Mean MFFlow (%)             0.26           1.39          1.89        2.15              2.36            2.60
 N                          12,683         9,500         8,069       7,033              6,011          5,081




                                                        13
       Table IA-13. Path Analysis of the Effects of Misvaluation on R&D: High Valuation (Low-MFFlow) Years

High valuation years are years in which the aggregate MFFlow is below median. The variables in Panel A are defined in
Table 1. In Panel B, ROA is income before depreciation and R&D expenses scaled by total assets for the prior fiscal year,
and ΔCR is change in the current ratio (total current assets divided by total current liabilities). All variables are not
standardized. All regressions operating include industry and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses.
Standard errors are clustered by firm and year. We break the total effect of MFFlow on R&D into three parts: the direct
catering effect, and the indirect effects through the equity issuance and debt issuance channels.

Panel A. RD Regression                                           Panel B. Equity Issuance (EI) and Debt Issuance (DI)
                                                                 Regressions
                                 RD                                                        EI                   DI
MFFlow                       -37.4851                            MFFlow               -67.9207              -8.4301
                               (-9.04)                                                 (-10.09)              (-2.15)
EI                             0.1585                            GS                     0.7987               0.6301
                               (15.96)                                                   (7.85)               (4.77)
DI                             0.0262                            ROA                   -0.3198               0.0601
                                (2.75)                                                  (-7.96)               (4.88)
GS                             0.2446                            ΔCR                    2.7009              -1.8991
                                (2.88)                                                   (5.74)            (-10.68)
CF                             0.1189                            Leverage               0.9307              -3.1727
                                (7.94)                                                   (0.84)              (-3.40)
Leverage                      -4.5273                            Log(Age)              -1.5571              -1.2526
                               (-7.06)                                                  (-4.68)              (-4.05)
Log(Age)                      -1.3253                            Size                  -2.7523               0.1420
                               (-6.55)                                                 (-10.71)               (0.88)
Size                          -1.2009                            Intercept             34.3344               9.6497
                              (-11.55)                                                  (11.69)             (11.07)
Intercept                     14.0421
                               (16.01)

N                             18,604                             N                      28,322                 28,362
R2                            0.4403                             R2                     0.1322                 0.0434

Panel C. Path analysis results for the effects of MFFlow on RD
                                                                      Coefficient                     T-stat
(1) Direct Effect of MFFlow on RD
MFFlow → RD                                                            -37.4851                      (-9.04)

(2) Indirect Effect of MFFlow on RD via Equity Channel
MFFlow → EI                                                            -67.9207                      (-10.09)
EI → RD                                                                 0.1585                       (15.96)
Equity Path Effect                                                     -10.7654

(2) Indirect Effect of MFFlow on RD via Debt Channel
MFFlow → DI                                                             -8.4301                      (-2.15)
DI → RD                                                                  0.0262                       (2.75)
Debt Path Effect                                                       -0.22087

(3) Total MFFlow Effect on RD                                          -48.4714
% Direct Path                                                           77.33%
% Equity Path                                                           22.21%
% Debt Path                                                              0.46%

                                                           14
       Table IA-14. Path Analysis of the Effects of Misvaluation on R&D: Low Valuation (High-MFFlow) Years

Low valuation years are years in which the aggregate MFFlow is above median. The variables in Panel A are defined in
Table 1. In Panel B, ROA is income before depreciation and R&D expenses scaled by total assets for the prior fiscal year,
and ΔCR is change in the current ratio (total current assets divided by total current liabilities). All variables are not
standardized. All regressions operating include industry and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses.
Standard errors are clustered by firm and year. We break the total effect of MFFlow on R&D into three parts: the direct
catering effect, and the indirect effects through the equity issuance and debt issuance channels.

Panel A. RD Regression                                           Panel B. Equity Issuance (EI) and Debt Issuance (DI)
                                                                 Regressions
                                 RD                                                        EI                   DI
MFFlow                       -14.9968                            MFFlow               -40.9575              -8.7515
                               (-6.28)                                                  (-7.87)              (-5.30)
EI                             0.1439                            GS                     1.3192               0.5248
                              (12.18)                                                    (6.82)               (6.85)
DI                             0.0216                            ROA                   -0.3201               0.0352
                                (2.18)                                                  (-6.16)               (3.66)
GS                             0.3467                            ΔCR                    4.9278              -1.3616
                                (4.53)                                                   (3.92)              (-4.85)
CF                             0.0999                            Leverage              -1.7706              -5.6692
                                (6.99)                                                  (-0.71)              (-5.30)
Leverage                      -3.8498                            Log(Age)              -2.5355              -0.9967
                               (-7.11)                                                  (-5.09)              (-5.01)
Log(Age)                      -1.0365                            Size                  -2.6443               0.1836
                               (-6.43)                                                  (-9.55)               (1.54)
Size                          -1.2163                            Intercept             35.2025               8.2708
                               (-7.74)                                                   (9.80)             (11.14)
Intercept                     16.0622
                              (16.77)

N                             17,272                             N                      26,998                 27,043
R2                            0.4612                             R2                     0.1702                 0.0429

Panel C. Path analysis results for the effects of MFFlow on RD
                                                                      Coefficient                     T-stat
(1) Direct Effect of MFFlow on RD
MFFlow → RD                                                            -14.9968                      (-6.28)

(2) Indirect Effect of MFFlow on RD via Equity Channel
MFFlow → EI                                                            -40.9575                      (-7.87)
EI → RD                                                                  0.1439                      (12.18)
Equity Path Effect                                                      -5.8938

(2) Indirect Effect of MFFlow on RD via Debt Channel
MFFlow → DI                                                             -8.7515                      (-5.30)
DI → RD                                                                  0.0216                       (2.18)
Debt Path Effect                                                       -0.18903

(3) Total MFFlow Effect on RD                                          -21.0796
% Direct Path                                                           71.14%
% Equity Path                                                           27.96%
% Debt Path                                                              0.90%

                                                           15
             Table IA-15. Path Analysis of the Effects of Misvaluation on R&D: High Turnover Firms

High turnover firms are firms in the highest turnover quintile. The variables in Panel A are defined in Table 1. In Panel B,
ROA is income before depreciation and R&D expenses scaled by total assets for the prior fiscal year, and ΔCR is change
in the current ratio (total current assets divided by total current liabilities). All variables are not standardized. All
regressions operating include industry and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are
clustered by firm and year. We break the total effect of MFFlow on R&D into three parts: the direct catering effect, and
the indirect effects through the equity issuance and debt issuance channels.

Panel A. RD Regression                                           Panel B. Equity Issuance (EI) and Debt Issuance (DI)
                                                                 Regressions
                                 RD                                                        EI                   DI
MFFlow                       -36.4972                            MFFlow               -99.9084              -6.9753
                               (-4.47)                                                  (-5.59)              (-0.74)
EI                             0.1273                            GS                     0.6984               0.6771
                              (13.54)                                                    (4.49)               (3.47)
DI                             0.0295                            ROA                   -0.3571               0.0175
                                (2.28)                                                  (-7.07)               (0.77)
GS                             0.1392                            ΔCR                    5.0419              -0.7221
                                (1.46)                                                   (3.39)              (-2.11)
CF                             0.0983                            Leverage              -1.4215              -3.4616
                                (6.78)                                                  (-0.98)              (-2.45)
Leverage                      -3.7961                            Log(Age)              -1.1582              -1.0606
                               (-4.20)                                                  (-2.30)              (-2.55)
Log(Age)                      -0.6717                            Size                  -5.1579              -0.0031
                               (-2.43)                                                  (-8.38)              (-0.01)
Size                          -1.3361                            Intercept             55.2219             11.5630
                               (-5.93)                                                   (9.67)               (9.17)
Intercept                     16.1902
                              (11.59)

N                             9,041                              N                       12,927                  12,960
R2                            0.4723                             R2                      0.2029                  0.0376

Panel C. Path analysis results for the effects of MFFlow on RD
                                                                      Coefficient                      T-stat
(1) Direct Effect of MFFlow on RD
MFFlow → RD                                                             -36.4972                       (-4.47)

(2) Indirect Effect of MFFlow on RD via Equity Channel
MFFlow → EI                                                             -99.9084                       (-5.59)
EI → RD                                                                  0.1273                        (13.54)
Equity Path Effect                                                      -12.7183

(2) Indirect Effect of MFFlow on RD via Debt Channel
MFFlow → DI                                                              -6.9753                       (-0.74)
DI → RD                                                                   0.0295                        (2.28)
Debt Path Effect                                                        -0.20577

(3) Total MFFlow Effect on RD                                           -49.4213
% Direct Path                                                            73.85%
% Equity Path                                                            25.73%
% Debt Path                                                               0.42%

                                                            16
              Table IA-16. Path Analysis of the Effects of Misvaluation on R&D: Low Turnover Firms

Low turnover firms are firms in the lowest turnover quintile. The variables in Panel A are defined in Table 1. In Panel B,
ROA is income before depreciation and R&D expenses scaled by total assets for the prior fiscal year, and ΔCR is change
in the current ratio (total current assets divided by total current liabilities). All variables are not standardized. All
regressions operating include industry and year fixed effects. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are
clustered by firm and year. We break the total effect of MFFlow on R&D into three parts: the direct catering effect, and
the indirect effects through the equity issuance and debt issuance channels.

Panel A. RD Regression                                           Panel B. Equity Issuance (EI) and Debt Issuance (DI)
                                                                 Regressions
                                 RD                                                        EI                   DI
MFFlow                        -4.9980                            MFFlow                -9.3129              -3.5698
                               (-2.59)                                                  (-3.63)              (-1.65)
EI                             0.1688                            GS                     0.7558               0.5061
                                (6.97)                                                   (2.77)               (2.80)
DI                             0.0352                            ROA                   -0.3154               0.0287
                                (1.75)                                                  (-5.74)               (1.23)
GS                             0.3531                            ΔCR                    1.7689              -2.1210
                                (2.72)                                                   (4.02)              (-9.78)
CF                             0.1120                            Leverage               3.0968              -3.0514
                                (4.69)                                                   (2.09)              (-2.52)
Leverage                      -5.2145                            Log(Age)              -1.2663              -1.3952
                               (-7.19)                                                  (-3.73)              (-4.10)
Log(Age)                      -1.8096                            Size                  -2.5058              -0.4086
                               (-5.75)                                                  (-5.72)              (-1.64)
Size                          -1.6820                            Intercept             23.7588             11.1757
                               (-8.29)                                                   (8.62)               (8.50)
Intercept                     18.1928
                              (12.02)

N                             4,505                              N                       7,872                    7,872
R2                            0.4137                             R2                      0.1105                  0.0512

Panel C. Path analysis results for the effects of MFFlow on RD
                                                                      Coefficient                      T-stat
(1) Direct Effect of MFFlow on RD
MFFlow → RD                                                             -4.9980                        (-2.59)

(2) Indirect Effect of MFFlow on RD via Equity Channel
MFFlow → EI                                                             -9.3129                        (-3.63)
EI → RD                                                                  0.1688                         (6.97)
Equity Path Effect                                                      -1.5720

(2) Indirect Effect of MFFlow on RD via Debt Channel
MFFlow → DI                                                              -3.5698                       (-1.65)
DI → RD                                                                   0.0352                        (1.75)
Debt Path Effect                                                        -0.12566

(3) Total MFFlow Effect on RD                                           -6.6957
% Direct Path                                                           74.65%
% Equity Path                                                           23.48%
% Debt Path                                                              1.88%

                                                            17
                Appendix IA-B. Calculation of Residual Income Value-to-Price (VP)
        Our estimation procedure for VP is similar to that of Lee, Myers, and Swaminathan (1999).
For each stock in month t, we estimate the residual income model (RIM) price, denoted by V (t). VP
is the ratio of V(t) to the stock price at the end of month t. With the assumption of ‘clean surplus’
accounting, which states that the change in book value of equity equals earnings minus dividends, the
intrinsic value of firm stock can be written as the book value plus the discounted value of an infinite
sum of expected residual incomes (see Ohlson (1995)),
                                   ∞
                                      𝐸𝑡 [{𝑅𝑂𝐸(𝑡 + 𝑖) − 𝑟𝑒 (𝑡 + 𝑖 − 1)}𝐵(𝑡 + 𝑖 − 1)]
                 𝑉(𝑡) = 𝐵(𝑡) + ∑                                                     ,
                                                       [1 + 𝑟𝑒 (𝑡)]𝑖
                                        𝑡=1

where Et is the expectations operator, B(t) is the book value of equity at time t (negative B(t)
observations are deleted), ROE(t + i) is the return on equity for period t + i, and re(t) is the firm’s
annualized cost of equity capital.
        For practical purposes, the above infinite sum needs to be replaced by a finite series of T −1
periods, plus an estimate of the terminal value beyond period T. This terminal value is estimated by
viewing the period T residual income as a perpetuity. Lee, Myers, and Swaminathan (1999) report
that the quality of their V (t) estimates was not sensitive to the choice of the forecast horizon beyond
three years. Of course, residual income V (t) cannot perfectly capture growth, so our misvaluation
proxy VP does not perfectly filter out growth effects. However, since V reflects forward-looking
earnings forecasts, a large portion of the growth effects contained in BP should be filtered out of VP.
        We use a three-period forecast horizon:

                  [𝑓 𝑅𝑂𝐸 (𝑡+1)−𝑟𝑒 (𝑡)]𝐵(𝑡)       [𝑓 𝑅𝑂𝐸 (𝑡+2)−𝑟𝑒 (𝑡)]𝐵(𝑡+1)       [𝑓 𝑅𝑂𝐸 (𝑡+3)−𝑟𝑒 (𝑡)]𝐵(𝑡+2)
         𝑉(𝑡) =                              +                   (𝑡)]2
                                                                              +        [1+ 𝑟𝑒 (𝑡)]2 𝑟𝑒 (𝑡)
                                                                                                             ,
                          1+ 𝑟𝑒 (𝑡)                     [1+ 𝑟𝑒



where fROE(t + i) is the forecasted return on equity for period t + i, the length of a period is one year,
and where the last term discounts the period t + 3 residual income as a perpetuity.1
       Forecasted ROE’s are computed as

                                                                    𝑓 𝐸𝑃𝑆 (𝑡 + 𝑖)
                                             𝑓 𝑅𝑂𝐸 (𝑡 + 𝑖) =                      ,
                                                                   𝐵̅ (𝑡 + 𝑖 − 1)

where 𝐵̅ (𝑡 + 𝑖 − 1) is defined as the average of B (t + i −1) and B (t + i −2), and where fEPS(t+i) is the
forecasted EPS for period t + i. If the EPS forecast for any horizon is not available, it is substituted
by the EPS forecast for the previous horizon and compounded at the long-term growth rate (as
provided by I/B/E/S). If the long-term growth rate is not available from I/B/E/S, the EPS forecast for
the first preceding available horizon is used as a surrogate for fEPS(t + i). We require that each of these
fROE’s be less than 1.
         Future book values of equity are computed as

                                𝐵 (𝑡 + 𝑖) = 𝐵(𝑡 + 𝑖 − 1) + (1 − 𝑘)𝑓 𝐸𝑃𝑆 (𝑡 + 𝑖),

1
 In unreported robustness tests we estimate V using a 5-year rather than 3-year forecast period. Many firms have missing
EPS forecasts beyond forecast year 3; to preserve sample size, when the 4-year and 5-year EPS forecasts are missing, we
use the 3-year EPS forecast multiplied by the long-run growth forecast rate as a proxy. Our results are highly robust, with
only slightly reduced magnitude of the effects.
                                                              18
where k is the dividend payout ratio determined by
                                                  𝐷 (𝑡)
                                            𝑘 =         ,
                                                 𝐸𝑃𝑆(𝑡)

and D(t) and EPS(t) are respectively the dividend and EPS for period t. Following Lee, Myers, and
Swaminathan (1999), if k < 0 (owing to negative EPS), we divide dividends by (0.06 × total assets)
to derive an estimate of the payout ratio, i.e., we assume that earnings are on average 6% of total
assets. Observations in which the computed k is greater than 1 are deleted from the study.
        The annualized cost of equity, re(t), is determined as a firm-specific rate using the CAPM,
where the time-t beta is estimated using the trailing five years (or, if there is not enough data, at least
two years) of monthly return data. The market risk premium assumed in the CAPM is the average
annual premium over the risk-free rate for the CRSP value-weighted index over the preceding 30
years. Any estimate of the CAPM cost of capital that is outside the range of 5%-20% is winsorized to
lie at the border of the range. The literature shows that the inferences from V estimates are not
sensitive to the choice of forecast horizon (such as three years) and cost of capital models (Lee,
Myers, and Swaminathan 1999), and to whether the discount rate is allowed to vary across firms
(D’Mello and Shroff 2000).
        There is strong support for VP as an indicator of mispricing. It is a stronger return predictor
than BP (Lee, Myers, and Swaminathan 1999, Frankel and Lee 1998, Ali, Hwang, and Trombley
2003).
        The benchmark for fair valuation for BP and VP is not equal to 1. Book is an historical value
that does not reﬂect growth, and residual income model valuations have been found to be too low on
average. We retain negative V values caused by low earnings forecasts relative to the cost of equity
capital, because such cases should also be informative about overvaluation; negative and low values
of VP indicate overvaluation and large values of VP indicate undervaluation. Similarly, to avoid
problems with low or zero book value, and for consistency, we also use a BP variable rather than P/B.
Removing negative VP observations (about 6% of the sample) tends to reduce statistical signiﬁcance
levels in our tests without materially altering the results.




                                                    19
