                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   INDEX INVESTING AND ASSET PRICING UNDER INFORMATION ASYMMETRY
                       AND AMBIGUITY AVERSION

                                      David Hirshleifer
                                       Chong Huang
                                      Siew Hong Teoh

                                     Working Paper 24143
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24143


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 2017, Revised June 2019




Previously circulated as "Model Uncertainty, Ambiguity Aversion, and Market Participation."
We thank Hengjie Ai (discussant), David Dicks, David Easley (discussant), Bing Han, Jiasun Li
(discussant), Stefan Nagel, Olivia Mitchell, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Yajun Wang (discussant),
Liyan Yang, and seminar and conference participants at UC Irvine, National University of
Singapore, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, the 27th Annual Conference on Financial
Economics and Accounting, the American Finance Association 2017 Annual Meeting, the 12th
Annual Conference of the Financial Intermediation Research Society, 2018 Western Finance
Association Annual Meeting, and 2018 Stanford Institute of Theoretical Economics Summer
Workshop for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by David Hirshleifer, Chong Huang, and Siew Hong Teoh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Index Investing and Asset Pricing under Information Asymmetry and Ambiguity Aversion
David Hirshleifer, Chong Huang, and Siew Hong Teoh
NBER Working Paper No. 24143
December 2017, Revised June 2019
JEL No. F3,G11,G12,G14,G15,G4,G41

                                          ABSTRACT

Ambiguity aversion alone does not explain the market nonparticipation puzzle. We show that in a
rational expectations equilibrium model with a fund offering the risk-adjusted market portfolio
(RAMP), ambiguity averse investors hold the fund and an information-based portfolio, and thus
participate in all asset markets, directly or indirectly. This result follows from a new separation
theorem which states that an investor’s equilibrium portfolio can be decomposed into
components, each matching the optimal portfolio based on only one information source (price
versus private signal). Asset risk premia satisfy the CAPM with the fund as the pricing portfolio.


David Hirshleifer                                Siew Hong Teoh
The Paul Merage School of Business               The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine                 University of Irvine
4291 Pereira Drive                               Irvine, CA 92697-3125
Irvine, CA 92697                                 steoh@uci.edu
and NBER
david.h@uci.edu

Chong Huang
University of California, Irvine
The Paul Merage School of Business
Building 221 Periera Drive
CA 92697-3125
chong.h@uci.edu
1      Introduction
Index investing has long been recommended by legendary practitioners (such as Jack
Bogle and Warren Buffett) and leading scholars (such as William Sharpe and John Cochrane)
as means by which retail investors can attain attractive combinations of risk and return.1
Market indexes are also important in asset pricing: they are used as pricing portfolios
for determining assets’ risk premia.
   These two roles of market indexes, facilitating index investment and pricing assets,
are highlighted in the Capital Asset Pricing Model (Sharpe 1964; Lintner 1965). In a
perfect financial market with rational investors and homogeneous beliefs, the Value-
Weighted Market Portfolio (VWMP) is, in equilibrium, the portfolio that all investors
should hold. Also, in equilibrium, VWMP is the pricing portfolio, so that correctly
priced assets have zero alphas with respect to it.
     In practice, however, investors have heterogeneous beliefs and are imperfectly ratio-
nal, violating the CAPM assumptions. With regard to beliefs, some investors are better
informed than others about asset payoffs, and even investors with equally good infor-
mation receive heterogeneous signals. So investors should not hold the same portfolio.
     Second, evidence from the laboratory and the field indicates that people are ambi-
guity averse. This can discourage investors from participating in the market and thus
affect asset risk premia.2 In particular, if all investors have common knowledge of the
structure of the capital market, they will have the courage to invest in all assets, because
their risk will be reduced by the information they glean from asset prices (i.e., price
signals), which partially aggregate other investors’ information.3 In contrast, if some
investors face model uncertainty (also known as ambiguity) about the financial market,
they may be unable to extract information from the price and may take zero positions
in assets that they are ambiguous about. The non-participation caused by ambiguity
aversion may obstruct the information aggregation of asset prices, and undermine the
roles of VWMP as a common holding of investors and as a pricing portfolio.
    1 Inrecent years investors have increasingly followed this recommendation. For example, according to
Morningstar Direct Asset Flows Commentary, February 20, 2018, net flows into passive U.S. equity funds
rose by $233.5 billion for the 12 months ended January 2018.
   2 Dimmock, Kouwenberg, and Wakker (2016), Dimmock et al. (2016), and Bianchi and Tallon (2018)

measure ambiguity attitudes using artificial events based on Ellsberg urn experiments. Anantanasuwong
et al. (2019) directly elicit ambiguity attitudes using an incentivized survey. These studies provide evi-
dence suggesting that ambiguity aversion reduces market participation.
   3 Investor learning from asset prices has been extensively studied in rational expectations equilibrium

models, such as Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), Hellwig (1980), and Admati (1985).


                                                    1



                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
   These points raise doubt about whether, in a financial market with information asym-
metry and ambiguity aversion, the VWMP is dysfunctional in facilitating index invest-
ment and pricing assets. If, in equilibrium, investors are not willing to hold a VWMP
fund as a component of their optimal portfolios, this raises the question of whether a
different index can be designed that investors will use and benefit from. If so, is there
an asset pricing model based on such a new index?
    In this paper, we address these questions in a noisy rational expectations equilibrium
setting with asymmetric information about asset payoffs, ambiguity averse investors
who do not know some parameters of the financial market, and a passive fund that
offers an index portfolio (not necessarily the VWMP). In particular, in addition to stan-
dard problems of information asymmetry, the ambiguity averse investors do not know
the precisions of some assets’ random supplies and optimize under worst-case assump-
tions about supply variance (that is, the max-min expected utility proposed by Gilboa
and Schmeidler (1989)).4
   We first provide a positive analysis of index investing and asset pricing when a pas-
sive fund offers investors the standard market index, VWMP. We show that the VWMP
is dysfunctional under information asymmetry and ambiguity aversion. In equilibrium,
investors who believe that some assets’ random supplies may be extremely volatile hold
zero position of the passive fund. That is, VWMP does not help ambiguity averse in-
vestors participate fully in the market via index investing. The problem is that these
investors believe that the price signals are extremely noisy in the worst-case scenario, so
that VWMP is too subjectively risky for them to hold.
   Second, using VWMP as the pricing portfolio, individual assets have non-zero al-
phas in equilibrium. The non-zero alphas arise from both the information asymmetry
and the ambiguity aversion. On the one hand, the non-zero alphas relative to VWMP are
equivalent to the assertion that VWMP is not mean-variance efficient conditional only
on asset prices. With information asymmetry, the efficient portfolio conditional on asset
prices must reflect the average precision of investor private signals and the precision
of random supply, because these precisions determine the distribution of price signals.
The market capitalization weights in VMWP do not depend upon these two precisions;
hence, assets have non-zero alphas relative to VWMP. On the other hand, compared
   4 While the assumptions that investors are subject to model uncertainty about the precisions of asset
random supplies and that they have max-min utilities are sufficient for our main results, our results,
especially those in the economy with the newly designed index, are robust to the parameters that the
investors are ambiguous about and to the utility representations of the ambiguity aversion preference.


                                                   2



                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
with the equilibrium asset holdings where investors commonly know the financial mar-
ket, some investors hold less positions of the assets that they are ambiguous about, so
those assets will have lower equilibrium prices and higher risk premia. We name the
extra risk premia the “ambiguity premia,” which also contribute to the non-zero alphas.
    Given the failures of VWMP, we investigate whether a new index can be designed
to facilitate index participation and serve as the pricing portfolio. The key is to have
asset weights depend appropriately upon the precisions of investor private signals and
the precisions of random supply, as well as assets’ market values. Since these precisions
measure the amount of risk an investor can reduce by trading based on the price signal,
the weights are, in this sense, risk-adjusted. We, therefore, call the newly designed in-
dex the Risk-Adjusted Market Portfolio (RAMP). Specifically, relative to VWMP, RAMP
has lower investment in more volatile assets (conditional on asset prices), i.e., it is a
defensive (low volatility) investing strategy.
    Importantly, while investors commonly know how RAMP is constructed (as a func-
tion of financial market parameters including supply shock precisions), investors who are
ambiguous about the financial market do not know the exact composition of RAMP
(since they do not know the values of the supply precisions). RAMP does not rely on
private information about asset payoffs, so RAMP is in a sense of a passive index. Given
these points, RAMP can be viewed as a “smart beta” investing strategy, a general ap-
proach that recently has gained popularity in investment practice.5
    With the passive fund offering RAMP, we show that there is an equilibrium in which
investors’ asset holdings are exactly the same as those in the economy without model
uncertainty. In particular, all investors, including ambiguity averse investors, hold ex-
actly one share of RAMP (by delegating the passive component of their portfolios to the
index fund) and additionally hold positions based upon their private information sig-
nals. Hence, investors do employ the index investment strategy in equilibrium. In other
words, delegation of investment to the index fund solves the problem of ambiguity aver-
sion and nonparticipation. Also, using RAMP as the pricing portfolio, in equilibrium,
assets’ alphas are zero, implying a new version of CAPM security market line under
information asymmetry and ambiguity aversion.
   The key intuition for why investors hold RAMP as the passive component of their
portfolios derives from a new separation theorem, which applies in the setting with no
   5 Smart  beta strategies seek to passively follow indexes that use alternative weighting schemes such as
volatility rather than weighting solely by traditional market capitalization.


                                                    3



                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
model uncertainty. In this setting, there is a rational expectations equilibrium in which
any investor’s equilibrium risky asset holding can be decomposed into two components.
The first is just RAMP, which is a common deterministic component in all investors’
equilibrium holdings. The second is the investor’s information-based portfolio, which in-
cludes a non-zero position in an asset if and only if the investor receives a private signal
about the asset.
   This new separation theorem differs from the separation theorem derived in the liter-
ature in that an investor’s optimal portfolio is separated by her conditionally indepen-
dent signals of asset payoffs.6 We, therefore, call it the Information Separation Theorem.
Specifically, RAMP is an investor’s equilibrium holding, when she trades based only
on price signal. In contrast, an investor’s information-based portfolio is her optimal
portfolio based on her private signals and conditional on asset prices (as exogenous pa-
rameters). Therefore, any investor’s information-based portfolio is independent of price
signals.
   The Information Separation Theorem provides new insight into why the investors’
equilibrium asset holdings in the setting where ambiguity averse investors are subject
to model uncertainty are the same as in the economy without model uncertainty. To
deepen the intuition, we consider the following proposed strategy profile: each investor
holds exactly one share of the fund, and additionally holds her information-based port-
folio (which could be a nullity). Given that all other investors behave as prescribed, no
investor has an incentive to deviate.
    The key insight is that the fund provides investors with a channel to share risks.
Consider, for example, an investor and a vector of precisions of assets’ supply shocks
that is possible according to her subjective belief. Given the value of this vector, the
investor would be in a possible world without model uncertainty. In such a possible
world, since all other investors are holding effectively one share of the fund and their
own information-based portfolios, they are holding the same portfolios as they would
in the rational expectations equilibrium in this world. Hence, the market clearing con-
dition implies that the pricing function is the same as the one in the rational expecta-
tions equilibrium. Therefore, if the investor knew the parameter values that characterize
this possible world, her optimal portfolio choice would consist of RAMP and her own
   6 Thisseparation derives from the model assumption that any investor is a price taker and so her pri-
vate signal and the price signal are conditionally independent. Hence, it follows from the Bayes’ rule that
investors can optimally construct a portfolio based on each of her signals and then sum all the constructed
portfolios together to get the equilibrium asset holdings.


                                                    4



                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
information-based portfolio.
   Because the fund offers RAMP in any possible world, without the knowledge of the
exact world, the investor’s optimal portfolio choice is to hold one share of the fund
together with her own information-based portfolio. Investors may disagree with each
other about financial market parameters (owing to having different prior supports on
their distributions) and thus the fund’s composition and risks. Nevertheless, by holding
one share of the fund along with their own information-based portfolios, each investor
knows that her position is, in the proposed equilibrium, optimal in each possible world.
   The fact that the investment strategy of holding one unit of the fund and her own
information-based portfolio is optimal to an investor (given other investors’ strategies)
for any possible world in her belief support implies that such an investment strategy
maximizes the investor’s max-min utility. Put differently, a strong min-max property
holds in the equilibrium. Therefore, ambiguity averse investors hold a diversified port-
folio, RAMP, by engaging in index investing.
   The above argument makes clear that an investor’s willingness to hold the fund is an
equilibrium outcome; the reasoning relies on her conjecture about the willingness of all
other investors to hold the fund and their own information-based portfolios. So RAMP
is not addressing ambiguity aversion (solely) by diversification, a principle which can
benefit investors even in a partial equilibrium setting. The willingness to hold RAMP
derives from an understanding that other investors will, in equilibrium, also be will-
ing to hold RAMP. Indeed, even though investors know the fund’s investment strategy
(the function to construct RAMP), off the equilibirum path, an investor will not in gen-
eral find it optimal to hold the fund if she knew that other investors are choosing off-
equilibrium asset holdings. Hence, it is only in equilibrium, and by virtue of our new
separation theorem, that we can conclude that ambiguity averse investors optimally
hold the fund offering RAMP.
   Interestingly, although investors agree to hold the fund in equilibrium, they disagree
on the fund’s composition, because it depends on financial market parameters about
which investors have heterogeneous uncertainties. So our assumption that there is a
passive fund that observes supply volatilities and offers RAMP accordingly does not
assume away model uncertainty. Model uncertainty in equilibrium remains; it is just
that investors find delegation to be an optimal way of addressing it.7
  7 Mele and Sangiorgi (2015) show that in a model without a passive fund offering RAMP, ambiguity
averse investors acquire costly information about model parameters. In comparison with their finding,


                                                 5



                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
   The Information Separation Theorem also shows why all assets have zero alphas rel-
ative to RAMP. The fact that an investor with no private information optimally holds
RAMP (through the fund) implies that RAMP is mean-variance efficient, so that the
CAPM security market line holds with RAMP as the pricing portfolio. Because the pric-
ing portfolio does not depend on the realization of the random supply shock, and the
weight of each asset in the pricing portfolio are conditional on asset prices, which are
publicly observable, the portfolio is potentially observed by an econometrician. This
makes the model empirically testable.
   Given the potential benefits of RAMP to investors, it is important to consider whether
the portfolio is implementable in practice as an index fund. First, although we assume
that a single passive fund knows all parameters of the financial market, enabling it to of-
fer RAMP. However, it turns out that this assumption is not necessary. Suppose instead
that no single agent knows all parameters of the financial market. Nevertheless, as long
as each parameter is known by some agents, knowledgeable agents can start competi-
tive specialized funds (e.g., geography-specific funds or industry-specific funds). This
enables investors at large to hold RAMP by holding all specialized funds. To put this
another way, it is possible to offer RAMP by creating as a fund of funds.
   Second, if private agents do not have the knowledge about financial markets needed
to offer a RAMP fund, government could potentially collect the needed information
and make it public. This can enable the formation of RAMP funds and improve market
participation and risk sharing. For either government or private parties, the cost of
collecting relevant information about the financial market have been declining as big
data technology develops.
   A possible practical problem with implementation of RAMP is helping naı̈ve in-
vestors understand its benefits. This suggests that improvements in financial literacy
may be a further ingredient needed to have more investors obtain the benefits of market
participation and risk sharing via RAMP.
   Our findings contribute to the growing literature on the economic consequences of
index investment. Chabakauri and Rytchkov (2016) find that the introduction of in-
dex trading increases volatilities and correlation of stock returns and that such an effect
arises from the improved risk sharing. Bond and Garcı́a (2018) show that as indexing
becomes cheaper, indexing increases while individual asset trading decreases, and ag-
our results indicate that delegation can serve as a substitute for information acquisition as a means of
addressing ambiguity aversion.


                                                   6



                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
gregate price efficiency decreases while relative price efficiency increases. Baruch and
Zhang (2018) prove that it is optimal for nonindex investors to index and establish a ver-
sion of CAMP in a very different economic setting. All these papers assume that some
investors are constrained to make index investing. By contrast, our paper assumes that
all investors can freely employ index investing strategy and analyzes the different ef-
fects of different market indexes (VWMP versus RAMP) on portfolio choice and asset
pricing.
   Past literature has analyzed extensively the extent to which ambiguity aversion hin-
ders market participation. This research mainly considers investor uncertainty about
the first moment of asset payoffs and study market participation decisions in partial
equilibrium frameworks (e.g., Bossaerts et al. (2010), Cao, Wang, and Zhang (2005),
Dow and Werlang (1992), Easley and O’Hara (2009), Easley and O’Hara (2010), Epstein
and Schneider (2010), and Cao, Han, Hirshleifer, and Zhang (2011)).8 Our paper differs
from this literature in considering investor model uncertainty about the second moment
of asset payoffs in a rational expectations equilibrium setting, and in studying index
investing as a way to address ambiguity aversion.
   A very different version of the CAPM has been derived in somewhat similar model
setups where all investors are perfectly rational (see, for example, Easley and O’Hara
(2004), Biais, Bossaerts, and Spatt (2010), and the online appendix of Van Nieuwerburgh
and Veldkamp (2010)). In these models, the market portfolio for CAPM pricing is the ex-
post total supply of the risky assets, the sum of the endowed risky assets and the random
supply of risky assets. This market portfolio is mean-variance efficient conditional on
the average investor’s information set, and so the CAPM security market line holds
from the perspective of the average investor. The version of the CAPM security market
line we derive differs in that the pricing portfolio is RAMP, which is determined ex
ante (prior to the realization of the random supply shocks), and in that risk premia are
conditional only upon the public information (market prices). This makes the market
portfolio more directly observable to an econometrician.
   Our setting endogenizes investor trust in fund managers (Gennaioli, Shleifer, and
Vishny 2015). An insight that our approach reveals is that inducing investors to make
index investing requires more than investor trust in the honesty and superior knowl-
edge of fund managers about the financial market. It is crucial that investors foresee
  8 An   exception is Watanabe (2016), who assumes that investors are ambiguous about the mean of the
asset’s random supply shock. The focus of Watanabe’s paper is on market fragility.


                                                 7



                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
an equilibrium in which other investors also trust the fund managers and trade accord-
ingly. Off the equilibrium, an investor would not be willing to hold the fund, even if she
trusts the fund manager. In a new working paper, Li and Wang (2018), a representative
investor faces model uncertainty about the financial market and so is uncertain about
the composition of the efficient portfolio offered by a fund based on the fund’s knowl-
edge of the financial market. They call such an uncertainty the “delegation uncertainty.”
In their partial equilibrium setting where there is no risk sharing, the delegation un-
certainty causes the investor to partially delegate, leading to higher CAPM alphas. By
contrast, in our model with RAMP, delegation uncertainty is endogenously eliminated
by risk sharing among investors: holding one share of the fund and the information-
based portfolio is optimal to an investor in every possible world in her subjective belief
support, when other investors are employing the same investment strategy. So an in-
vestor is not concerned about the exact asset holdings through the fund, which vary
across possible worlds in her belief support.


2    The Financial Market
A continuum of investors with measure one, who are indexed by i and uniformly dis-
tributed over [0, 1] trade assets at date 0 and consume at date 1.

Assets.    At date 0, each investor i can invest in a riskfree asset and N ≥ 2 independent
risky assets.9 Let Q be the set of all risky assets. At date 1, the riskfree asset pays r
units, and risky asset n pays f n units of the single consumption good. In addition to
trading directly, investors can also hold individual risky assets through a passive fund
that commits to offering a portfolio X, which is an N-dimension column vector with the
nth element being the shares of the nth risky asset in X.
    Letting Di be the vector of shares of the risky assets held by investor i, and di (a
scalar) the shares of the fund held by investor i, investor i’s effective risky asset holding
is di X + Di .

Return Information.          Let F = ( f 1 , f 2 , . . . , f N )0 be the vector of risky assets’ returns.
   9 If assets are correlated with full rank prior variance-covariance matrix, asset payoffs can be decom-

posed into orthogonal factors, and investors’ private signals are about these factors. Van Nieuwerburgh
and Veldkamp (2009), Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2010) and Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh, and
Veldkamp (2016) show that such a model has the same solution as in the setting with independent assets.
In such a setting, investors hold factors instead of individual assets.


                                                    8



                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
We assume that all investors share a common uniform improper prior of F, and so no
investor has prior information about any risky asset’s return.10 Each investor i receives
a vector of private signals Si about asset returns, Si = F + ei , where F and ei are inde-
pendent; and ei and e j are also independent. Each ei is normally distributed, with mean
zero and precision matrix Ωi . We assume that Ωi is diagonal for all i ∈ [0, 1], so investor
i’s private signal about asset n’s payoff is uninformative about that of asset k.
    Investor i is an informed investor of asset n if and only if the nth diagonal entry of Ωi
is strictly positive. Let λn be the measure of informed investors of asset n; we assume
that λn ∈ (0, 1), for all n ∈ Q. Let diag(λ) be the N × N diagonal matrix with the nth
diagonal entry being λn .
   For simplicity, we assume that the private signals of all informed investors of asset
n have the same precision κn > 0. Let Ω be the N × N diagonal matrix with the nth
diagonal entry being κn . Letting Σ be the matrix of the average precision of private
signals, we have
                                           Z 1
                                      Σ=         Ωi di = Ωdiag(λ)                                       (1)
                                             0
As is standard, the independence of the errors implies that in the economy as a whole
signal errors average to zero, so that the equilibrium pricing function does not depend
on the error realizations (though it does depend on their distributions).

Random Supply. Let Z denote the random vector of supplies of all risky assets. We
assume that Z is independent of F and of ei (for all i ∈ [0, 1]). We further assume that
Z is normally distributed with mean 0 and the precision matrix U. By independence of
assets, U is diagonal and positive definite, with the nth diagonal entry being un .
   All parameters are common knowledge to investors except U. We assume that for
each asset n, a subset of uninformed investors do not know un . We say that such a
group of investors are subject to model uncertainty (or are ambiguous) about asset n.
Any investor i who is ambiguous about asset n will have her own subjective prior belief
about un with the support 0, ūin , where ūin > 0. So we allow different investors who
                                 

  10 The uniform improper prior assumption is for simplicity. Our model can be extended to an economy
with a normal prior. Specifically, as we shall show, the investors’ equilibrium asset holdings and the asset
pricing implications are qualitatively same when the passive fund is offering the newly designed RAMP.
By contrast, in the case where the passive fund offers VWMP, the investors may hold non-zero positions
of risky assets based on the prior information; however, the investors’ equilibrium asset holdings still
differ from those in the economy without model uncertainty. We discuss in more detail an ambiguity
averse investor’s asset holdings in the economy with normal prior distributions of asset payoffs and a
fund offering VWMP in the Online Appendix.


                                                     9



                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
are ambiguous about a particular asset n to have different supports of their beliefs about
un . Let Ui be the set of all possible subjective beliefs of investor i about U, let Ui be a
typical element in Ui , and let U i be the lower bound of Ui .
   Let the measure of the group of investors who are ambiguous about n be 1 − qn ∈
(0, 1 − λn ). Let Q be the N × N diagonal matrix with the nth diagonal entry being qn .
For simplicity, we assume that an investor who is ambiguous about asset n is also unin-
formed about asset n. However, an investor who is uninformed about asset n may know
un and so is not ambiguous about asset n.

Ambiguity Aversion.           Taking the riskfree asset to be the numeraire, let P be the price
vector of the risky assets. Also, let Wi = (wi1 , wi2 , . . . , wiN )0 be the endowed sharehold-
ings of investor i (we assume that the aggregate endowments of shares of each stock are
                                 R1
strictly positive; that is, W = 0 Wi di  0.) Then investor i’s final wealth at date 1 is

                        Πi = r Wi0 − di X 0 + Di0 P + di X 0 + Di0 F.
                                                               
                                                                                          (2)

The first term is the return of investor i’s investment in the riskfree asset, and the second
term is the total return from her investments in risky assets.
    Since investor i is risk averse, if she knows all model parameters, at date 0 she maxi-
mizes a CARA expected utility function,
                                                                 Π
                                                                    
                                  Ei u ( Π i ) = Ei       − exp − i          .                          (3)
                                                                 ρ
The expectation in equation (3) is taken based on investor i’s information about asset
returns. Since the common prior about asset returns is uninformative, any investor i’s
information consists of the equilibrium price vector and the realization of a private sig-
nal Si only.
    However, investor i may be subject to model uncertainty about the precisions of
some assets’ random supplies. If so, owing to ambiguity aversion, she chooses an in-
vestment strategy (di , Di ) to maximize the infimum of her CARA utility. Formally, each
investor i’s decision problem is11
                                                              Π
                                                                  
                                   max inf Ei          − exp − i         .                              (4)
                                   di ,Di Ui ∈Ui              ρ
  11 An investor’s utility in this paper differs slightly from that defined in Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989).
Since any investor’s subjective prior about the precision of the random supply shock has a non-compact
support, the investor maximizes the infimum rather than the minimum of her CARA utility among all
possible precisions.

                                                       10



                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
Equilibrium.         We are interested in an equilibrium defined as follows.

Definition 1 A pricing vector P∗ and a profile of all investors’ risky asset holdings {di∗ , Di∗ }i∈[0,1]
constitute an equilibrium, if:

    1. Given P∗ , (di∗ , Di∗ ) solves investor i’s maximization problem in equation (4), for all i ∈
       [0, 1]; and

    2. P∗ clears the market,
                     Z 1
                           (di∗ X + Di∗ ) di = W + Z,   for any realizations of F and Z.            (5)
                      0

    As in the literature on rational expectations models, equilibrium prices play two
roles: clearing the market and partially aggregating private information. Hence, a ra-
tional expectations equilibrium differs from a Walrasian equilibrium mainly in that the
asset prices convey information about the asset payoffs to investors. This is especially
important in our setting with model uncertainty. Since investors hold neither infor-
mative priors nor private signals about the payoffs of those assets they are ambiguous
about, observation of asset prices is what allows them to update their beliefs to have
finite conditional variances, making them willing to participate in the markets for those
risky assets. Their ambiguity about random supply precisions, however, will hinder
their learning from asset prices, discouraging them from holding non-zero positions of
the assets they are ambiguous about.


3     The Value-Weighted Market Portfolio
We next discuss the investors’ equilibrium asset holdings and the asset pricing implica-
tions when the fund is offering the investors with the value-weighted market portfolio
(VWMP); formally, in this section, we assume that X = W. We show that ambiguity
averse investors are not willing to hold a fund offering VWMP as the passive (noninfor-
mational) index component of their portfolios, and that VWMP is not the appropriate
benchmark portfolio for pricing assets.

3.1    Equilibrium Asset Holdings
Since the composition of VWMP is commonly known, even if no fund is available that
offers VWMP, an investor can attain the same effective risky asset holdings by directly

                                                   11



                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
trading individual assets only. So an investor’s optimal risky asset holdings are the
same regardless of whether this passive fund is available. As a result, in order to ana-
lyze investors’ equilibrium asset holdings when VWMP is publicly offered, we can first
consider an economy without VWMP.
   Investor i is risk averse, so she only holds a non-zero position of asset n, if her subjec-
tive belief of asset n’s payoff has a finite variance, conditional on her information. When
investor i is uninformed about asset n, however, she has neither prior information nor
private information about the payoff of asset n. Hence, she estimates the payoff based
on only the price, which partially aggregates informed investors’ private information.
Since the precision of asset n’s random supply, un , is strictly positive (no matter how
small it is), if investor i knows un , her belief of asset n’s payoff has a finite variance and,
therefore, she will hold a non-zero position of asset n.
   On the other hand, if investor i is subject to model uncertainty about asset n, she does
not know the precision of asset n’s random supply. By assumption, investor i’s subjec-
tive prior about un has the support 0, ūin . Since all random variables in the model are
                                           

normally distributed, observing the asset price does not change the support of investor
i’s belief about un , although investor i may extract some information about un from asset
n’s price. Hence, the worst-case scenario is independent of asset n’s price. Specifically,
when the precision of the random supply is arbitrarily close to zero, price becomes al-
most uninformative. So as investor i considers the worst-case scenario in making the
investment decision, she focuses on the possibility that the true un is very close to 0. For
any non-zero position of asset n, as the price becomes almost uninformative, the pay-
off variance conditional upon investor i’s information diverges to infinity. So holding
a non-zero position is extremely risky in the worst-case scenario. To avoid this risk, in-
vestor i optimally chooses a zero position. Lemma 1 below summarizes the argument
above.

Lemma 1 An investor i who is ambiguous about asset n optimally holds a zero position in it.

   We now analyze the investors’ equilibrium asset holdings. The model is similar to
the rational expectations equilibrium model with multiple risky assets (Admati 1985).
The key difference is that for each asset n, there are 1 − qn measure investors who will
hold a zero position (by Lemma 1). Proposition 1 below characterizes a linear ratio-
nal expectations equilibrium. Recall that since the composition of VWMP is commonly
known, whether or not such a portfolio is offered by the passive fund, investors will


                                              12



                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
have the same effective risky asset holdings.

Proposition 1 In the model where the passive fund offers VWMP (formally, X = W), there
exists a linear equilibrium with the pricing function
                                        −1
                                   P = BV  [ F − AV − CV Z ] ,                            (6)

where
                                      1h 2            i −1
                              AV =       ρ (ΣQUΣ) + Σ      W                              (7)
                                      ρ
                              BV    = rI                                                  (8)
                                      1 −1
                              CV    =   Σ .                                               (9)
                                      ρ
Any investor i’s effective risky asset holding is
                                                     −1
                                             1    −1
                 di X + Di = lim I + 2 (ΣUi )             W + ρΩi (Si − rP)             (10)
                                Ui →U i      ρ
   Equations (6) and (7) show that for each risky asset n, the measure of investors who
know the precision of its random supply affects its equilibrium price. In particular, QU
is the matrix of the average precisions of asset random supplies in the investors’ sub-
jective “worst-case scenarios,” which positively affect the asset prices. Hence, ceteris
paribus, if qk > qn , the equilibrium price of asset k is greater than that of asset n. Intu-
itively, when qk > qn , on average the subjective worst case for k is not as bad as for n, so
the demand function for asset k is higher than the demand function for asset n. So when
both assets have the same supply, asset k’s price is higher than that of asset n.
   Equation (10) characterizes investor i’s effective risky asset holdings in equilibrium.
For each asset n, if investor i knows the precision of its random supply, she will hold a
position based on the equilibrium price. Formally, in such a case, the nth diagonal entry
of U i is un > 0; hence, the first term in equation (10) is positive. Furthermore, if such an
investor receives a private signal about asset n’s payoff, the nth diagonal entry of Ωi is
κn > 0, and so the second term is also positive.
   At the other extreme, if investor i is ambiguous about asset n, both the nth diagonal
entry of U i and the nth diagonal entry of Ωi are zero, implying that investor i holds a
zero position of asset n. Therefore, even with a passive fund offering VWMP, ambiguity
averse investors will not participate in some assets’ markets. As a result, VWMP is not
effective in encouraging ambiguity averse investors to hold better-diversified portfolios.

                                               13



                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
3.2   Asset Pricing with VWMP
We next analyze asset risk premia to see if VWMP is, as in the CAPM, the relevant
pricing portfolio. Given any realized equilibrium price P, the volatility of asset payoffs
derives from the supply shock only. Let diag( P) be an N × N diagonal matrix, whose
nth diagonal element is the nth element of the vector P. Generically, as no asset has a
zero price, diag( P) is invertible. Then, by the definition of diag( P),

                                         diag( P)−1 P = 1,                                            (11)

where 1 = (1, 1, . . . , 1)0 . From equation (6), we can calculate the difference between
individual assets’ expected rates of return and the riskfree rate as

                             diag( P)−1 E( F ) − r1 = diag( P)−1 AV ,                                 (12)

where AV is characterized in equation (7), and the expectation is taken conditional on
the asset prices.
   Since the pricing portfolio is VWMP, we calculate the market capitalization weights
for individual assets as
                                                      diag( P)W
                                        ωV =                    .                                     (13)
                                                         P0 W
Then, the variance of VWMP is
                                                       2
                                                  1
                              Var ( RV ) =                   W 0 CV U −1 CV W,                        (14)
                                                 P0 W
and the covariances between individual assets and VWMP are
                                                  1
                            Cov( R, RV ) =             diag( P)−1 CV U −1 CV .                        (15)
                                             P0 W
Here, CV is characterized in equation (9).
   Therefore, when the pricing portfolio is VWMP, the assets’ betas are

                                Cov( R, RV )        diag( P)−1 CV U −1 CV
                         βV =                = P0 W                       ,                           (16)
                                 Var ( RV )           W 0 CV U −1 CV W
and their alphas are

                                                                             CV U −1 CV WW 0
                                                                                            
                   −1                                             −1
   αV = diag( P)        AV − β V [E( RV ) − r ] = diag( P)                 I− 0                AV .   (17)
                                                                             W CV U −1 CV W
   Simple algebra verifies that VWMP does not successfully price assets in the capital
market.

                                                       14



                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
Proposition 2 With VWMP being the pricing portfolio, the assets’ alphas are not equal to zero.

   The non-zero alphas show that in contrast with the CAPM, in our model VWMP
does not price assets correctly in the cross section. These alphas derive from both in-
formation asymmetry and ambiguity aversion. First, the traditional CAPM is based on
homogeneous beliefs which are fully impounded in the market capitalization weights
in VWMP. Hence, conditional on the asset prices, VWMP is mean-variance efficient. In
contrast, in our setting, owing to information asymmetry, the average precision of pri-
vate signals (Σ) and the precision of random supply (U) will determine the price signal
distribution. This is directly implied by the equilibrium pricing function (equation (6)).
Therefore, the weights in a portfolio that can price assets correctly must be functions of
these two precisions. VWMP, however, has value weights, which are not functions of
these two precisions, so it cannot be efficient conditional on asset prices in the financial
market with information asymmetry. Hence, using VWMP as the pricing portfolio, the
assets should have non-zero alphas.
   Second, ambiguity aversion also affects appropriate index portfolio weights for as-
set pricing, which further contributes to nonzero alphas relative to VWMP. Intuitively,
when more investors are ambiguous about an asset, its demand curve shifts leftward,
leading to a lower price and a higher risk premium. We then refer to the increment in
the asset’s risk premium due to ambiguity aversion as the asset’s ambiguity premium.


4    The Risk-Adjusted Market Portfolio
Proposition 1 and Proposition 2 show that as an index fund, the conventional stock mar-
ket index, VWMP, fails to encourage better diversification and risk sharing by ambigu-
ity averse investors, and fails as a benchmark for equilibrium asset pricing. The dys-
functions of VWMP derive from important limitations: assets are weighted in VWMP
by their market capitalization only, so these weights depend upon neither the average
precision of private signals nor the precision of random supply, which determine the
distribution of price signal.
    This raises the question of whether there is an alternative index which, if offered
by a fund, ambiguous investors would be willing to hold. If so, this could improve
diversification and risk-sharing between investors who are ambiguous about any given
asset and those who are not. We will show that a new index design achieves these goals.
    The index is formed by adjusting the market capitalization weights in VWMP by the

                                             15



                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
average precision of investor private signals and the precision of random supply. Since
these precisions determine the amount of risks an investor can reduce by trading based
on the price signal, we name the new index the Risk-Adjusted Market Portfolio (RAMP).
We analyze portfolio choices and asset pricing, when there is a passive fund offering this
index portfolio.
   Formally, RAMP is defined as
                                                            −1
                                             1
                                     X = I + 2 (ΣU )−1             W.                             (18)
                                            ρ
Ambiguity averse investors do not know U and hence do not know the exact compo-
sition of X. However, the functional relationship between X and U that is specified in
equation (18) is common knowledge to investors. RAMP does not depend on any of
the private signals about asset payoffs, and so RAMP is a passive asset management
product. Because of these features (i.e., passive but weighting assets not only by mar-
ket capitalization), RAMP can be viewed as a type of smart beta strategy, an investing
approach which has been growing in popularity in investment practice.12
   More specifically, RAMP an be viewed as a defensive investment strategy in the
sense that it underweights high volatility stocks. Specifically, RAMP differs from VWMP
in that it contains a component (ΣU )−1 . It then follows from equation (18) that RAMP
includes fewer shares of more volatile assets. Therefore, holding RAMP will be a defen-
sive investment strategy that can largely reduce the risk of loss.

4.1       Equilibrium Index Investing
The key result in this subsection is that with the passive fund offering RAMP, all in-
vestors employ the index investment strategy in equilibrium by holding one share of
the fund, and their effective asset holdings are exactly the same as in the economy with-
out model uncertainty. Proposition 3 formalizes this result.

Proposition 3 In the model with a passive fund that commits to offering the portfolio X specified
in equation (18), there is an equilibrium in which

   1. All investors will buy one share of the passive fund, and so di∗ = 1 for all i ∈ [0, 1];

   2. Any investor i will hold an extra portfolio ρΩi (Si − rP); and
  12 By   the end of December 2017, smart beta funds have surpassed $1 trillion in assets under manage-
ment.

                                                   16



                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
  3. For any given F and Z, the equilibrium price is

                                     P = B−1 [ F − A − CZ ] ,                           (19)

     where
                                     1h 2           i −1
                                 A =    ρ (ΣUΣ) + Σ      W                              (20)
                                     ρ
                                 B = rI                                                 (21)
                                     1 −1
                                 C =   Σ .                                              (22)
                                     ρ

   The intuition of Proposition 3 builds upon a new separation theorem that applies in
the setting without model uncertainty. We develop this intuition in detail in Section 4.2.
In brief, RAMP provides investors with a channel to share risks, so that when other in-
vestors behave as prescribed, an ambiguity averse investor will find that holding RAMP
and her information-based portfolio is optimal in each possible world in her subjective
belief support. In the rest of this subsection, we discuss some properties of the equilib-
rium characterized in Proposition 3.
   First, investors all hold exactly one share of the fund, even though they have hetero-
geneous priors about U and thus different beliefs about the fund’s composition. Take
two investors, Lucy and Martin, for an example, who do not receive private information
about asset payoffs. Lucy believes that for all n, un could be arbitrarily close to 0; Martin
knows the true precisions of all supply shocks. Hence, Lucy and Martin have very dif-
ferent beliefs about the composition of the fund. By Proposition 3, however, both Lucy
and Martin will hold one share of the passive fund, and neither holds any extra active
positions because they don’t have any private information about assets’ payoffs. Hence,
Lucy and Martin hold the same overall portfolio. So, if a RAMP index fund is available,
differences in investors’ holdings arise solely from differences in their private signals
about asset payoffs, not from differences in their model uncertainties.
   Second, Proposition 3 shows that the willingness of investors to buy an index is based
on an understanding of equilibrium risk-sharing, rather than just a partial equilibrium
understanding that there can be risk-reduction benefits to the investor in isolation to di-
versifying her portfolio. Specifically, consider an investor who faces model uncertainty
about a subset of traded assets, and views the return distributions as exogenous. Even
if she can indirectly trade those assets through a passive fund, it may not be optimal for
her to do so, because she cannot calculate the fund’s expected return and risk. Therefore,

                                             17



                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
arguments based on the incentive of individuals to diversify do not, under radical ig-
norance, justify holding of the fund. In contrast, in our equilibrium setting, an investor
optimally holds the fund, given her belief that other investors will also do so (together
with their direct portfolios). Hence, she is willing to hold the fund too, which achieves
the benefit of optimally sharing risks with other investors.13
    Proposition 3 more broadly suggests that the reason why actual investors often fail
to diversify goes beyond investor ambiguity aversion. In particular, for an investor to
hold the fund, all other investors need to behave according to the prescribed equilib-
rium strategy profile. If imperfectly rational investors reason about possible portfolios
based solely on partial equilibrium risk and return arguments, portfolios containing as-
sets that investors are ambiguous about might seem extremely risky (or in the limiting
case, infinitely risky). Proposition 3 shows that, owing to equilibrium considerations,
even ambiguity averse investors, if otherwise rational, will hold such assets. But actual
investors may not understand the equilibrium reasoning which underlies this result.
   Third, and finally, comparing the equilibrium characterized in Proposition 3 with
that in Proposition 1, we can see the different effects of RAMP and VWMP on the asset
prices and investors’ equilibrium asset holdings. Specifically, whether the passive fund
offers RAMP or VWMP, conditional on the asset payoffs, the price volatility is same.
This follows from the fact that B and C in the equilibrium pricing function with RAMP
are equal to BV and CV in the equilibrium pricing function with VWMP, respectively.
For any give asset payoffs (F) and asset random supplies (Z), however, the asset prices
are higher in the economy with RAMP being the index, because A < AV . This then
directly implies that an informed investor’s asset holdings based on her private signals
are higher in the economy with VWMP. On the other hand, while an informed investor’s
asset holdings based on the price signals are the same in both the economies with RAMP
   13 The fact that equilibrium rather than just diversification considerations are crucial for the index invest-

ment result can be seen more concretely by considering the off-equilibrium possibility that other investors
trade in a fashion that causes asset prices to be almost uninformative. In such a scenario, an ambiguity
averse investor would not hold the passive fund, because RAMP would be perceived as extremely risky.
Specifically, suppose that the off-equilibrium trading strategy profile of other investors leads asset price
informativeness to converge to zero as the random supply shock precisions go to zero. This convergence
could be even faster than the convergence of the asset positions in RAMP to zero. Hence, taking any non-
zero position of the passive fund will give the investor infinite risks in the worst-case scenario, since she
believes that random supply shock precisions could be extremely close to zero. Therefore, the investor
will not hold the fund. In contrast, in such a case, an uninformed investor who knows the supply shock
precisions may still hold asset positions that are bounded away from zero, because the investor can extract
asset payoff information from asset prices, resulting in finite risk.



                                                       18



                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
and with VWMP, an ambiguity averse investor’s asset holdings are higher with RAMP.
The market clearing condition then implies that when the passive fund offers VWMP,
the informed investors trade more aggressively based on their private signals to absorb
the random supplies, and hence they should receive higher premia, which can be called
ambiguity premia. This in turn suggests that when the passive fund offers RAMP, the
assets’ ambiguity premia should disappear, which we verify in Subsection 4.3.


4.2    The Information Separation Theorem
Proposition 3 is surprising, since the fund is at an informational disadvantage relative to
informed investors. There is a clear potential benefit to ambiguous investors to holding
the fund to take advantage of the fund’s knowledge of the precisions of the supply
shocks. But the informational disadvantage of the fund relative to some investors also
might seem to be a potential danger for ambiguous investors. Indeed, off equilibrium, if
other investors do not trade as prescribed in Proposition 3, an ambiguity averse investor
in general may not hold the fund.
    So a valid intuition for Proposition 3 must go beyond the passive fund’s superior
knowledge about the parameters of the financial markets. To build insight into this
result, we now derive a new separation theorem for financial markets with asymmetric
information, but without model uncertainty or funds.
   To do so, we simplify the model described in Section 2 by assuming that U is com-
mon knowledge among all investors and that there is no passive fund.14 Then the model
is a traditional rational expectations equilibrium model with multiple risky assets, ana-
lyzed by Admati (1985). Proposition 4 characterizes a linear rational expectations equi-
librium and shows investors’ optimal risky assets holding when all parameters are com-
mon knowledge.

Proposition 4 In the model whose parameters are all common knowledge among investors, there
exists an equilibrium with the pricing function

                                        P = B−1 [ F − A − CZ ] ,                                        (23)
  14 The theorem we are about to state does not require the assumption of an uninformative prior. Hence,
we prove a general version of Proposition 4 in the appendix for the case of independent assets with normal
priors. Since both the equilibrium pricing function and investors’ equilibrium holdings are continuous in
the prior precisions of assets’ payoffs, substituting zero prior precisions will lead to exact Proposition 4.




                                                     19



                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
where
                                      1h 2           i −1
                                  A =    ρ (ΣUΣ) + Σ      W                             (24)
                                      ρ
                                  B = rI                                                (25)
                                      1 −1
                                  C =   Σ .                                             (26)
                                      ρ

Any investor i’s risky asset holding is
                                                −1
                                 1
                        Di = I + 2 (ΣU )−1             W + ρΩi (Si − rP) .              (27)
                                ρ

  Owing to supply shocks, asset prices are not fully revealing, so information asym-
metry persists in equilibrium and different investors have different asset holdings. An
investor’s asset holding is the sum of two components. The first term in equation (27),
                                                         −1
                                             1
                                         I + 2 (ΣU )−1          W
                                            ρ

is just RAMP, which is deterministic.
   The second component of any investor’s risky asset holding, the second term in (27),
is what we call information-based portfolio. This position, ρΩi (Si − rP), consists of
extra holdings in the securities about which the investor has information. Investor i
holds such an extra position of an asset n if and only if the nth diagonal entry of Ωi is
κn > 0. This suggests that any investor i holds direct positions of a risky asset because
possessing an informative signal about such an asset reduces its conditional volatility
(independent of the signal realization). Investor i’s direct positions of a risky asset also
come from her speculation, which is taken to exploit superior information. Different
investors, even if they are informed about asset n, hold different speculative portfolios,
because they receive heterogeneous private signals.
   Crucially, in each investor’s equilibrium asset holdings in equation (27), the two
components depend upon investors’ information sets in different ways. The first com-
ponent, RAMP, is formed based only on the information that the investor gleans from
asset prices; it is independent of the investor’s private information. In contrast, the
second component, the information-based portfolio, can be formed based only on the
investor’s own private information; it is independent of the information content of the
market price. Since the supply shock precisions do not affect the distributions of the


                                                20



                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
private signals, it follows that the information-based portfolio is independent of the sup-
ply shock precisions. The reason for this independence is that each individual investor is
“small” and thus her trading cannot affect the asset prices and thus the price informa-
tiveness. 15 This independence implies a new separation theorem under asymmetric
information.

Theorem 1 (The Information Separation Theorem) When the characteristics of all assets
are common knowledge, equilibrium portfolios have three components: a deterministic risk-
adjusted market portfolio (RAMP); an information-based portfolio based upon private informa-
tion and equilibrium prices but no extraction of information from prices; and the riskfree asset.

    Theorem 1 indicates that any investor can form an optimal portfolio in separate steps:
(1) buy one share of RAMP; (2) buy the information-based portfolio using only private
information, not the information extracted from price; and (3) put any left-over funds
into the riskfree asset. This separation theorem derives from market equilibrium as well
as optimization considerations. This differs from those (non-informational) separation
theorems in the literature that are based solely on individual optimization arguments.16
   In our model, the fund can provide RAMP because it knows all the model param-
eters, and RAMP does not include any investor’s private information. Meanwhile, the
information-based portfolio is exactly the same as the direct holdings of the risky assets
in Proposition 3. To form the information-based portfolio, an investor does not need to
extract information from the equilibrium price: she can treat the equilibrium prices as
given parameters, and solve for the information-based portfolio from her CARA utility
maximization problem as in a partial equilibrium model.
    The Information Separation Theorem provides the intuition for investors’ equilib-
rium investment strategies in the setting with model uncertainty. Consider the model
in which investors are uncertain about the precisions of some assets’ supply shocks.
The easiest way to build the intuition is to first suppose that investors have min-max
  15 Vives (2008) derives investors’ equilibrium asset holdings in a single-asset environment with a normal

prior and zero aggregate endowment. Therefore, his result cannot be directly used in our analysis when
investors are ambiguity averse about some assets.
   16 It may seem puzzling that none of the three portfolio components depend on the information that an

investor extracts from price. How then does this information enter into the investor’s portfolio decision?
The answer is that RAMP is optimal precisely because of the ability of investors to extract information
from price. As mentioned before, RAMP is deterministic; it does not depend on the private signals. But
the fact that RAMP is an optimal choice is true only because investors update their beliefs based on price.
So the optimal portfolio choice is indeed influenced by such information extraction.



                                                    21



                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
preferences, and then show that our conclusions also apply to max-min preferences as
well. With min-max preferences, we argue that given other investors’ strategies of hold-
ing RAMP and their own information-based portfolios, an investor’s optimal trading
strategy is constant across all possible worlds in her subjective belief support. Hence,
the investor’s optimal trading strategy with max-min utility is the same as that with
min-max utility.
   Specifically, when investor i has a min-max utility, for each possible world Ui ∈ Ui ,
she can solve her optimal risky asset holdings, assuming that the equilibrium pricing
function is the one in equation (19) with U being Ui . Importantly, because all other in-
vestors are holding one share of the fund along with their own direct information-based
portfolios, they are effectively holding the risky assets as in the world with Ui being
common knowledge. Therefore, in the possible world Ui , the market clearing condition
implies that the pricing function is the one specified in equation (19) with U being Ui .
That is, investor i’s belief about the pricing function is correct. So, she would like to hold
the risky assets as in the world Ui . Such risky asset holdings can be implemented by
holding one share of the passive fund and her information-based portfolio, so investor
i would like to use the investment strategy in Proposition 3. Furthermore, investor i is
still uncertain about U, so holding the risk-adjusted market portfolio through holding
one share of the fund is strictly preferred.
   In the above, for any given possible world, holding one share of the fund and her
own information-based portfolio maximizes investor i’s expected CARA utility (given
that all other investors trade according to the prescribed strategy profile). Since such a
trading strategy is optimal across all possible worlds, it maximizes investor i’s max-min
utility. That is, a strong max-min property holds in the equilibrium, and hence, in our
model with investors having max-min utilities, the investment strategy of holding one
share of the fund and the information-based portfolio is also optimal to investors.
   So the Information Separation Theorem helps explain why ambiguity averse in-
vestors are willing to hold the fund that offers RAMP in an equilibrium. Indeed, the
same argument can also be applied when investors have heterogeneous risk tolerances.
In the Online Appendix, we extend our model to allow for heterogeneous risk toler-
ances. We find that in such an extension, investors are still willing to employ the index
investment strategy, but their equilibrium holdings of the passive fund depend on their
risk tolerances.



                                               22



                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
4.3   CAPM Pricing with RAMP
Propositions 3 and 4 indicate that the model with ambiguity aversion and a fund that
offers RAMP has an equilibrium in which investors’ effective risky assets holdings are
exactly the same as in the rational expectations equilibrium without model uncertainty.
This suggests that asset risk premia should not have any ambiguity premia. In addition,
as shown in the Information Separation Theorem, RAMP is the efficient portfolio condi-
tional only on the price signals. This suggests that a version of CAPM security market
line will hold under information asymmetry and ambiguity aversion, with RAMP as the
benchmark pricing portfolio.
   To formally analyze asset alphas relative to RAMP as an asset pricing benchmark,
we first return to the special case of no model uncertainty. From equation (23), the
equilibrium pricing function in this case is
                                                 
                                    1        1 −1
                               P=        F−A− Σ Z ,                                (28)
                                     r       ρ
where A = 1ρ [ρ2 (ΣUΣ) + Σ]−1 W. We then have

                           diag( P)−1 E( F ) − r1 = diag( P)−1 A.                  (29)

Here, E( F ) is the expected payoff conditional on the equilibrium price. The LHS of
equation (29) is just the vector of the risky assets’ equilibrium risk premia.
   Given a realized equilibrium price, RAMP has the value P0 X. Then the vector of the
weights of risky assets in RAMP is
                                         1
                                    ω=       diag( P) X.
                                        P0 X
Hence, conditional on the price P, the difference between the expected return of RAMP
and the riskfree rate is

                E( R X ) − r = ω 0 diag( P)−1 E( F ) − r
                                   1
                             =     0
                                      X 0 diag( P)diag( P)−1 ( A + rP) − r
                                  PX
                                   1
                             =     0
                                      X 0 A,                                       (30)
                                  PX
where the expectations are all conditional on the equilibrium price.
   The variance of RAMP is
                                         0   1 2
                   0      −1    0       −1
   V( R X ) = E ω diag( P) CZ ω diag( P) CZ      =       X 0 CU −1 CX,             (31)
                                                   P0 X

                                             23



                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
and the covariance between all risky assets and RAMP is

                                             1
                          Cov( R, R X ) =        diag( P)−1 CU −1 CX.                    (32)
                                            P0 X
   Let α X be the CAPM alpha with RAMP being the pricing portfolio. From equations
(29)-(32), and since X = ρ(CU −1 C )−1 A, we have the following proposition.

Proposition 5 (Risk premia with Supply Shocks) In the model with all parameters being
common knowledge, asset risk premia satisfy the CAPM security market line where the relevant
market portfolio for pricing is RAMP.

This result may seem surprising, since investors have heterogeneous asset holdings,
and since the portfolios held by informed investors are not mean-variance efficient with
respect to the public information set. Nevertheless, in equilibrium, there are no extra
risk premia incremental to those predicted by the CAPM using RAMP.
   The CAPM pricing relation using RAMP is equivalent to the assertion that RAMP
is mean-variance efficient conditional only on asset prices. This efficiency can be seen
from the utility maximization problem of an investor who is uninformed about all as-
sets. Such an investor balances the expected returns and the risks of her holdings, and
her information consists of the equilibrium price only. In equilibrium, such an investor
holds RAMP, implying that RAMP is mean-variance efficient conditional only on equi-
librium prices.
    Privately informed investors also hold RAMP as the passive component of their port-
folios; this is the piece that does not depend upon their private signals (except to the
extent that their signals are incorporated into the publicly observable market price). In
addition, they have other asset holdings to take advantage of the greater safety of assets
they have more information about, and for speculative reasons based upon their private
information. RAMP is not mean-variance efficient with respect to their private informa-
tion sets, but it is efficient with respect to the information set that contains only publicly
available information.
   In the special case of asymmetric information but no model uncertainty, RAMP is a
natural candidate for the CAPM pricing portfolio, because it is the common component
in all investors’ risky asset holdings. We show that RAMP is mean-variance efficient un-
conditional on any investor’s private information. Therefore, the CAPM security market
line relation holds without conditioning on private information, with respect to RAMP.


                                               24



                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
    What is perhaps more surprising is that when there is a passive fund that offers
RAMP, even with model uncertainty, RAMP is the appropriate CAPM pricing portfolio.
To see how the presence of a fund offering RAMP affects asset risk premia when there is
model uncertainty, consider equilibrium asset holdings as in Proposition 3. This shows
that even when investors are uncertain about the precisions of asset supply shocks, they
all hold one share of the passive fund, eliminating ambiguity premia. So asset risk pre-
mia satisfy the CAPM.
   Corollary 1 presents this even more surprising result.

Corollary 1 In the model where investors are uncertain about the precisions of some assets’
supply shocks, and a passive fund is offering RAMP that is specified in equation (18), asset risk
premia satisfy the CAPM with RAMP being the pricing portfolio.


5    Centralized versus Distributed Implementation of the
     RAMP Fund
We have shown that our new index, RAMP, can encourage all investors, including am-
biguity averse ones, to employ index investment strategy, and thus in equilibrium in-
vestor risky asset holdings are exactly same as those in the economy without model
uncertainty.
   In order to offer RAMP, the passive fund needs to have full knowledge about the
relevant parameter values that characterize the capital market. Improving information
processing technologies and “big data” may have improved the feasibility of this over
time. It is also possible that the regulatory powers of government may give it advan-
tages for collecting information relevant for estimating the relevant parameter values.
If so, in principle the government itself could offer RAMP, or could publicly disclose
relevant information that helps others estimate relevant parameters. So potentially ei-
ther government or private funds can contribute to the offering of RAMP, promoting
investor participation and risk sharing. There can also be agency problems associated
with either public or private fund providers, a topic that we do not focus on in this
paper.
   By whatever means, if a single agents has access to all relevant parameter values, a
centralized approach to offering RAMP is straightforward. The agent calculates RAMP
based on equation (18) and publicly announces the formula for calculating portfolio


                                               25



                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
weights. If there are multiple agents with the requisite information, competition be-
tween them can drive fees to a very low level.
   What is less obvious is that even if no single agent knows all the relevant parameters,
a decentralized approach can also implement RAMP. Suppose that each parameter is
known by a nontrivial set of investors. Specifically, suppose that the set of all traded
assets can be partitioned into M subsets. In the partition j, there are m j ≥ 1 assets. We
assume that there is a positive measure of investors, who know all parameters about
assets in partition j but do not have any private signals about the payoffs of such assets.
We call these investors “Group j uninformed investors.” (In the extreme case, M = N,
and so, in each partition, there is only one asset. Then, we are in the setting described in
Section 2.)
   We consider the following equilibrium. Each of the Group j uninformed investors
commits to offering a portfolio Yj . Here, Yj can be seen as a “local” fund, which includes
only assets in partition j. For each asset n included in asset partition j, Yj includes exactly
the same position as in the portfolio X.
   First, the fund fee will be zero in an equilibrium. Since there are infinitely many
funds who are committing to offering Yj , the jth local fund industry is perfectly compet-
itive. Hence, the fund fee should be the same as the marginal cost of offering Yj , which
is zero.
    Second, and more importantly, as required in the existing index fund industry, all
local funds are required to disclose their asset holdings at the end of the period. Then, if
a local fund of Group j that deviates from Yj , its portfolio holding will differ from other
Group j local funds’ portfolio holdings. Hence, such a deviation is observable ex post
and verifiable. Ex post, once a fund’s deviation is detected, we assume that the fund
will be heavily punished or incur a large reputation cost. It follows that no local fund is
willing to deviate from its commitment to invest in Yj . This indeed follows the idea of
“Nash implementation” in the mechanism design literature.
  Finally, any investor will first buy one share of the Group j local fund, for each j. By
doing so, any investor will form an asset holding (Y10 , Y20 , . . . , YM
                                                                        0 )0 = X 0 , which is exactly

RAMP specified in equation (18). Then, investors will hold their own information-based
portfolios. Obviously, investors are effectively holding one share of the passive fund and
their own information-based portfolios, which are their optimal investment strategies in
the equilibrium described in Proposition 3.



                                                 26



                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
6    Concluding Remarks
We analyze here two major roles played by market indexes, facilitating diversified in-
vesting, and providing an appropriate asset pricing benchmark, in a financial market
with information asymmetry, model uncertainty, and ambiguity aversion. We show that
with the Value-Weighted Market Portfolio (VWMP) as index, investors’ equilibrium as-
set holdings differ from those in the economy without model uncertainty, because am-
biguity averse investors take zero positions of the assets whose parameters they are
sufficiently uncertain about. So ambiguity averse investors do not employ an index in-
vestment strategy, which hinders diversification and risk sharing. This also implies that
in comparison to a market without model uncertainty, informed investors need to hold
extra positions to absorb a greater proportion of outstanding shares, including random
supplies, and thus they will require ambiguity premia in expected returns. So infor-
mation asymmetry and ambiguity aversion lead to non-zero alphas of assets relative to
VWMP as the pricing portfolio.
   We derive a new market index that adjusts market value weights to take into account
the average precision of investor private signals and the precision of random supply of
different assets, i.e., the amount of risk reduction investors obtain by conditioning on
price as a signal. We call this index design the Risk-Adjusted Market Portfolio (RAMP).
RAMP is a defensive strategy in the sense that, relative to the value-weighted market, it
underweights assets that are more volatile.
    The ability of investors to invest in a RAMP index fund has major implications for
equilibrium trading and asset pricing. In equilibrium, regardless of investors’ hetero-
geneity in their ambiguity aversion, all investors hold exactly one share of the index as
the passive (non-information-based) component of their portfolios. That is, RAMP in-
duces investors to diversify by employing an index investment strategy. This improves
the sharing of risk between investors who face model uncertainty about an asset and
those who do not. In equilibrium, all investors’ asset holdings are exactly the same as
those in the economy without model uncertainty. Finally, the CAPM pricing relationship
holds with respect to RAMP as the benchmark pricing portfolio, even though investors
have asymmetric information and face model uncertainty.
   These properties of RAMP derive from a new information separation theorem as
shown in the special case of no model uncertainty even if no index fund is available.
The information separation theorem says that to attain her optimal asset holdings, an


                                            27



                Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
investor first constructs an optimal portfolio based on each of her signals (i.e., price
signal and private signal) and then sums all these optimal portfolios together. Then,
in the setting with model uncertainty, when other investors are holding a passive fund
offering RAMP and their information-based portfolios, in any possible financial market
in her subjective belief support, an investor’s optimal investment strategy is also to hold
the fund and her own information-based portfolio. Therefore, providing RAMP to all
investors facilitates their asset market participation and risk sharing.
   The design of RAMP has important empirical and policy implications. First, because
it underweights high volatility stocks, RAMP is a defensive investing strategy. The in-
vestment strategy of following RAMP can also be viewed as a smart beta strategy, which
is gaining increasing popularities. In order to implement RAMP, the government may
employ big data analysis to gather all the information about capital market parameters
and to offer RAMP. At the same time, the government should educate investors about
the market equilibrium and risk sharing, and may consider recommending RAMP to
investors through their retiring investments.




                                             28



                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
A      Omitted Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1:

    Because investor i is ambiguous about asset n, by assumption, she does not have
private signal about asset n’s payoff; that is, κi = 0. Hence, investor i’s only informa-
tion about the distribution of asset n’s payoff is its price, which may partially aggregate
informed investors’ private signals. Suppose the uninformed investors’ aggregate de-
mand for asset n is (1 − λn ) D ( pn ). Since uninformed investors do not observe un , D ( pn )
is not a function of un .
    Given any P and any un ∈ 0, ūin , we derive investor i’s expected utility conditional
                                    

on Pn as follows. Suppose asset n’s pricing function in a linear equilibrium is

                                     f n = a + bpn + czn ,

where a, b, and c are undetermined parameters. Since informed investors know un , they
can extract information from the price without any ambiguity. Therefore, any informed
investor j’s demand is
                             h        un    un                     i
                      D j = ρ κn s j + 2 a + 2 (b − r ) pn − rκn pn .
                                       c     c
Then, the informed investors’ aggregate demand will be
                          h        un    un                     i
                      λn ρ κn f n + 2 a + 2 (b − r ) pn − rκn pn .
                                    c     c
Then, the market clearing condition implies that
             h        un    un                     i
         λn ρ κn f n + 2 a + 2 (b − r ) pn − rκn pn + (1 − λn ) D ( Pn ) = wn + zn .
                       c     c
Matching the coefficient of the market clearing condition and the pricing function, we
have
                            wn         un
                       a =         − 2 a
                           λn κn ρ c κn
                             (1 − λ n ) D ( p n )   un
                     bpn = −                      − 2 (b − r ) pn + rpn
                                   λn κn ρ         c κn
                              1
                       c =
                           λn κn ρ


                                              29



                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
   Therefore, for any given un ∈ 0, ūin , conditional on the price Pn , |E( f n − rpn | pn )| <
                                        

+∞. On the other hand, the variance of asset n’s payoff conditional on pn is

                                     V ( f n | p n ) = c2 u − 1
                                                            n ,


which diverges to +∞ as un goes to 0. Hence, any non-zero position Di of asset n brings
investor i a utility
                                  "                                         #
                                                           Di2
                          
                       1              1
             − exp − wi rpn exp − Di E ( f n − rpn | pn ) + 2 V ( f n | pn ) ,      (33)
                       ρ              ρ                    2ρ

which goes to −∞ as un goes to 0. Therefore, if investor i is ambiguous about asset n,
investor i will hold a zero position of asset n.
                                                                                        Q.E.D.


Proof of Proposition 1:

   We assume that the pricing function can be written as

                                   F = AV + BV P + CV Z,

where BV is nonsingular. Then, conditional on the asset prices P, an investor i’s updated
belief about asset payoffs is
                                                                
                            F|P ∼ N        AV + BV P, CV0 Ui−1 CV ,

where Ui ∈ Ui
  Then, each investor i’s optimal asset holdings are
              n                                o
 di X + Di = ρ (CV Ui CV ) ( BV − rI ) − rΩi P + ρΩi Si + ρ[(CU −1 C 0 )−1 AV ]. (34)
                     −1 0 −1


It follows from Lemma 1 that if investor i is ambiguous about asset n, her holding of
asset n is zero. Then, aggregating all investors’ effective asset holdings and applying the
market clearing condition yield
          h                     i       h                              i
              0 −1          −1            0 −1         −1
                                           
 D = ρ CV          QU (CV ) AV + ρΣF + ρ CV    QU (CV ) ( BV − rI − rΣ) P
     = W + Z.


                                                30



                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
   Therefore, by matching coefficients, we have

                                                 1 −1
                                      CV =         Σ
                                                 ρ
                                      BV       = rI
                                                 1h 2          i −1
                                      AV       =    ρ ΣQUΣ + Σ      W.
                                                 ρ

   Substituting these parameters into the pricing function and the individual investor’s
asset holding function, we get Proposition 1.
                                                                                               Q.E.D.


Proof of Proposition 2:

   From equation (17), individual assets’ alphas are

                                                            CV U −1 CV WW 0
                                                                           
                                                 −1
                            αV = diag( P)                 I− 0                AV .
                                                            W CV U −1 CV W
              −1
         CV U CV WW    0                                                     CV U CV WW       −1    0
Because W  0 C U −1 C W 6 = I, αV = 0 if and only if AV is an eigenvector of W 0 C U −1 C W
              V      V                                                            V      V
with the associated eigenvalue 1. Therefore, AV should not be a function of Q, since
    CV U −1 CV WW 0
I−  W 0 CV U −1 CV W
                       is not a function of Q. However, it follows from Proposition 1 that
                                −1
AV = 1ρ ρ2 ΣQUΣ + Σ
           
                                     W, and so AV does depend on Q. Therefore, AV is not an
                         − 1
                   CV U CV WW      0
eigenvector of W     0 C U −1 C W with the associated eigenvalue 1. Hence, αV 6 = 0.
                         V      V

                                                                                               Q.E.D.


Proof of Proposition 3:

   We first verify that the market clearing condition holds. Each investor i’s effective
risky assets holding is
                                                                 −1
                                            1
                    di∗ X   +   Di∗   = I + 2 (ΣU )−1                   W + ρΩi (Si − rP) .
                                           ρ




                                                            31



                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
Then, using the pricing function (equation (19)), the aggregate demand can be calculated
as
                Z 1
                    (di∗ X + Di∗ ) di
                 0
                                   −1
                       1       −1
            =     I + 2 (ΣU )           W + ρΣ ( F − rP)
                      ρ
                                   −1                       −1        
                       1       −1                 1                   1 −1
            =     I + 2 (ΣU )           W + ρΣ       Σ + ρ ΣUΣ
                                                           2
                                                                    W+ Σ Z
                      ρ                           ρ                   ρ
                                   −1                i −1
                       1                    h
            =     I + 2 (ΣU )−1         W + I + ρ2 ΣU       W+Z
                      ρ
                       h            i −1     h          i −1
            =   ρ2 ΣU I + ρ2 ΣU          W + I + ρ2 ΣU       W+Z
            = W + Z.
Therefore, the market clears.
   Now, for any investor i, we consider a general investment strategy di X + Di . Denote
by Din investor i’s direct holding of asset n. Suppose that investor i is informed about
asset n. Then, the pricing function (19) implies that investor i’s optimal holding of asset
n is                             −1
                1             −1
            1 + 2 (λn κn un )         wn + ρκn (sin − rpn ) = xn + ρκn (sin − rpn ) .
               ρ
Therefore, any combination of di and Din such that

                              di xn + Din = xn + ρκn (sin − rpn )

can lead to the optimal holding of asset n for investor i.
   Now, consider an asset n that investor i is uninformed about. For any given di and
Din , investor i is effectively holding a position di xn + Din of asset n. Then, for any given
un Such a holding will bring invest i a utility
                         "                                                                    #
                                                                (di xn + Din )2
                 
           1                 1
 − exp − win rpn exp − (di xn + Din ) E ( f n − rpn | pn ) +                    V ( f n | pn ) .
           ρ                 ρ                                        2ρ2
                                                                                             (35)
   There are two cases. In the first case where uin = 0, similarly to Lemma 1, if Din 6= 0,
the infimum of such a utility is −∞, since V( f n | Pn ) → +∞ as un → 0. Therefore,
 ∗ = 0. Next, substituting X into equation (35), the investor’s utility given u is
Din                         n
                                    "                                          #
                                                          ρun λ2n κn2 w2n
                                                
                      1                       1 2
           − exp − win rpn exp − di − di                                      2
                                                                                  .         (36)
                      ρ                       2      [λn κn + ρ2 un λ2n κn2 ]

                                               32



                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
It follows from        (36) that for any di , the infimum of the investor’s utility is at
              equation                                                                    
                1                                                                1
most − exp − ρ win rPn . Since the investor can get the utility at least − exp − ρ win rPn
by employing the investment strategy di∗ = 1, there is no profitable deviation.
   In the second case, uin > 0. We first assume that any investor i has min-max utility,
and then finally show that her max-min utility is the same as her min-max utility, which
implies a strong min-max property. Then, investor i’s optimal investment strategy with
a max-min utility is the same as the optimal investment strategy with a min-max utility.
Since investor i does not know un , di and Din are not functions of un . For any given
un , we can solve di∗ and Din
                           ∗ by the first order condition of the following maximization

problem:

                                           wn              (di xn + Din )2     1
              max (di xn + Din )             2    2  2
                                                         −                             .            (37)
              di ,Din            ρ [λn κn + ρ un λn κn ]          2ρ        2 2
                                                                           ρ λn κn2 un
The second order condition of such a maximization problem holds, because the utility
function in equation (37) is strictly concave.
   Differentiating the utility function in equation (37) with respect to di , we get one of
the first-order conditions:
                                  wn                 (di xn + Din ) xn       1
                   xn                              −                                 = 0.
                        ρ [λn κn + ρ2 un λ2n κn2 ]           ρ         ρ2 λ2n κn2 un
So,
                                  ρ2 un λ2n κn2                      ρ2 un λ2n κn2
        di xn + Din = di                            w n + D in =                       wn + Din .
                              λn κn + ρ2 un λ2n κn2              λn κn + ρ2 un λ2n κn2
Then, di∗ = 1 and Di∗ = 0, because they are not functions of un . Therefore, with a min-
max utility, if an investor i is uninformed about asset n, she will hold exactly one share
of the passive fund and a zero position of asset n.
    Because investor i’s optimal investment strategy (di∗ , Din
                                                             ∗ ) = (1, 0) is constant across

all possible un , we have

        min max u((di , Din ), un ) = min u((1, 0), un ) ≤ max min u((di , Din ), un ).
           un di ,Din                        un                        di ,Din un

Generally, by the min-max utility, we have

                        min max u((di , Din ), un ) ≥ max min u((di , Din ), un ).
                         un di ,Din                       di ,Din un

Then, we have

                        min max u((di , Din ), un ) = max min u((di , Din ), un ).
                         un di ,Din                       di ,Din un


                                                     33



                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
This implies a strong min-max property, and hence, (di∗ , Din
                                                           ∗ ) = (1, 0) is also the optimal

investment strategy of investor i, when she has a max-min utility.
   In sum, given the pricing function specified in equation (19), it is optimal for any
investor i to choose the investment strategy di∗ = 1 and
                     (
                ∗      0,                 if she is uninformed about asset n;
               Din =
                       ρκn (Sin − rPn ) , if she is informed about asset n.

                                                                                          Q.E.D.


Proof of Proposition 4:

  Let’s first prove a more general version of Proposition 4, when investors hold a com-
                                         
mon prior belief about F, F ∼ N F, V . As is standard in the literature of rational
expectations equilibrium, we consider the linear pricing function

                          F = A + BP + CZ,      with C nonsingular.                         (38)

If and only if B is nonsingular, equation (38) can be rearranged to

                               P = − B−1 A + B−1 F − B−1 CZ,                                (39)

which solves for prices. Recall that Si = F + ei , so conditional on F, P and Si are inde-
pendent. Therefore, we can write down assets’ payoffs’ posterior means and posterior
variances conditional on all information that are available to investor i as follows.
   First consider investor i’s belief about F conditional on P. Conditional on P, F is
normally distributed with mean A + BP and precision [CU −1 C 0 ]−1 . On the other hand,
conditional on Si , investor i’s belief about F is also normally distributed, with mean Si
and precision Ωi . Therefore, investor i’s belief about F conditional on what the investor
observes, P and Si , is also normally distributed. The mean of the conditional distribution
of F is the weighted average of the expectation conditional on the price P, the expecta-
tion conditional on investor i’s private signal Si , and the prior mean F. Therefore, the
conditional mean of F is
        h                            i −1 h                                          i
          (CU −1 C 0 )−1 + Ωi + V −1        (CU −1 C 0 )−1 ( A + BP) + Ωi Si + V −1 F .     (40)

The precision of the conditional distribution of F is

                                  (CU −1 C 0 )−1 + Ωi + V −1 .                              (41)

                                              34



                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
  Then, from any investor i’s first order condition, investor i’s demand is
        h                           i
Di = ρ (CU −1 C 0 )−1 + Ωi + V −1
         h                            i −1 h                                   i  
               −1 0 −1              −1           −1 0 −1                    −1
            (CU C ) + Ωi + V                  (CU C ) ( A + BP) + Ωi Si + V F − rP
        nh                                         i h                         i o
   = ρ (CU −1 C 0 )−1 ( A + BP) + Ωi Si + V −1 F − (CU −1 C 0 )−1 + Ωi + V −1 rP
        n                                       o
   = ρ (CU −1 C 0 )−1 ( B − rI ) − rΩi − rV −1 P
                 +ρΩi Si + ρ[(CU −1 C 0 )−1 A + V −1 F ].                             (42)

   Integrating across all investors’ demands gives the aggregated demand as
             Z 1                                    Z 1                 
                                −1 0 −1                                 −1
                 Di di =ρ (CU C ) ( B − rI ) − r          Ωi di − rV          P
              0                                        0
                                 Z 1          
                             +ρ        Ωi Si di + ρ[(CU −1 C 0 )−1 A + V −1 F ].    (43)
                                      0
                           R1
By equation (1), we have   0    Ωi di = Σ. Also, note that
                                       Z 1
                                              Ωi Si di = ΣF.
                                          0

Therefore, from the market clearing condition, we have
                                      Z 1
                                              Di di = Z + W.                        (44)
                                          0

In an equilibrium, both equation (38) and equation (44) hold simultaneously for any
realized F and Z, therefore, by matching coefficients in these two equations, we have
                          h                           i
                         ρ (CU −1 C 0 )−1 A + V −1 F − W = −C −1 A                  (45)
                    h                                      i
                   ρ (CU −1 C 0 )−1 ( B − rI ) − rΣ − rV −1 = −C −1 B               (46)
                                                               ρΣ = C −1            (47)

   Therefore, from equation (47), we have
                                                   1 −1
                                              C=     Σ
                                                   ρ
Obviously, C is positive definite and symmetric. Then from equation (45), we have
                                                 1
                               [ρ2 (ΣUΣ) + Σ] A = W − V −1 F.
                                                 ρ

                                                  35



                Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
Because both (ΣUΣ) and Σ are both positive definite, we have
                                                          
                                         −1 1          −1
                     A = [ρ (ΣUΣ) + Σ]
                            2
                                                 W−V F .
                                               ρ

From equation (46), we have

                                 [ρ2 (ΣUΣ) + Σ]( B − rI ) = rV −1 .

Again, because [ρ2 (ΣUΣ) + Σ] is positive definite, we have

                                 B = rI + r [ρ2 (ΣUΣ) + Σ]−1 V −1 .

Obviously, B is invertible. By substituting A, B, and C into equation (39), we solve the
equilibrium pricing function.
    Now, let’s look at any investor i’s holding. Substituting the coefficients into investor
i’s holding function (42), we have
                                 −1                   i −1
                     1                       h
      Di =       I + 2 (ΣU )−1          W + ρ I + ρ2 ΣU      V −1 ( F − rP) + ρΩi (Si − rP).
                    ρ

   Finally, because the pricing function P and any investor i’s demand function Di are
continuous in V −1 , we can substitute V −1 = 0 to get Proposition 4.
                                                                                           Q.E.D.


Proof of Proposition 5:

   By equations (30), (31), and (32), we have
                                          1             −1     −1
                                         P0 X diag( P ) CU CX        X0 A
                                                                     P0 X
                                                  2
                                               1
                                              P0 X    X 0 CU −1 CX
                                        diag( P)−1 CU −1 CX 0
                                  =                        X A.
                                            X 0 CU −1 CX
This is the RHS of the Security Market Line relation. We want to show that this equals
the difference between the risky assets’ rates of return and the riskfree asset’s rate of
return, which is shown to be diag( P)−1 A from equation (29).



                                                   36



                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
   Then, we have

                  diag( P)−1 CU −1 CX 0
                        0   − 1
                                     X A = diag( P)−1 A
                      X CU CX
                ⇔ diag( P)−1 CU −1 CXX 0 A = diag( P)−1 AX 0 CU −1 CX
                ⇔ CU −1 CXX 0 A = AX 0 CU −1 CX.

The last equation holds because X = ρ(CU −1 C )−1 A and (CU −1 C )−1 is a symmetric
matrix.
                                                                                 Q.E.D.




                                           37



               Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
References
 Admati, A. (1985, May). A noisy rational expectations equilibrium for multi-asset
   securities markets. Econometrica 53(3), 629–658.
 Anantanasuwong, K., R. Kouwenberg, O. Mitchell, and K. Peijnenberg (2019, Febru-
   ary). Ambiguity attitudes about investments: Evidence from the field. NBER
   Working paper.
 Baruch, S. and X. Zhang (2018). Is Index Trading Benigh? Working paper, University
    of Utah.
 Biais, B., P. Bossaerts, and C. Spatt (2010). Equilibrium asset pricing and portfolio
    choice under asymmetric information. Review of Financial Studies 23, 1503–1543.
 Bianchi, M. and J.-M. Tallon (2018). Ambiguity preferences and portfolio choices: Ev-
    idence from the field. Management Science. forthcoming.
 Bond, P. and D. Garcı́a (2018). The Equilibrium Consequences of Indexing. Working
    paper, University of Washington, Seattle.
 Bossaerts, P., P. Ghirardato, S. Guarnaschelli, and W. R. Zame (2010, April). Ambiguity
    in asset markets: Theory and experiment. Review of Financial Studies 23(4), 1325–
    1359.
 Cao, H. H., B. Han, D. Hirshleifer, and H. H. Zhang (2011, January). Fear of the un-
   known: Familiarity and economic decisions. Review of Finance 15(1), 173–206.
 Cao, H. H., T. Wang, and H. H. Zhang (2005, Winter). Model uncertainty, limited
   market participation, and asset prices. Review of Financial Studies 18(4), 1219–1251.
 Chabakauri, G. and O. Rytchkov (2016). Asset Pricing with Index Investing. Working
   paper, London School of Economic.
 Dimmock, S. G., R. Kouwenberg, O. Michell, and K. Peijnenburg (2016). Ambiguity
   aversion and household portfolio choice puzzles: Empirical evidence. Journal of
   Financial Economics 119, 559–577.
 Dimmock, S. G., R. Kouwenberg, and P. Wakker (2016). Ambiguity attitudes in a large
   representative sample. Management Science 65, 1363–1380.
 Dow, J. and S. R. Werlang (1992, January). Uncertainty aversion, risk aversion, and
   the optimal choice of portfolio. Econometrica 60(1), 197–204.
 Easley, D. and M. O’Hara (2004, August). Information and the cost of capital. Journal
    of Finance 59(4), 1553–1583.
 Easley, D. and M. O’Hara (2009, May). Ambiguity and nonparticipation: The role of
    regulation. Review of Financial Studies 22(5), 1817–1843.
 Easley, D. and M. O’Hara (2010, October). Microstructure and ambiguity. Journal of
    Finance LXV(5), 1817–1846.
 Epstein, L. G. and M. Schneider (2010). Ambiguity and asset markets. Annual Review
    of Financial Economics 2, 315–346.

                                           38



               Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (2015, January). Money doctors. Journal of
  Finance 70(1), 91–114.
Gilboa, I. and D. Schmeidler (1989). Maxmin expected utility with nonunique prior.
   Journal of Mathematical Economics 18(2), 141–153.
Grossman, S. J. and J. E. Stiglitz (1980, June). On the impossibility of informationally
   efficient markets. American Economic Review 70(3), 393–408.
Hellwig, M. F. (1980). On the aggregation of information in competitive markets. Jour-
   nal of Economic Theory 22, 477–498.
Kacperczyk, M., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and L. Veldkamp (2016, March). A rational
   theory of mutual funds’ attention allocation. Econometrica 84(2), 571–626.
Li, Y. and C. Wang (2018). Delegation uncertainties. Working paper, Ohio State Uni-
    versity.
Lintner, J. (1965, February). The valuation of risky assets and the selection of risky
   investments in stock portfolios and capital budgets. Review of Economics and Statis-
   tics 47, 13–37.
Mele, A. and F. Sangiorgi (2015). Uncertainty, information acquisition and price
  swings in asset markets. Review of Economic Studies 82, 1533–1567.
Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under con-
   ditions of risk. Journal of Finance 19, 425–442.
Van Nieuwerburgh, S. and L. Veldkamp (2009, June). Information immobility and the
   home bias puzzle. Journal of Finance 63(4), 1187–1215.
Van Nieuwerburgh, S. and L. Veldkamp (2010, April). Information acquisition and
   under-diversification. Review of Economic Studies 77(2), 779–805.
Vives, X. (2008). Information and Learning in Markets. Princeton University Press.
Watanabe, M. (2016, November). Supply ambiguity and market fragility. Working
  paper, University of Alberta.




                                          39



              Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
B     Online Appendix (Not For Publication)
B.1     Normal Prior in Economy with VWMP
In this appendix, we consider ambiguity averse investors’ asset holdings when they
have normal priors about assets’ payoffs. Because all assets are assumed to be inde-
pendent, we focus on one risky asset here, and so we omit notations’ subscripts in this
section.
   Equation (33) in the paper implies that if an investor is ambiguous about the asset,
she wants to chooses D, her effective holding of the asset, such that

                                                         D2
                                inf DE ( f − rp| p) −       Var ( f | p)
                              u∈(0,ū)                   2ρ

is maximized. Denote by ν and f¯ the precision and the mean of the prior distribution of
the asset’s payoff, respectively. Suppose that the pricing function is f = a + bp + cz, the
investor will then choose her effective asset holding d to maximize

                                  u( a + bp) + ν f¯        D2 1
                                                       
                          inf D                     − rp −          .                            (48)
                         u∈(0,ū)       u+ν                2ρ u + ν

    Because of the max-min utility, we fix any D and solve for the u that will solve the
infimum problem. Differentiating

                               u( a + bp) + ν f¯        D2 1
                                                    
                             D                   − rp −
                                     u+ν                2ρ u + ν

with respect to u yields

                                                                 D2
                                                                   
                                 1                         ¯
                                          ν( a + bp) D − ν f D +      .
                             ( u + ν )2                          2ρ

    Hence, the sign of the derivative is either globally positive or globally negative, im-
plying that the ambiguity averse investor will evaluate her asset holding based on either
u → 0 or u → ū.
    While whether the investor will evaluate her asset holding based on either u → 0 or
u → ū is indeterminate,17 we conclude here that the ambiguity averse investor’s asset
holding surely differs from that in the economy without model uncertainty. And this
is enough for us to establish the benchmark, since with RAMP as the index, investors’
equilibrium asset holdings are exactly same as those in the economy without model
uncertainty.
  17 This depends on the realized asset price, which is endogenously determined in equilibrium. There-
fore, completely solving the model with normal prior distributions when VWMP is publicly offered is
rather intractable.


                                                 40



                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
B.2    Heterogeneous Risk Aversions
To evaluate the robustness of our conclusions, we now analyze an extension in which
investors have heterogeneous risk tolerances. This also suggests further empirical im-
plications.
    In the model described in Section 2, investors share a same risk aversion coefficient
ρ. Such an assumption leads to investors’ homogeneous holdings of the passive fund.
Indeed, in the equilibrium characterized in Proposition 3, all investors hold one share
of the passive fund. However, it is conceivably that differences in risk tolerances, and
investor unawareness of other investors’ risk tolerances, could resurrect investors’ het-
erogeneous holdings of the passive fund. We extend the model in Section 2 by assuming
that any investor i (i ∈ [0, 1]) has the risk aversion coefficient ρi . Here, ρi is a continuous
function of i. Let                Z    1                Z         1
                             ρ=            ρi di   and   Σ=           ρi Ωi di.
                                   0                          0
Here, ρ is the average risk tolerance, and Σ is the average precision of investors’ private
information that is weighted by their risk tolerances. We assume that any investor i
knows ρi , but she does not know the distribution of ρ j and thus the average risk toler-
ance ρ. The passive fund cannot evaluate each individual investor’s risk tolerance, but
it has accurate information about the distribution of investors’ risk tolerances; hence, it
knows ρ and Σ. Then, the passive fund offers the portfolio
                                      h           −1 i −1
                                 X = ρ + ΣU                W.                          (49)

to all investors. Proposition 6 shows that investors with different risk tolerances hold
different numbers of shares of the passive fund.

Proposition 6 In the model with investors’ heterogeneous risk tolerances, there exists an equi-
librium in which any investor i with the risk tolerance ρi holds ρi shares of the passive fund and
her own information-based portfolio ρi Ωi (Si − rP).


Proof of Proposition 6:

    We first analyze the model in which investors have heterogeneous risk tolerances and
all parameters are common knowledge. We again consider the linear pricing function as
in equation (38),
                         F = A + BP + CZ, with C nonsingular.
Therefore, conditional on the price, assets’ payoffs have the conditional distribution is
                                                          
                                                      −1 0
                             F | P ∼ N A + BP, CU C .

An investor i gleans such information from the price. Therefore, an investor i’s demand
is                 h                          i
           Di = ρi (CU C ) ( B − rI ) − rΩi P + ρi Ωi Si + ρi (CU −1 C 0 ) A.
                         −1 0 −1
                                                                                    (50)

                                                    41



                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
Then, by integrating all investors’ demands and equalizing the aggregate demand and
the total supply (the aggregate endowments and the supply shocks), we can derive the
pricing function
                                 P = B−1 [ F − A − CZ ] ,                       (51)
where
                                      h                  −1 i −1
                              A =         Σ + ρ ΣUΣ                 W                   (52)
                              B = rI                                                    (53)
                                          −1
                              C = Σ            .                                        (54)

Any investor i’s risky asset holding is
                             h        −1 i −1
                      Di = ρi ρ + ΣU           W + ρi Ωi (Si − rP) .                    (55)

    Because the passive fund provides the portfolio X specified in equation (49), Equa-
tion (55) can be rewritten as

                                Di = ρi X + ρi Ωi (Si − rP) .                           (56)

Then, when investors are uncertain about some parameters and thus are subject to am-
biguity aversions, they still want to hold the passive fund. In particular, investor i first
buys ρi shares of a passive fund and then use her own private information to form the
information-based portfolio ρi Ωi−1 (Si − rP). Finally, investor i invests the rest of her
endowments in the riskfree asset.
                                                                                   Q.E.D.


B.3     Less Trusting Investors
In the model described in Section 2, investors are perfectly rational except that they are
ambiguity averse. As we argue in the paper, when the passive fund offers RAMP, it
is optimal for an ambiguity averse investor to hold the RAMP fund (together with her
own information-based portfolio), if and only if she believes that all other investors are
also holding the RAMP fund and their information-based portfolios. In this appendix,
however, we show that such an equilibrium requirement can be relaxed.
    We consider a setting where there are some investor with the measure h (here, h > 0
but very small) do not trust the fund. The lack of trust may arise from the potential
agency problem or from the fact that these investors do not think the fund manager has
the information about the financial market. Therefore, even though the fund publicly
commits to an investment strategy, these “less trusting” investors still think the fund is
very risky.
    For simplicity, we assume that the less trusting investors do not have private infor-
mation and face model uncertainty about all risky assets. Therefore, even if the fund

                                                   42



                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
is still publicly available, the less trusting investors will not participate in the capital
market at all.
    By the same arguments as in the paper, if the passive fund offers an adjusted RAMP,
which is defined as                                     −1
                                             1       −1
                               Xh = hI + 2 (ΣU )             W,                         (57)
                                             ρ
we show that the following proposition hold.

Proposition 7 With the passive fund offering Xh , there is an equilibrium in which
  1. Each trusting investor i’s asset holding is di∗ = 1 and Di∗ = ρΩi (Si − rP);
  2. The pricing function is
                                      P = Bh−1 [ F − Ah − Ch Z ] ,                           (58)
     where
                                         1h 2            i −1
                                Ah =        hρ (ΣUΣ) + Σ      W                              (59)
                                         ρ
                                 Bh    = rI                                                  (60)
                                         1 −1
                                Ch     =   Σ ;                                               (61)
                                         ρ

  3. and, using Xh as the pricing portfolio, a version of CAPM security market line holds.




                                               43



                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2898992
