                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        RULES VERSUS DISCRETION:
       ASSESSING THE DEBATE OVER THE CONDUCT OF MONETARY POLICY

                                          John B. Taylor

                                       Working Paper 24149
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24149


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2017




This paper was presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s 61st Economic Conference,
“Are Rules Made to be Broken? Discretion and Monetary Policy,” on October 13, 2017. I thank
the Boston Fed for asking me to assess the current state of the rules versus discretion debate at the
conference, and I thank Matthew Canzoneri, V.V. Chari, Geovanni Olivei, David Papell, Eric
Rosengren, and especially my discussant Donald Kohn for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by John B. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Rules Versus Discretion: Assessing the Debate Over the Conduct of Monetary Policy
John B. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 24149
December 2017
JEL No. E52,E58,F33

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper reviews the state of the debate over rules versus discretion in monetary policy,
focusing on the role of economic research in this debate. It shows that proposals for policy rules
are largely based on empirical research using economic models. The models demonstrate the
advantages of a systematic approach to monetary policy, though proposed rules have changed and
generally improved over time. Rules derived from research help central bankers formulate
monetary policy as they operate in domestic financial markets and the global monetary system.
However, the line of demarcation between rules and discretion is difficult to establish in practice
which makes contrasting the two approaches difficult. History shows that research on policy
rules has had an impact on the practice of central banking. Economic research also shows that
while central bank independence is crucial for good monetary policy making, it has not been
enough to prevent swings away from rules-based policy, implying that policy-makers might
consider enhanced reporting about how rules are used in monetary policy. The paper also shows
that during the past year there has been an increased focus on policy rules in implementing
monetary policy in the United States.


John B. Taylor
Herbert Hoover Memorial Building
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
John.Taylor@stanford.edu
TABLE OF CONTENTS

   Introduction
   1. How have the various rules suggested for monetary policy changed over time?
   2. Have the reasons given for why we might want to tie a central banker's hands evolved?
   3. How should we think about discretion, and what is the line demarcating a rules-based
       policy and a discretionary policy when the latter already features a large systematic
       component?
   4. How is the practice of central banking being influenced by the current debate on the
       optimal conduct of monetary policy?
   5. How does the recently proposed Congressional legislation on conducting monetary policy
       fit into this debate?

   Conclusion

References




                                             3
Introduction

         The purpose of this paper is to assess the state of the debate about rules versus discretion

in monetary policy, an issue I have been researching for a long time and which now seems more

crucial than ever as monetary policy normalizes in the United States and other countries. I

organize the assessment along the helpful line of questions by which the staff of the Federal

Reserve Bank of Boston Fed defined the scope of the debate. 1 These delve into (1) changes in

suggested policy rules over time, (2) the idea of tying the hands of central bankers, (3) the

difficulty of demarcating discretion, (4) the influence of policy rule research on the practice of

central banking and (5) the purpose of recently proposed legislation on monetary strategies.



      1. How have the various rules suggested for monetary policy changed over time?

         In addressing this question, it is important to note first that economists have been

suggesting monetary policy rules since the beginnings of economics. Adam Smith (1776) argued

in the Wealth of Nations that “a well-regulated paper-money” could improve economic growth

and stability in comparison with a pure commodity standard, as discussed by Asso and Leeson

(2012). Henry Thornton (1802) wrote in the early 1800s that a central bank should have the

responsibility for price level stability and should make the mechanism explicit and “not be a

matter of ongoing discretion,” as Robert Hetzel (1987) put it. David Ricardo (1824, pp.10-11)

wrote in his Plan for the Establishment of a National Bank that government ministers “could not

be safely entrusted with the power of issuing paper money” and advanced the idea of a rule-

guided central bank. Knut Wicksell (1907) and Irving Fisher (1920) in the early 1900s proposed

policy rules for the interest rate or the money supply to avoid the kinds of monetary induced


1
    Conference Agenda, Session Details, https://www.bostonfed.org/discretionmonpol2017/agenda/

                                                   4
disturbances that led to hyperinflation or depression. Henry Simons (1936) and Milton Friedman

(1948, 1960) continued in that tradition recognizing monetary policy rules—such as a constant

growth rate rule for the money supply—would avoid such mistakes in contrast with discretion.

       The goal of these reformers was a monetary system that prevented monetary shocks and

cushioned the economy from other shocks, and thereby reduced the chances of inflation,

financial crises, and recession. Their idea was that a simple monetary rule with little discretion

could avoid monetary excesses whether due to government deficits, commodity discoveries, or

mistakes by government. The choice was often broader than the modern distinction in “rules

versus discretion” as explained in Taylor and Williams (2011); it was “rules versus chaotic

monetary policy” whether the chaos was caused by policy makers’ discretion or simply

exogenous shocks like gold discoveries or shortages.

       Over time economic research on monetary policy rules has expanded greatly and the

design of rules has improved. To understand and appreciate how the suggestions for policy rules

have changed it is necessary to examine the changes in econometric models used to design rules.

Moreover, a brief historical review of how policy evaluation methodology and research have

developed offers important insights.

       Recall that the first macroeconomic model, built about 8 decades ago by Jan Tinbergen

(1936), was designed to answer a monetary policy question: Whether the devaluation of a

currency of a small open economy would stimulate the economy. The currency was the guilder,

the country was the Netherlands, and the model was of the Dutch economy. The model had 32

stochastic equations and was based on the ideas of John Maynard Keynes. To answer the

question, Tinbergen simulated the model and examined how a change in the policy instrument—

the exchange rate—affected the target variables—employment and output. Soon after the paper



                                                 5
was circulated, the guilder was devalued by about 20% (in September 1936) suggesting that the

econometric model influenced the decision.

        Tinbergen’s model-based simulations of instruments and targets put economists and

statisticians on to a new line of research: building, estimating, and simulating policy models. The

common framework involved calculating the impact of alternative paths for policy instruments

on target variables, which stimulated research on structural models in the 1940s and 1950s at the

Cowles Commission and Foundation. Lawrence Klein took the research further by building more

complex models in the 1950s.

        Research departments at central banks began to adopt these models and this approach to

policy evaluation. In the 1960s the MPS (MIT-PENN-SSRC) model with 75 stochastic equations

was adopted for use by the Federal Reserve. Papers by de Leeuw and Gramlich (1968) and by

Ando and Rasche (1971) tell the story, and it was the same story at many other central banks.

        After a few years—about half way through this eight-decade history—there was a major

paradigm shift. Views changed about how models should be used for monetary policy

evaluation. It was a shift from policy evaluation in “path-space” to policy evaluation in “rule-

space.” In “path-space” one estimates the impact of a one-time change in the path of the policy

instrument on the target variables using an econometric model. In “rule-space” one estimates the

impact of a policy rule for the instruments on the dynamic stochastic properties of the target

variables. 2

        The shift had many antecedents. One was the realization that Milton Friedman’s

arguments regarding predictability and accountability applied to steady feedback rules as well as




2
 I reviewed the shifts and used this terminology in talks at the Dutch National Bank (September
29, 2016), the Bank of Canada (November 17, 2016), and the Bank of Korea (May 10, 2017).
                                                 6
to the constant money growth rate rules. Moreover, it was discovered that a natural way to

evaluate policy in the new dynamic or stochastic models of the economy was by simulating

policy rules. This is how engineers had been designing servo-mechanisms to stabilize dynamic

stochastic systems. The early work by A.W. Phillips (1954) on proportional, derivative and

integral control is an example. Another factor leading to analysis with rules is that they

simplified difficult problems such as joint estimation and control as shown by Anderson and

Taylor (1976). In addition, newer rational expectations models led to a serious critique by Lucas

(1976) and Kydland and Prescott (1977) of conventional “path-space” approaches. Moreover, the

incorporation of sticky wage and price dynamics into these forward-looking models meant that

many of the problems confronting monetary policy makers could be approached by monetary

policy rules—rather than by one-time changes in the policy instrument.

       Difficult computational tasks with the larger rational expectations models needed by

central banks created a significant barrier, but algorithms and computers soon improved, and

change eventually happened. The Brookings Model Comparison program in the late 1980s and

early 1990s helped. In the book by Bryant, Hooper and Mann (1993), I noted the change saying

that “Whereas previous model-comparison exercises conducted by the Brookings Institution

have looked at the effects on the economy of one-time changes in the instruments of monetary

and fiscal policy—that is policy multipliers—this exercise has emphasized comparisons of the

response of the economy to monetary policy regimes that are simplified policy rules.” So, in the

early 1990s, the MPS model at the Federal Reserve was replaced by the FRB/US model. As

stated by Brayton and Tinsley (1996), in the FRB/US “expectations of private sectors are

explicit, and these expectations, especially market perceptions of policy, constitute a major




                                                 7
transmission channel of monetary policy.” Brayton, Levin, Tryon, and Williams (1997) provide a

good history.

       Volker Wieland’s macro model data base (MMB) provides a broader perspective on this

change in monetary policy research by including models at other central banks and by tracing

developments over time. Wieland, Afanasyeva, Kuete, and Yoo (2016) classified models into

first, second, and third generation new Keynesian models. While these models were different in

structure there was a surprising amount of consensus in what the models implied about the

impact of monetary policy rules on the economy, as was shown by Taylor and Wieland (2012)

       As with earlier research the main policy objective was to find monetary policy rules

which cushioned the economy from shocks and did not cause their own shocks. But the models

were getting complex, and thus the policy rules were getting complex, and this raised serious

doubts about the practical applicability of the whole “rule-space” framework. The question then

became whether simple practical rules consistent with the economic models could be found. The

answer turned out to be “yes,” and this led to a huge change in the type of policy rules suggested

for monetary policy.

       It turned out that rules in which the policy interest rate reacts to real GDP and inflation

worked well in these models. Research showed that the interest rate reaction to inflation should

be greater than 1, the interest rate reaction to the GDP gap should be greater than 0, and the

interest rate reaction to other variables should be small. For the Taylor (1993a) rule the inflation

target was 2% (taking in to account inflation measurement bias and the zero lower bound on the

interest rate), and the equilibrium interest rate was 2% in real terms and 4% in nominal terms.

The rule was not the result of a curve fitting exercise in which various instruments of policy were




                                                  8
regressed on other variables. This simple rule was derived from first generation policy models

operating in “rule-space.”

       To this day people say that such rules are too simple because they omit certain variables.

Well, they were simple, because they were made to be simple. At the time people were coming

up with all sorts of complex rules that included many types of variables, including asset prices.

These rules were too complex to be workable in practice. It was amazing that they could be

simplified. Rules from which certain variables were removed gave just as good a performance in

many models as more complex rules. Simple rules were more robust than optimal rules over a

wide range of models, and they were certainly something more practical for policy makers to

work with.

       Levin and Williams (2003) and Orphanides and Williams (2008) found that more

complex fully optimal policies performed poorly in some models, while simple rules performed

well in a wide variety of models. Optimal policies can be overly fine-tuned to a specific model.

That is fine if that model is correct, but not if it is incorrect. Simple monetary policy rules

incorporated basic principles such as leaning against the wind of inflation and output. Because

they were not fine-tuned to specific assumptions, they were more robust.

       The new rules that were suggested led in other directions which helped to reinforce their

use. Economists learned that policy rules helped them explain unusual phenomena, such as the

positive correlation between inflation surprises and exchange rate movements (see Engel and

West (2006)). Interest in policy rules also grew beyond academia and central banks: Wall Street

economists found them to be useful rules of thumb for predicting central bank actions as

explained by Lipsky (2012). Also, policy rules affected other equations in models because with

them it became more reasonable to assume that “economic agents” develop their own rules of



                                                  9
thumb when monetary policy becomes more predictable. And it enabled economists to consider

policy robustness in a rigorous way, as emphasized by McCallum (1999) and continued today as

reviewed by Wieland, Afanasyeva, Kuete, and Yoo (2016).

         The “rule-space” approach was also applied internationally. See Taylor (1993b).

Research with the models demonstrated the near global optimality in rule-space of a Nash

equilibrium in which each central bank followed an optimal policy for its country assuming other

central banks would do the same. Thus, the research showed that rule-based monetary policy

would lead to good macroeconomic performance in the national economy and in the global

economy. This has in turn led to suggestions for designing a rules-based international monetary

system based on policy rules in each country. (See Taylor (2016)).

        That the simple rules appeared to work well in practice also helped to reinforce

confidence in the rules that were being suggested. Central banks appeared to be moving toward

more transparent rules-based policies in 1980s and 1990s, including through a focus on price

stability, and economic performance improved. This connection between the rules-based policy

and performance was detected by Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000). There was an especially

dramatic improvement compared with the 1970s when policy was highly discretionary, and the

models were used in a “path-space” mode. Mervyn King (2003) called it the NICE period for

non-inflationary consistently expansionary, and there was also a near internationally cooperative

equilibrium (another NICE) among most developed countries as there were few complaints about

spillovers. By the year 2000 many emerging market countries joined the rules-based policy

approach, usually through inflation targeting. Their improved performance contributed to global

stability.




                                                10
          Unfortunately, it did not last. The Great Moderation ended, and the Global Financial

Crisis came. There has been debate about why the better performance ended, and this has led to

further debate and suggested additional changes in policy rules. I have argued that the Fed

turned away from the policy rule that had been working well. The departure began before the

crisis when interest rates were set too low for too long. Kahn (2010) and Ahrend (2010) have

provided evidence of monetary policy swinging away from rule-like policies. Kohn (2012)

questioned using simple policy rules to make that judgement. More recently Lane (2016) cites

evidence in an IMF Report (2015) that both “macroeconomic gaps” and “financial gaps” were

large in several countries suggesting that interest rates should not have been so low.

          Hofmann and Bogdanova (2012) show that there has been a “Global Great Deviation”

from policy rules. One reason that the deviation has become global is that central banks followed

each other. For example, in many countries, estimated central bank reaction functions have a

significant coefficient on foreign policy rates or on deviations from rules-based policy in other

countries; see Gray (2013), Carstens (2015), Edwards (2017).

          While there is an issue of causality versus correlation, econometric and historical

evidence points to a close temporal connection between this deviation in policy and deteriorating

performance. Following the Great Global Deviation, NICE ended in both senses of the word.

Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy, Papell, Prodan (2014) provide econometric evidence for the United States

and Teryoshin (2017) for nine countries including the United States. 3 Allan Meltzer (2012)

provides historical evidence. There are also concerns about international spillover effects, and

emerging market countries have been impacted with increased exchange rate and capital flow

volatility.



3
    I will return to these studies later in the presentation.
                                                     11
          The other view is that the onset of poor economic performance was not due to a deviation

from policy rules that were working, but rather to other factors. For example, Carney (2013)

argues that the deterioration of performance in recent years occurred because “… the disruptive

potential of financial instability—absent effective macroprudential policies—leads to a less

favourable Taylor frontier.” Carney (2013) illustrated his argument with a shift in the tradeoff

frontier as did King (2012). The view I offer here is that the deterioration was due more to a

move off the efficient policy frontier due to a change in policy. That would suggest moving back

toward the type of policy rule that described policy decisions during the Great Moderation

period.

          In any case this experience has led to more suggestions for changes in policy rules. There

has been a great deal of renewed interest in nominal GDP targeting as suggested by Sumner

(2014). Beckworth and Hendrickson (2015), for example, have examined interest rate rules

where the central bank reacts to nominal GDP rather than to the inflation rate and GDP

separately. They stress that such a rule has the advantage that the central bank does not have to

estimate potential GDP, reflecting concerns raised by Orphanides (2003).

          Another way in which suggested rules are changing over time is the reconsideration of

money growth rules. Belongia and Ireland (2014) show that the Divisia index of the money

supply has effects on the economy over and above the effects of the short-term interest rate.

Their research suggests that central bankers should consider money growth rate rules. Another

example is due to Fagan, Lothian, and McNelis (2013) who examine monetary rules for the

monetary base. In my early work on policy rules in the 1970s, I began by suggesting money

growth rules, but the models showed that interest rates rules would work better, at least with the

range of shocks observed in the United States. Nevertheless, I argued that interest rate rules need



                                                  12
to be placed within a band: Outside that band the central bank should rely on money growth

rules. In situations where the interest rate hits the lower bound, I have argued that central banks

need to focus on a policy rule which keeps the growth rate of the money supply steady. In Taylor

(1996), for example, I recommended that “Interest rate rules need to be supplemented by money

supply rules in cases of either extended deflation or hyperinflation.”

        Another suggestion is to use forecasts of variables in the policy rule rather than actual

values. If that is not done, then people say that a rule is not forward-looking because it includes

current variables rather than forecasts of those variables. But the Taylor (1993a) rule, for

example, was designed to deal explicitly with forward looking agents, and it is therefore

forward-looking. Note that when a central bank indicates that it will predictably follow a strategy

in which the interest rate reacts to the current inflation rate, it automatically says that next

period’s interest rate will react to next period’s inflation rate. That’s forward-looking. Moreover,

the current level of inflation and output are key factors in any forecast of inflation, and the

coefficients of existing policy rules take that into account. If one replaced current inflation with a

forecast of inflation, the coefficients would most likely have to be different. And the approach

raises the question of whose forecast to use and how to evaluate the rule. Forecasts—including

central bank forecasts—are not always that good. Also rules with forecasts of inflation and

output on the right-hand side tend to be less robust.

        Other suggested changes in policy rules in recent years are due to the effective lower

bound (ELB) on the interest rate, which was reached during and for a while after the crisis. At

the least, the standard monetary policy rule should be truncated to account for the ELB. But the

ELB also has other implications for the design of the monetary policy rule. Reifschneider and

Williams (2000) find that increasing the response to the output gap helps reduce the effects of the



                                                  13
ELB. However, this could increase the variability of inflation and interest rates. Reifschneider

and Williams (2000) also suggested other changes. In one suggestion, the policy rule is modified

to lower the interest rate more aggressively than otherwise when close to the ELB—for example

by cutting the interest rate to zero if the unconstrained interest rate falls below 1 percent. This

adds monetary stimulus near the ELB which can offset the constraining effects when the ELB

hits. In a second suggestion, the interest rate is kept extra low following an ELB incident; for

example, the interest rate is kept at zero until the absolute value of the cumulative sum of

negative deviations of the actual interest rate from the ELB equals what occurred during the

period of that ELB. These approaches mitigate the effects of the ELB according to model

simulations.

        This second suggestion is a form of forward guidance, and more generally such

communication about future interest rate changes is a frequently suggested change in monetary

policy rules in recent years. However, forward guidance should be consistent with the policy rule

or strategy of the central bank. If it is purposely meant to promise interest rates in the future that

are inconsistent with the strategy, then it is time-inconsistent which leads to uncertainty and

confusion. If forward guidance is consistent with the policy strategy, then it is simply a matter of

being transparent about the strategy. Frequent changes in forward guidance cause problems for

monetary policy.

       Another recent suggested change in policy rules is to adopt a price-level target, rather

than an inflation target. Reifschneider and Williams (2000) find that such price-level targeting

rules reduce the costs of the ELB. As with their second suggested policy rule, it promises more

monetary stimulus than a standard inflation-targeting policy rule. This anticipation of lower

rates in the future boosts the economy even when the economy is at the ELB.



                                                  14
          It is worth noting that the ELB was not a reason to have deviated from rules-based

policy in 2003-2005 because even the zero lower bound was not binding. The zero-bound

appears to have been binding in 2009, but by then suggestions based on the research of

Reifshneider and Williams (2000) were available and widely discussed.

        Another suggested change in policy rules, motivated in part by the ELB, is a higher target

inflation rate. If the target inflation rate is sufficiently high, the ELB will rarely constrain

monetary policy and the macroeconomy. In the past, a 2 percent inflation target was viewed as

sufficient to avoid these constraints; that is why 2 percent is close to the inflation target of many

central banks today, but that view has been questioned recently.

        Looking toward the future, changes in technology are likely to affect suggestions for

policy rules. The advent of sophisticated now-casting has mitigated the limitation that central

bankers do not know much about the current quarter. And the development of digital currency

may enable central banks to have a wider range of flexibility in setting the policy instruments as

discussed by Bordo and Levin (2017).

        Perhaps the most important suggested change in policy rules in recent years is to adjust

the intercept to accommodate the lower estimate of the equilibrium real interest rate (r*). For

example, in the Taylor rule the equilibrium real interest rate was set to equal 2 percent, meaning

that with the 2 percent target inflation rate in the rule, the equilibrium nominal rate would be 4

percent. But according to members of the FOMC the average estimate is at least one percentage

point lower now. Laubach and Williams (2003, 2016) and Holston, Laubach and Williams

(2016) have provided evidence for this, though Taylor and Weiland (2016) have shown there is a

great deal of uncertainty, and that the low interest rates set by central banks make it difficult to

estimate the equilibrium real rate. In any case, there is no reason why a moving equilibrium rate



                                                  15
could not be incorporated into a policy rule. Debates about the implications of changes in the

equilibrium interest rate are more productive if they are conducted within the framework of a

policy rule rather than in the abstract.



    2. Have the reasons given for why we might want to tie a central banker's hands
       evolved?


        Several years ago, I was asked to list the reasons for a rules-based approach rather than a

discretionary approach to monetary policy. Though I would not characterize the list as reasons

why we might want to tie central banker’s hands, they are nonetheless reasons why central banks

would want to choose to run monetary policy in a rule-like fashion. Here are the reasons. 4

        (1) Time inconsistency. The time inconsistency problem calls for the use of a policy rule

in order to reduce the chance that the monetary policy­makers will change their policy after

people in the private sector have taken their actions.

        (2) Clearer explanations. If a policy rule is simple, it can make explaining monetary

policy decisions to the public or to students of public policy much easier. It is difficult to explain

why a specific interest rate is being chosen at a specific date without reference to a method or

procedure such as would be described by a policy rule. The use of a policy rule can mean a better

educated public and a more effective democracy. It can help to take some of the mystique out of

monetary policy.




4
  See Taylor (1998). Similar views can be found in McCallum (1999) in the Handbook of
Macroeconomics and by Taylor and Williams (2011) in the Handbook of Monetary Economics.
There are also technical reasons for rules, such as the fact that the economy is a dynamic
stochastic evolving entity and requires analysis in rule-space as discussed in the previous section.
And there are also political reasons: Like the rule of law, a predictable policy that applies
without exception preserves individual freedom.
                                                  16
       (3) Less short-run political pressure. A policy rule is less subject to political pressure than

discretionary policy. If monetary policy appears to be run in an ad hoc rather than a systematic

way, then politicians may argue that they can be just as ad hoc and interfere with monetary

policy decisions. A monetary policy rule which shows how the instruments of policy must be set

in a large number of circumstances is less subject to political pressure every time conditions

change.

       (4) Reduction in uncertainty. Policy rules reduce uncertainty by describing future policy

actions more clearly. The use of monetary policy rules by financial analysts as an aid in

forecasting actual changes in the instruments would reduce uncertainty in the financial markets.

       (5) Teaching the art and science of central banking. Monetary policy rules are a good

way to instruct new central bankers in the art and science of monetary policy. In fact, it is for

exactly this reason that new central bankers frequently find such policy rules useful for assessing

their decisions.

       (6) Greater accountability. Policy rules for the instrument settings allow for more

accountability by policy-makers. Because monetary policy works with a long and variable lag, it

is difficult simply to look at inflation and determine if policy-makers are doing a good job.

Today’s inflation rate depends on past decisions, but today’s settings for the instruments of

policy—the monetary base or the short-term nominal interest rate—depend on today’s decisions.

       (7) A useful historical benchmark. Policy rules provide a useful baseline for historical

comparisons. For example, if the interest rate was at a certain level at a time in the past with

similar macroeconomic conditions to those of today, then that same level would be a good

baseline from which to consider today’s policy actions.




                                                 17
         Many of these reasons would be the same if the word strategy was used rather than policy

rule, and if we were referring to any other policy rather than monetary policy. It is not that we

want to tie central banker’s hands as much as we want a policy that works well, and that is the

case when a clear strategy is in place. George Shultz (2014) explained the importance of having

a strategy. He wrote that “…it is important, based on my own experience, to have a rules-based

monetary policy…. At least as I have observed from policy decisions over the years in various

fields, if you have a strategy, you get somewhere. If you don’t have a strategy, you are just a

tactician at large and it doesn’t add up.”

         A related point is that a policy rule or strategy does not mean that that policy maker can’t

do things that need to be done. Any reasonable law enforcement strategy will require actions by

law enforcement officials. And sometimes not acting is violating a strategy: A decision by

government financial regulators, for example, not to act when an institution takes on risk beyond

the limits of the regulations is inaction and clearly poor policy. Policymakers need to explain that

a policy strategy involves a series of actions.

         In my view, the reasons stated here for monetary policy rules have not evolved much

over the years. However, reasons against policy rules have evolved, and deserve some discussion

in this assessment. They are sometimes characterized as why we should not tie central banker’s

hands.

         At the 2013 American Economic Association meetings, Larry Summers and I had a

debate about rules versus discretion. Summers started off by saying: 5 “John Taylor and I have, it

will not surprise you…a fundamental philosophical difference, and I would put it in this way. I

think about my doctor. Which would I prefer: for my doctor’s advice, to be consistently



5
    Transcript published in the Journal of Policy Modeling, Issue 4, Volume 36, 2013
                                                  18
predictable, or for my doctor’s advice to be responsive to the medical condition with which I

present? Me, I’d rather have a doctor who most of the time didn’t tell me to take some stuff, and

every once in a while said I needed to ingest some stuff into my body in response to the

particular problem that I had. That would be a doctor who’s [advice], believe me, would be less

predictable.”

       Thus, Summers argues in favor of relying on an all-knowing expert, a doctor who does

not perceive the need for, and does not use, a set of guidelines, but who once in a while in an

unpredictable way says to ingest some stuff.

       But as in economics, there has been progress in medicine over the years. And much

progress has been due to doctors using checklists, as described by Atul Gawande. 6 Of course,

doctors need to exercise judgement in implementing checklists, but if they start winging it or

skipping steps the patients usually suffer. Experience and empirical studies show that checklist-

free medicine is wrought with dangers just as rules-free, strategy-free monetary policy is.

       Another recent development also appears as an argument for not wanting to tie hands. At

a recent Brookings conference, 7 Ben Bernanke argued that the Fed had been following a policy

rule—including in the “too low for too long” period. But the rule that Bernanke had in mind is

not a rule in the sense that I have used it in this discussion, or that many others have used it.

       Rather it is a concept that all you really need for effective policy making is a goal, such

as an inflation target and an employment target. In medicine, it would be the goal of a healthy




6
  “The Checklist: If Something So Simple Can Transform Intensive Care, What Else Can It Do?”
The New Yorker, Dec 19, 2007, http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2007/12/10/the-checklist
7
   “Objections to Federal Reserve accountability bill” video
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KJmA5JDNpKg&t=37 of remarks at the Conference on The
Fed in the 21st century: Independence, governance, and accountability, Brookings Institution,
March 2, 2015
                                                  19
patient. The rest of policymaking is doing whatever you as an expert, or you as an expert with

models, thinks needs to be done with the instruments. You do not need to articulate or describe a

strategy, a decision rule, or a contingency plan for the instruments. If you want to hold the

interest rate well below the rule-based strategy that worked well during the Great Moderation, as

the Fed did in 2003-2005, then it’s ok, if you can justify it in terms of the goal.

       Bernanke and others have argued that this approach is a form of “constrained discretion.”

It is an appealing term, and it may be constraining discretion in some sense, but it is not inducing

or encouraging a rule as the language would have you believe. Simply having a specific

numerical goal or objective function is not a rule for the instruments of policy; it is not a

strategy; in my view, it ends up being all tactics. I think there is evidence that relying solely on

constrained discretion has not worked for monetary policy.

       Another evolution of the policy rule concept is also related to concerns about tying

central bankers’ hands. This is the idea of “inflation forecast targeting” or simply “forecast

targeting” as developed by Svensson (1998) and Woodford (2012). Woodford entitled his 2012

paper “Forecast Targeting as a Monetary Policy Strategy,” emphasizing that this alternative

approach is a strategy. There is a close connection between “inflation forecast targeting” and

policy rules for the instruments. In Taylor (2012b) I argued that they were the dual solution to

the same problem, much like first-order conditions and decision rules provide dual and

complementary answers to the same optimization problem. One can learn from both approaches.

       According to this approach the central bank would choose its policy interest rate so that a

linear combination of its forecast of different variables would fall along a given path. Woodford

(2012) suggested a linear combination of the h-period ahead forecast of the inflation rate πt+h,t

relative to the target inflation rate π* and the h-period ahead forecast of the output gap xt+h,t



                                                  20
follow the following path (πt+h,t – π*) + ϕxt+h,t = 0 over a range of h where interest rate policy can

affect these variables.

       While an interest rate path can be calculated using this approach it need not yield a

simple policy rule for the instruments. The central bank would have the job of deciding on the

instrument setting, and this might cause tension with some of the reasons for policy rules given

above. Qvigstad (2005) showed how charts and other diagnostic tests could be used to describe

the intended path for the interest rate. In addition, with examples from the Norges Bank policy

decisions, he showed how policy rules could be used as a cross-check, emphasizing the

connection between proposals for policy rules for the instruments and forecast targeting.

       Although this paper is focused on monetary policy and not on other activities of central

banks, such as lender of last resort and financial supervision and regulation, it is appropriate to

also mention that economic research implies that there are reasons to limit the scope of a central

bank. In granting independence to a government agency in a democracy, one needs to make sure

that the agency has a well-defined limited purpose with strong accountability.

       When central banks drift too far from being limited-purpose institutions and become

independent multi-purpose institutions, they escape the checks and balances needed in a

democratic system. This can lead to inappropriate interventions which may not have been

approved by a legislative process or a vote of the people. It can also lead to poor economic

performance. Research shows that central bank independence is necessary for good monetary

policy and thus good macroeconomic performance, but it is not sufficient.



   3. How should we think about discretion, and what is the line demarcating a rules-
      based policy and a discretionary policy when the latter already features a large
      systematic component?



                                                  21
       This is a fundamental and highly practical question. McCallum (1999) devoted the first

section of his comprehensive Handbook of Macroeconomics review of monetary rules to the

distinction between rules and discretion admitting that “When it comes to practical application to

the behavior of actual central banks, however, the distinction cannot be easily drawn.” He

argued that in my paper “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” (Taylor (1993a)), I

“explicitly addressed the problem” by saying that rule-like behavior is systematic in the sense of

“methodical, according to plan, and not casual or at random.” Indeed, the stated purpose of that

paper was “to study the role of policy rules in a world where simple, algebraic formulations of

such rules cannot and should not be mechanically followed by policymakers.”

       I elaborated on the demarcation later, saying in Taylor (2012a) that: “When assessing in

practice whether monetary policy is rules-based, it is not necessary to focus on purely theoretical

definitions of rules versus discretion—such as might come out of game theory or the time-

inconsistency literature, where policy is at one extreme or the other. Nor is it necessary to limit

the definition of rules-based policy to situations where the policy instruments are set perfectly in

line with an algebraic formula. Rather, the distinction between rules and discretion is more a

matter of degree. There are several ways to assess and measure whether monetary policy is more

rules-based or less rules-based.

       “When monetary policy is rules-based, decisions about the policy instruments are more

predictable and more systematic. Policymakers can and do discuss their strategy in dynamic

terms, including the implications of a decision today for decisions in the future. They tend to use

formulas or equations for the policy instruments, at least as a guide when making decisions. And

their decisions about the policy instruments can be described reasonably well by a stable




                                                 22
relationship, which shows a consistent reaction of the policy instruments to observable events

such as changes in inflation and real economic growth.

       “In contrast, in the case of more discretionary policy making, decisions are less

predictable and more ad hoc, and they tend to focus on short-term fine-tuning. Policymakers

show little interest in coming to agreement about an overall contingency strategy for setting the

instruments of policy, and the historical paths for the instruments are not well described by stable

algebraic relationships.”

       It was by using this definition, that I found that the period from 1985 to 2003 was rule-

like while the years before and after that interval were discretionary. As already noted, economic

performance was far better in the 1985-2003 period. Using an historical approach, Meltzer

(2012) also identified the years from 1985 through 2003 as rules-based rather than a

discretionary, and he noted that this was also a period of relatively good economic performance.

       To apply more rigorous statistical tests to the rules versus discretion issue, Nikolsko-

Rzhevskyy, Papell, and Prodan (2014) and Teryoshin (2017) have had to be more specific and

directly face the questions addressed here. In evaluating rules versus discretion, Nikolsko-

Rzhevskyy, Papell, and Prodan (2014) decided to consider well- known policy rules—similar to

the Taylor rule—as the definition of rule-based policy, and deviations from that as the

demarcation of discretion. As Teryoshin (2017), who followed a similar approach in the United

States and other countries, puts it, he calculated “the absolute deviation between the policy-rule

recommendation using real-time data and the actual central bank rate. Higher values are times of

greater discretion relative to the rule, while smaller values suggest a more rule-like monetary

policy.”




                                                23
       In this way, they provided a more formal statistical foundation for the results of Meltzer

(2012) and Taylor (2012a). The papers used various statistical techniques to determine when in

history monetary policy was rule-like, and they showed that the rule-like periods coincide

remarkably well with periods of good economic performance. By taking a stand and measuring

deviations from policy-rules, Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy, Papell, and Prodan (2014) made an important

contribution to the large empirical literature on policy rules. Teryoshin (2017) established the

robustness of their results and usefully extended the analysis to other countries using data

available to policymakers at the time. A difficulty with this approach, of course, is that the

definition of discretion depends on the policy rule.

       It would be possible to envisage, as an alternative, a complicated rule that fits the data

very well, where discretion would therefore be very small, and where the periods of rule-like

performance are quite different. For example, if you put in a lagged dependent variable (interest

rate) into the policy rule—as with an inertial rule—you would have smaller deviations. In reality,

one cannot usually distinguish between lagged dependent variables and serially correlated errors,

so the lags will be there. By putting a lagged dependent variable in, the econometrician is

effectively saying “policy is good now, and if it moves just a little bit, it’s still pretty good” even

though it may be bad, based on the rule without inertia.

       Dotsey (2016) argues that the “optimal” policy rule would also have inertia terms, as in

Giannoni and Woodford (2005), so it is not just an arbitrary lagged dependent variable. The

optimal policy approach uses an intertemporal optimization problem. In Giannoni and

Woodford (2005), the optimal policy can be written as a single equation in terms of leads and

lags of the objective variables, such as inflation and output. An advantage of the optimal policy

approach is that it incorporates all relevant information unlike simple monetary policy rules.



                                                  24
However, this informational advantage has been found to be surprisingly small in model

simulations, even when the central bank is assumed to have perfect knowledge of the model.

Williams (2003) used the FRB/US model, and he found that a simple policy rule gives outcomes

close to those with the optimal policy.

         A related complication is that monetary policy may not follow a rule, but may seem to

have a systematic component in the sense that there are small deviations from that component

with small effect, as Ramey (2016) shows. 8 In some cases, these are deviations from vector auto-

regressions which may be combining rule-like and discretionary regimes. In other cases, the

systematic part may be based on a narrative which does not consider regime changes as defined

here. In either case, the results indicate the importance of extending existing results to a wider

array of policy rules.

          Another issue is that deviations from policy rules can be designed to be rule-like in ways

that the econometrician does not know. The adjustment to the interest rate that I suggested in

Taylor (2008) is an example of how a seemingly discretionary development can be incorporated

into a policy rule in a systematic way. At that time, my research suggested that there was

increased counterparty risk between banks, related to concerns about securities derived from sub-

prime mortgages. Based on this research, I testified in Congress that, as a first line of defense,

central banks should reduce their policy interest rate by the increased spread between Libor and

the overnight index swap (OIS), which was about 50 basis points at the time, and then do more

research to find out the reasons for the higher credit risk. This adjustment is an example of why

the Taylor rule should not be used mechanically as I emphasized that in the original Taylor rule

paper (1993a), but the adjustment was meant to deal in a systematic way with a problem in the



8
    See Table 1, p. 99 of Ramey (2016).
                                                 25
money market when the spread between Libor and OIS widened significantly. I argued that the

models that were used to find the Taylor rule in the first place implied such an adjustment.



    4. How is the practice of central banking being influenced by the current debate on the
       optimal conduct of monetary policy?


       In the first section of this paper, I showed how suggestions for policy rules have changed

over time and that swings toward and away from rules-based policy are associated with swings

in economic performance. The question I address in this section is how the research on optimal

monetary policy rules and the resulting suggestions directly affect the analysis and decisions of

monetary policy makers and their committees. The question is difficult to answer, though

increased central bank transparency will aid future investigations.

       Kahn (2012) provides much useful detail about how policy rules have been the subject of

discussion at the Federal Reserve, using transcripts and records of the Federal Open Market

Committee (FOMC) meetings starting in the 1990s. He also considers the proceedings at other

central banks, including the European Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of Japan and the Bank of

England. When I first read his paper, I was surprised to see a great deal of discussion related to

policy rules through the 1990s. 9 This corresponds to the time-period when actual policy

decisions were rule-like. 10 There was also much mention of policy rules in the deliberations at

other central banks during the Great Moderation period. I have used records of deliberations at

the Norges Bank to assess the contagion of deviations from policy rules (the degree to which



9
  The first reference to the Taylor rule in the FOMC transcripts is in 1995 in a statement made by
Janet Yellen.
10
   Alan Greenspan gave a talk at Stanford in 1997. His title was “Rules vs. Discretionary
Monetary Policy.” He discussed the Taylor rule and commented positively on the usefulness of
monetary policy rules in general.
                                                 26
central banks follow each other) in recent years. I have also benefited from informal discussion

with many central bankers in other countries over the years, and found that they are all familiar

with policy rules and understand their value. I see no indication in these discussions that

committee decision making is incapable of handling discussions of a monetary policy strategy or

that such an approach eliminates the need for a strategy. 11

       An important research question is how discussions of policy rules evolved in more recent

years at the FOMC, especially during the period in 2003-2005 when we saw more of a deviation

from policy rules. To be sure, the records of the meetings and discussions may miss informal

conversations and other key elements of any decision process at central banks, so some

“investigative reporting” may be needed. Mallaby (2016) writes about the FOMC decision to

keep interest rates low and to say that they would be low “for a considerable period,” and does

not indicate one way or the other whether there was discussion that the rate was too low based on

policy rules. Later, Bernanke (2010) argued that they were not too low based on policy rules if

one used forecasts of inflation rather than actual inflation. As I pointed out in Taylor (2010),

however, the Fed’s forecasts were lower than actual inflation at the time, and the forecast turned

out to undershoot inflation over the forecast horizon.

        Much of the policy changes in the 2009-2013 period were “balance sheet” operations as

the Fed purchased Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities in large-scale. I would

classify these actions as discretionary rather than rule-like in the sense I have used the terms in

this paper. The uncertainty and market disruption associated the so-called “taper-tantrum” in




11
  Such are issues raised by Fischer (2017b) and discussed in the context of proposed legislation
below.
                                                 27
2013 is an illustration of the dangers of too much discretion in balance sheet operations, and

more recent Fed decisions seem to be steering clear of such actions.

       Following this experience, the normalization process designed and described in the Fed’s

“Policy Normalization Principles and Plans” of September 2014 is consistent with a more rule-

like approach, in which the FOMC “intends to reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings in

a gradual and predictable manner….” The “Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles

and Plans” issued earlier this year provides useful details about how the FOMC intends to

gradually reduce the Fed's securities holdings by decreasing its reinvestment of principal

payments to the extent that they exceed gradually rising caps.

       Recently Janet Yellen (2017a, 2017b), as Federal Reserve Chair, broke new ground in

describing how monetary policy rules are used at the Federal Reserve. A follow-up presentation

by Stanley Fischer (2017a), as Federal Reserve Vice-Chair, and a new section of the June 2017

Monetary Policy Report continue in this vein.

       Yellen (2017a) summarized the Fed’s strategy for the policy instruments, saying that

“When the economy is weak and unemployment is on the rise, we encourage spending and

investing by pushing short-term interest rates lower. As you may know, the interest rate that we

target is the federal funds rate, the rate banks charge each other for overnight loans…. Similarly,

when the economy is threatening to push inflation too high down the road, we increase interest

rates to keep the economy on a sustainable path and lean against its tendency to boom and then

bust.” She then described “price stability” as a level of inflation of “2 percent a year,” the

maximum level of employment that can be sustained in the longer run as an unemployment rate

of around 4-3/4 percent, and a “longer-run neutral rate” of the federal funds as a rate of “3

percent.” One could certainly add more detail, but the statement includes the signs of the



                                                  28
responses by the policy instruments, though not the magnitudes. It mentions key factors driving

the responses. And it gives numerical values for three key parameters. It could be usefully added

to the Fed’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which, despite its

name, now has no strategy for the instruments.

        In a speech the following day, Yellen (2017b) provided charts and references to the

specific policy rules. The purpose was to compare actual Fed policy with the Taylor rule and

other rules, and then explain any differences. I think people found that useful, and it was good to

see clarification of how the FOMC uses such policy rules in a constructive manner. An algebraic

way to summarize the words in the presentations would be: r = p + ay + b(p – 2 ) + 1 with a > 0

and b > 0, where r is the federal funds rate, p is the rate of inflation, and y = 2.3(4.75-u) where u

is the unemployment rate. (The 2.3 comes from Yellen (2012)). In contrast the Taylor rule is: r =

p + .5y + .5(p – 2) + 2. This clearly provided context for a candid discussion. Fischer’s (2017a)

recent talk takes a similar approach; he referred to decisions made in 2011 and more generally,

explaining how a rules-based analysis feeds in to the discussions and is evaluated by the FOMC

to arrive at a policy decision.

        This year’s Federal Reserve Board’s semi-annual Monetary Policy Report (2017)

contains a whole new section called “Monetary Policy Rules and Their Role in the Federal

Reserve’s Policy Process.” The section also breaks new ground. It lists three “key principles of

good monetary policy” that the Fed says are incorporated into policy rules; it then lists five

policy rules, including the Taylor rule and four variations on that rule that the Fed uses, with

helpful references in notes.




                                                 29
       The three principles sound quite reasonable: For one of them, sometimes called the

“Taylor Principle,” the Fed is quite specific in that it gives the numerical range for the response

of the policy rate–the federal funds rate–to the inflation rate.

       More information, including some algebra, is given in the Report. It is good that one of

the five policy rules, which the Fed calls the “Taylor (1993) rule, adjusted,” is based on the

economic research of Reifschneider and Williams (2000) which I discussed earlier in this paper.

The Fed describes these rules using the unemployment rate rather than real GDP, relying on

Okun’s Law, the empirical connection between the real GDP/potential GDP gap and the

unemployment rate. One of the rules, what the Fed calls the “balanced-approach rule,” is the

Taylor rule with a different coefficient on the cyclical variable.

       The Report compares the FOMC’s settings for the federal funds rate with the policy

rules. It shows that the interest rate was too low for too long in the 2003-2005 period according

to the Taylor rule, and that, according to three of the rules, the current fed funds rate should be

moving up now. The Fed makes these calculations using its estimate of time varying neutral rate

of interest. However, aside from being positive about the three principles, it does not say much

about its own policy strategy in the document.

       The Report focuses on differences, rather than similarities, in the policy rules, and on the

differences in inputs to the policy rules. The differences in measures of inflation, the equilibrium

neutral interest rate, and other variables are part of monetary policy making and always will be.

They are a reason to use policy rules as a means of translating these differences in measurement

into differences about policy in a systematic way. As I mentioned earlier in this paper, such

differences do not imply that policy rules or strategies are impractical.




                                                  30
       It is also worth noting that the concept of policy rules is affecting practical thinking on

the international front. Paul Volcker (2014) argues that “the absence of an official, rules-based,

cooperatively managed monetary system has not been a great success.” Raghu Rajan (2016)

writes that “what we need are monetary rules that prevent a central bank’s domestic mandate

from trumping a country’s international responsibility.” And Mario Draghi (2016) states that

“We would all clearly benefit from…improving communication over our reaction functions…”

All are suggesting a more rule-based approach to the international monetary system.



   5. How does the recently proposed Congressional legislation on conducting monetary
      policy fit into this debate?

       Several years ago, I discussed legislation which would require the Federal Reserve to

establish and report on a policy rule for the interest rate or other instruments of policy. (Taylor

(2011). The idea was based on economic research, including historical experience with prior

legislative changes regarding the monetary aggregates. The legislation would not require that the

Fed choose any specific rule, only that it establish some rule and report what the rule is. If the

Fed deviated from its chosen strategy, the legislation would call on the Fed to provide an

explanation and answer questions at a public congressional hearing.

       In Taylor (1993a), the paper in which I discussed a simple policy rule as a guideline for

monetary policy, I made no suggestion that the rule should be written into law, or even that it be

used to monitor policy, or hold central banks accountable. As I described in this paper, the

objective was to help central bankers make their interest rate decisions in a less discretionary and

more rule-like manner, and thereby achieve the goal of price stability and economic stability.

        Why does legislation fit into the debate now? Because, as the debate reveals, there is

evidence that, starting around 2003-05, monetary policy became more discretionary and less

                                                 31
rule-like than it was in the 1980s and 1990s. This historical experience suggests that a legislated

rule could help restore rule-like monetary principles and help prevent deviations in the future. It

could also provide a catalyst for international monetary reform. In other words, the debate over

such legislation fits directly into the debate about monetary policy rules versus discretion.

       A proposal along these lines has now been written into legislative language in a bill

which passed the House Financial Services Committee and the House of Representatives. The

legislation is entitled “Requirements for Policy Rules of the Federal Open Market Committee,”

which is Section 2 of the Fed Oversight Reform and Modernization Act (FORM). This bill

would require that the Fed “describe the strategy or rule of the Federal Open Market Committee

for the systematic quantitative adjustment” of its policy instruments. It would be the Fed’s job to

choose the strategy and how to describe it. The Fed could change its strategy or deviate from it if

circumstances called for a change, but the Fed would have to explain why.

       Precedent for this type of legislation appeared in sections of the Federal Reserve Act

from 1977 to 2000 requiring the Fed to report the growth rate ranges of the monetary aggregates.

The legislation did not specify exactly what the numerical settings of these ranges should be, but

a greater focus on the money growth ranges was part of the disinflation efforts of the 1980s.

When the requirement for reporting ranges for the monetary aggregates were removed from the

law in 2000, nothing was put in its place.

       A “Statement on Policy Rules Legislation” (2016) by a number of economists discusses

reasons for the legislation which would change how the Senate Banking Committee and the

House Financial Services Committee oversee monetary policy. Allan Meltzer argued in




                                                 32
Congressional testimony that 12 “We need change to improve the oversight that this Committee

and the House Committee exercises over the Fed. You have the responsibility. Article I, Section

8 gives that to you. But you do not have the ability to exercise authority. You are busy people.

You are involved in many issues. The Chairperson of the Fed is a person who has devoted his

life to monetary policy. There is not any series of questions that you can ask on the fly that they

are not going to be able to brush aside….So you need a rule which says, look, you said you were

going to do this, and you have not done it. That requires an answer, and that I think is one of the

most important reasons why we need some kind of a rule.”

        Janet Yellen, as Federal Reserve Chair, expressed concerns about the legislation,

however. Testifying at the House Financial Services Committee 13 she said that “I don’t believe

that the Fed should chain itself to any mechanical rule.” The legislation could be modified to

address such concerns, and it is sensible to seek out compromises in which the Fed would

choose, describe and change its strategy, with no requirement that it be mechanical. The Fed

would still serve as lender of last resort or take appropriate actions in the event of a crisis.

        Some commentators say that the House monetary strategy bill would require the Fed to

follow the Taylor rule, but this is not the case. The bill requires the Fed to describe how its

strategy or rule might differ from a “reference rule,” which happens to be the Taylor rule. While

this could be modified and compromises should be examined, describing the difference between

specific policy rules and this reference rule is a natural and routine task for the Fed. In fact, many

at the Fed already make such comparisons including Yellen (2012, 2017a, 2017b).




12
   Transcript, Hearing before The Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs United
States Senate, March 3, 2015
13
   Hearing entitled “Monetary Policy and the State of the Economy,” February 25, 2015
                                                  33
       Some argue that the zero bound on the interest rate means policy rules are no longer

useful. But as I described in this paper there are many ways for policy rules to deal with the

effective lower bound on the interest rate. Some argue that the decline in the equilibrium interest

rate means policy rules cannot be used. But one can easily adjust the equilibrium interest rate in

the rule, as I also described in this paper. Some argue that uncertainty about the output gap or the

inflation rate renders useless rules that depend on the gap or the inflation rate. But that

uncertainty is just as much a problem for discretion as it is for policy rules. Some argue that there

are so many variants of policy rules, that you can’t use rules in practice. It is true that some rules

are better than others, and it makes perfect sense for researchers and policy makers to be looking

for new and better rules. I think research indicates the dangers of adding housing prices or the

stock market to policy rules, but it is the job of the Fed to decide.

       As I discussed above, a possible problem with policy rules is that a monetary policy

committee, such as the FOMC, might find it difficult to select a single rule when there are many

differences of opinion on the committee about the rule. It might be particularly hard for the chair

of the committee to forge a consensus. However, the possibility of dissents within the FOMC, as

with decisions about setting the policy interest rate, alleviates this problem, because unanimity

would not be required.

       Finally, there are different ways to meet the requirements of the legislation. For example,

rather than using a rule for the instruments of policy the Fed might state a monetary strategy in

terms of “inflation forecast targeting” or simply “forecast targeting.” As I described earlier,

according to this approach the central bank would choose its policy interest rate so that a linear

combination of its forecast of different variables would fall along a given path. While an interest

rate path can be calculated, this approach does not yield a simple policy rule. According to the



                                                  34
policy rules legislation the central bank would have the job of deciding on the strategy. While

experience suggests that focusing on the decision rule for monetary policy works better in

practice, this alternative approach could possibly meet the terms of the proposed legislation.



Conclusion

        Several take-aways emerge from this review of the debate over rules and discretion in

monetary policy.

        First, by and large, the different suggestions and proposals for policy rules over time have

been based on specific economic models, robust methodologies, and empirical findings. That is

an attractive feature of the policy evaluation, and it implies that high quality economic research

on monetary policy should be continued both inside and outside central banks.

        The research has led to a lot of policy rules for central bankers to choose from, and to an

understandable debate about the proposals and between the proposers. However, this is not a

criticism and does not imply that central bankers should discard a systematic approach to policy.

By analogy, in foreign policy, virtually all agree that it is crucial to have a strategy, so that policy

is not all tactics. But in any realistic situation, there are many proposed foreign policy strategies

to choose from. It is the job of the policy maker to choose the strategy and make it work.

        Second, while policy rules are often cast as ways to tie central bankers’ hands, in reality,

rules or strategies are simply ways to help central bankers improve monetary policy as they

operate and communicate with markets and citizens in a democracy, and interact in a global

monetary system. Experience over time in different countries shows that they do improve

economic performance and thereby improve people’s lives.




                                                  35
       Third, while quantitative, empirical, and historical methods are used in research to

distinguish discretionary policy from rules-based policy, the line of demarcation is difficult to

establish in practice. This makes comparing and contrasting the approaches difficult. Although

important progress has been made, there is a need for further research. In the meantime, there are

many ways that policy makers can internalize the principles of a clear and consistent strategy as

they formulate their day to day decisions.

       Fourth, research on policy rules has had a clear impact on the practice of central banking

even as the debate continues and enthusiasm for the ideas has waxed and waned. Detailed

investigations based on transcripts and other documents show increasing impacts over time, as

does informal conversations with policy makers. Research shows that this has occurred in central

banks with varying degrees of committee decision making. During the past year or so there has

been an increased focus on policy rules and strategies in speeches and commentaries by central

bankers in the United States and other countries.

       Fifth, while research shows that central bank independence is crucial for good monetary

policy making, it has not been enough to prevent swings away from rules-based policy. In the

United States where Congress has responsibility under the Constitution, this research suggests

the value of considering some legislation that would enhance reporting and discussions with

Congress and the public about the strategy of monetary policy.

       This paper has addressed the key questions that define the scope of the debate between

rules and discretion. The economic research described in the paper shows why it is important that

U.S. monetary policy and the international monetary system have a rules-based strategy. By

considering each of these questions, I have tried to contribute to a rational discussion through

which we can move onward to the goal of a better performing economy.



                                                 36
References

Ahrend, Rudiger (2010), “Monetary Ease: A Factor Behind Financial Crises? Some Evidence
      from OECD Countries,” Economics: The Open Access, Open Assessment E-Journal,”
      Vol. 4, 2010-12, April 14, 2010

Anderson, Theodore W. and John B. Taylor (1976) “Some Experimental Results on the
      Statistical Properties of Least Squares Estimates in Control Problems” Econometrica, 44
      (6), November, pp. 1289-1302

Ando, Albert and Robert Rasche (1971), “Equations in the MIT-PENN-SSRC Econometric
      Model of the United States.” Manuscript. University of Pennsylvania.

Asso, Pier Francesco and Robert Leeson (2012) “Monetary Policy Rules: from Adam Smith to
       John Taylor,” in Evan F. Koenig, Robert Leeson, and George A. Kahn, The Taylor Rule
       and the Transformation of Monetary Policy, Hoover Institution Press, 2012.

Beckworth, D., and Hendrickson, J. R. (2015) “Nominal GDP Targeting and the Taylor Rule on
     an Even Playing Field.” Western Kentucky University, Department of Economics
     Working Paper.

Belongia, Michael T., Peter N. Ireland (2014) “Interest Rates and Money in the Measurement of
      Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper No. 20134, May

Bernanke, Ben S. (2010), “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble,” Annual Meeting of the
      American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia, January 3

Bordo, Michael D. and Andrew T. Levin (2017), “Central Bank Digital Currency and the Future
       of Monetary Policy, Economics Working Paper 17104, Hoover Institution, Stanford
       University

Brayton, Flint, Andrew Levin, Ralph Tryon, and John C. Williams (1997) “The Evolution of
       Macro Models at the Federal Reserve Board,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
       Public Policy, Vol. 47, 43-81.

Bryant, Ralph, Peter Hooper, and Catherine Mann (1993), Evaluating Policy Regimes: New
       Research in Empirical Macroeconomics, Brookings Institution, Washington DC

Brayton, Flint. and Peter Tinsley A. Bomfim, D. Reifschneider, and P. von zur Muehlen, B.
       Tetlow and J. Williams, (1996) “A Guide to FRB/US A Macroeconomic Model of the
       United States,” Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. 20551

Carney, Mark (2013), “Monetary Policy After the Fall,” Eric J. Hanson Memorial Lecture,
      University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, May 1




                                              37
Carstens, Agustin (2015), “Challenges for Emerging Economies in the Face of Unconventional
       Monetary Policies in Advanced Economies,” Stavros Niarchos Foundation Lecture,
       Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, April 20.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (2000), “Monetary Policy Rules and
       Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
       (February), 115, 1, 147-180.

Dotsey, Michael (2016), “Comment on Alex Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy, David H. Papell, and
       Ruxandra Prodan ‘Policy Rule Legislation in Practice,’” in Central Bank Governance
       and Oversight Reform, John H. Cochrane and John B. Taylor (Eds.), Hoover Institution
       Press, Stanford University

de Leeuw, Frank and Edward Gramlich (1968), “The Federal Reserve-MIT Econometric
       Model,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, 54: 11-40

Draghi, Mario (2016), “The International Dimension of Monetary Policy,” The ECB Forum on
       Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 28

Edwards, Sebastian (2017), “Monetary Policy Independence under Flexible Exchange Rates: The
      Federal Reserve and Monetary Policy in Latin America—Is There Policy Spillover?” in
      Rules for International Monetary Stability, Michael Bordo and John B. Taylor (Eds.),
      Hoover Institution Press.

Engel, Charles and Kenneth West (2006), “Taylor Rules and the Deutsche-Dollar Real Exchange
       Rate,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 38, 1175-1194.

Fagan, G.; Lothian, J. R.; and McNelis, P. D. (2013) “Was the Gold Standard Really
       Destabilizing?” Journal of Applied Econometrics 8: 131–249.

Fischer, Stanley (2017a), "I'd Rather Have Bob Solow Than an Econometric Model, But ..." at
       the Warwick Economics Summit, Coventry, United Kingdom

Fischer, Stanley (2017b), “Committee Decisions and Monetary Policy Rules,” at the conference
       on "The Structural Foundations of Monetary Policy," Hoover Institution, Stanford
       University

Fisher, Irving (1920), Stabilizing the Dollar, Macmillan, New York

Friedman, Milton (1948), “A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic Stability,” The
      American Economic Review Vol. 38, No. 3 (June), pp. 245-264

Friedman, Milton (1960), A Program for Monetary Stability, Fordham University Press, New
      York




                                              38
Gionnoni, Marc P. and Michael Woodford (2005), “Optimal Inflation Targeting Rules,” in The
      Inflation-Targeting Debate, Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford, (Eds.), National
      Bureau of Economic Research, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Gray, Colin (2013), “Responding to a Monetary Superpower: Investigating the Behavioral
       Spillovers of U.S. Monetary Policy.” Atlantic Economic Journal 21 (2): 173–84.

Hansen, Lars Peter, Robert Lucas, Edward Prescott, George Shultz, Robert Heller, Jerry Jordan,
      Athanasios Orphanides, William Poole, Michael Bordo, Michael Boskin, Charles
      Calomiris, Varadarajan Chari, John Cochrane, John Cogan, Steven Davis, Marvin
      Goodfriend, Gregory Hess, Peter Ireland, Mickey Levy, Bennett McCallum, Allan
      Meltzer, Gerald O’Driscoll, Lee Ohanian, Scott Sumner, and John Taylor (2016),
      Statement on Policy Rules Legislation.
      https://web.stanford.edu/~johntayl/2016_pdfs/Statement_on_Policy_Rules_Legislation_2
      -29-2016.pdf

Hetzel, Robert (1987) “Henry Thornton: Seminal Monetary Theorist and Father of the Modern
        Central Bank,” Economic Review Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, July/August

Hofmann, B. and B. Bogdanova (2012), “Taylor rules and monetary policy: a global ‘Great
     Deviation’?” BIS Quarterly Review, September, pp 37–49

Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2016), “Measuring the Natural Rate
       of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,” Board of Governors of the Federal
       Reserve System

IMF Staff Report (2015), “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability,” August 28

Kahn, George A. (2010), “Taylor Rule Deviations and Financial Imbalances.” Federal Reserve
      Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, Second Quarter, 63–99.

Kahn, George A. (2012), “The Taylor Rule and the Practice of Central Banking,” in Evan F.
      Koenig, and Robert Leeson and George A. Kahn (2012), The Taylor Rule and the
      Transformation of Monetary Policy, Hoover Institution Press, 2012

Kohn, Donald (2012), “It’s Not So Simple,” in Evan F. Koenig, Robert Leeson, and George A.
      Kahn (2012), The Taylor Rule and the Transformation of Monetary Policy, Hoover
      Institution Press, Stanford

King, Mervyn (2003), “Speech at the East Midlands Development Agency/Bank of England
       Dinner,” Leicester, October 14

King, Mervyn (2012), “Twenty years of Inflation Targeting,” Stamp Memorial Lecture, London
       School of Economics, London, October 9




                                              39
Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott (1977), “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of
      Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, pp. 618-637


Lane, Timothy (2016), “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability—Looking for the Right Tools,”
       Bank of Canada, February 8

Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,”
      Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), (November) 1063-1070.

Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2016), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest
      Redux,” Business Economics, 51, 257-267.

Levin, Andrew T., and John C. Williams (2003), “Robust Monetary Policy with Competing
       Reference Models,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 945--975.

Lipsky, John (2012), “A View from the Financial Markets,” in Evan F. Koenig, Robert Leeson,
       and George A. Kahn, (2012), The Taylor Rule and the Transformation of Monetary
       Policy, Hoover Institution Press, Stanford

Lucas, Robert E. (1976), “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” Carnegie-Rochester
      Conference Series on Public Policy, Volume 1.

Mallaby, Sebastian (2016), The Man Who Knew, Penguin Press, New York

McCallum, Bennett (1999), “Issues in the Design of Monetary Policy Rules.” In Handbook of
      Macroeconomics, edited by John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford. Amsterdam: Elsevier

Meltzer, Allan (2012), “Federal Reserve Policy in the Great Recession,” Cato Journal, Vol 32,
       No. 2, 255-263.

Monetary Policy Report (2017), Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 7

Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy, Alex, David Papell and Ruxandra Prodan (2014), “Deviations from Rules-
       Based Policy and Their Effects,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 49, 4-
       17.

Orphanides, A. (2003) “Monetary Policy Evaluation with Noisy Information.” Journal of
      Monetary Economics, 50 (3), pp. 605–31

Orphanides, Athanasios and John C. Williams (2008) “Learning, Expectations Formation, and
      the Pitfalls of Optimal Control Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol.
      55S, pp. S80-S96, October.

Phillips, A.W. (1954), “Stabilization Policy in a Closed Economy,” Economic Journal, Vol. 64,
        pp. 290-323

                                              40
Qvigstad, Jan F. (2005), “When Does an Interest Rate Path `Look Good'? Criteria for an
       Appropriate Future Interest Rate Path—A Practitioner's Approach," Norges Bank Staff
       Memo: Monetary Policy, No. 2005/6, June 15.

Rajan, Raghuram (2016) “New Rules for the Monetary Game” Project Syndicate, March 2

Ramey, Valerie (2016) “Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation. in Handbook of
      Macroeconomics, Volume 2, John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig (Eds.), Elsevier Science,
      Amsterdam, pp. 71-162

Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000), “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a
       Low Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32, no. 4 (November), pp.
       936–66.

Ricardo, David (1824), Plan for the Establishment of a National Bank, reprinted in Ricardo,
       David (1951): The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo. Volume 4: Pamphlets
       and Papers 1815-1823, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Shultz, George (2014) “The Importance of Rules-Based Policy in Practice,” in Frameworks for
        Central Banking in the Next Century, Michael D. Bordo, William Dupor, and John B.
        Taylor (Eds.), Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Volume 49, December

Simons, Henry (1936), “Rules versus Authorities in Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political
      Economy, Vol. 44, No. 1, 1-30

Smith, Adam (1776), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, London,
       Methuen and Co.

Sumner, Scott (2014), “Nominal GDP Targeting: A Simple Rule to Improve Fed Performance.”
      Cato Journal 34 (2): 315–37.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (1998), “Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring
      Inflation Targets," European Economic Review, 41: pp. 1111-1146

Taylor, John B. (1993a), “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
       Series on Public Policy, North-Holland, 39, pp. 195-214.

Taylor, John B. (1993b), Macroeconomic Policy in a World Economy: From Econometric
       Design to Practical Operation, W.W. Norton, New York, on-line Edition, 1999:
       https://web.stanford.edu/~johntayl/MacroPolicyWorld.htm

Taylor, John B. (1996), “Policy Rules as a Means to a More Effective Monetary Policy,”
       Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 14 (1), July, pp. 28-39.




                                              41
Taylor, John B. (1998), “Applying Academic Research on Monetary Policy Rules: An Exercise
       in Translational Economics,” The Harry G. Johnson Lecture, The Manchester School
       Supplement, Blackwell Publishers, 66, June, pp. 1-16.

Taylor, John B. (2008) “The Costs and Benefits of Deviating from the Systematic Component of
       Monetary Policy,” Keynote address at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
       Conference on Monetary Policy and Asset Markets, February 22
       https://web.stanford.edu/~johntayl/Onlinepaperscombinedbyyear/2008/The_Costs_and_B
       enefits_of_Deviating_from_the_Systematic_Component_of_Monetary_Policy.pdf

Taylor, John B. (2010), “The Fed and the Crisis: A Reply to Ben Bernanke,” Wall Street
       Journal, January 11.

Taylor, John B. (2011), “Legislating a Rule for Monetary Policy,” The Cato Journal, 31 (3), Fall,
       pp. 407-415.

Taylor, John B. (2012a), “Monetary Policy Rules Work and Discretion Doesn’t: A Tale of Two
       Eras,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 44, No. 6, 1017-1032

Taylor, John B. (2012b), “The Dual Nature of Forecast Targeting and Instrument Rules,” in The
       Taylor Rule and the Transformation of Monetary Policy, edited by Evan F. Koenig,
       Robert Leeson and George A. Kahn, Hoover Institution Press, Stanford, CA, pp.235-244

Taylor, John B, (2016) “A Rules-Based Cooperatively-Managed International Monetary
       System for the Future,” in International Monetary Cooperation: Lessons from the Plaza
       Accord After Thirty Years, C.F. Bergsten and Russell Green (Eds.) Peterson Institute for
       International Economics: Washington, pp. 217-236.

Taylor, John B. and Volker Wieland (2012), “Surprising Comparative Properties of Monetary
       Models: Results from a New Model Data Base,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94
       (3), August, pp. 800-816

Taylor, John B. and Volker Wieland (2016), “Finding the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate in a
       Fog of Policy Deviations,” Business Economics, 51 (3), July, pp. 147-154.

Taylor, John B. and John C. Williams (2011), “Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy,”
       in Handbook of Monetary Economics, 3, Benjamin Friedman and Michael Woodford
       (Eds.), Elsevier, pp 829-859.

Teryoshin, Yevgeniy (2017), “Historical Performance of Rule-Like Monetary Policy,” Working
      Paper No. 17-005, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, February
      https://siepr.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/publications/17-005.pdf

Thornton, Henry (1802), “An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great
       Britain,” Edited with an Introduction by F. A. Hayek. New York: Rinehart & Company,
       Inc., 1939.

                                               42
Tinbergen, Jan (1936), “An Economic Policy for 1936,” in: L.H. Klaassen, L.M. Koyck and H.J.
       Witteveen (eds.), Jan Tinbergen, Selected Papers, Amsterdam, 1959 pp. 37-84 (original
       in Dutch).

Volcker, Paul A. (2014), “Remarks,” Bretton Woods Committee Annual Meeting, June 17

Wicksell, Knut (1907), “The Influence of the Rate of Interest on Prices,” Economic Journal, 17,
      213-220

Wieland, Volker, E. Afanasyeva, M. Kuete, and J. Yoo (2016), “New Methods for Macro
      Financial Model Comparison and Policy Analysis,” in John B Taylor and Harald Uhlig
      (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics Vol 2, Elsevier, Amsterdam

Williams, John C. (2003), “Simple Rules for Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of San
       Francisco Economic Review.

Woodford, Michael (2012), “Forecast Targeting as a Monetary Policy Strategy: Policy Rules in
     Practice,” in The Taylor Rule and the Transformation of Monetary Policy, edited by Evan
     F. Koenig, Robert Leeson and George A. Kahn. Hoover Institution Press, Stanford, CA,
     pp. 185-233

Yellen, Janet (2012), “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy, Money Marketeers, New
       York, April 11

Yellen, Janet L. (2017a), “The Goals of Monetary Policy and How We Pursue Them,” The
       Commonwealth Club, San Francisco, January 18

Yellen, Janet L. (2017b), “The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy,” at the
       Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, January
       19




                                               43
