                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE CAUSAL EFFECT OF LIMITS TO ARBITRAGE ON ASSET PRICING ANOMALIES

                                      Yongqiang Chu
                                      David Hirshleifer
                                         Liang Ma

                                     Working Paper 24144
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24144


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                         December 2017, Revised October 2018




For helpful comments and suggestions, we thank Wei Xiong (the Editor), an anonymous
Associate Editor, two anonymous referees, Karl Diether, Lukasz Pomorski, Jeffrey Pontiff, Lin
Sun, and participants at the 2016 Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research Conference on
Financial Decisions and Asset Markets at Wharton and the 2017 American Finance Association
Meetings. This research has received financial support from the Moore School Research Grant
Program. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Yongqiang Chu, David Hirshleifer, and Liang Ma. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Causal Effect of Limits to Arbitrage on Asset Pricing Anomalies
Yongqiang Chu, David Hirshleifer, and Liang Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 24144
December 2017, Revised October 2018
JEL No. G12,G18,G4

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine the causal effect of limits to arbitrage on 11 well-known asset pricing anomalies
using the pilot program of Regulation SHO, which relaxed short-sale constraints for a quasi-
random set of pilot stocks, as a natural experiment. We find that the anomalies became weaker on
portfolios constructed with pilot stocks during the pilot period. The pilot program reduced the
combined anomaly long-short portfolio returns by 72 basis points per month, a difference that
survives risk adjustment with standard factor models. The effect comes only from the short legs
of the anomaly portfolios.

Yongqiang Chu                                  Liang Ma
University of South Carolina                   University of South Carolina
1014 Greene Street                             Darla Moore School of Business
Columbia, SC 29208                             1014 Greene Street
yongqiang.chu@moore.sc.edu                     Columbia, SC 29208
                                               United States
David Hirshleifer                              liang.ma@moore.sc.edu
The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine 4291
Pereira Drive
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
david.h@uci.edu
1         Introduction

        Over the last several decades, finance researchers have discovered many cross-sectional

asset pricing anomalies, wherein predetermined security characteristics predict future stock

returns.1 Such patterns can derive from either rational risk premia or market mispricing.

The mispricing explanation goes hand-in-hand with the idea that there are limits to arbitrage

which delay the flow of wealth from irrational to sophisticated investors (Shleifer and Vishny

(1997)). In contrast, if return predictability is the result of rational risk premia for bearing

factor risk, limits to arbitrage should not affect expected returns.

        It is therefore interesting to ascertain whether return anomalies, to the extent that they

reflect mispricing, are persistent because limits to arbitrage prevent sophisticated investors

from trading profitably against them. However, it is empirically hard to measure pure varia-

tions in limits to arbitrage that exclude variations in other economic forces that might affect

either risk premia or mispricing. In this paper, we study the causal effect of limits to arbi-

trage on 11 well-known asset pricing anomalies—namely, the momentum, gross profitability,

asset growth, investment to assets, return on assets, net operating assets, accruals, net stock

issuance, composite equity issuance, failure probability, and O-score anomalies. These 11

anomalies were the focus of Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012) in their study of sentiment

and anomalies, and were chosen because of their survival after adjusting for the Fama-French

three factors. Examining the causal effect of limits to arbitrage on these anomalies provides

insight into whether, and to what extent, well-known return anomalies derive from risk versus

mispricing.

        It is challenging to identify the causal effect of limits to arbitrage, as we seldom directly

observe them, or pure variations in them. The existing literature therefore often relies on

firm characteristics, such as idiosyncratic volatility, size, and stock liquidity, as proxies for

limits to arbitrage. However, these proxies are likely to be correlated with risk. For example,
    1
    Harvey, Liu, and Zhu (2016) provide a comprehensive list of variables that can predict cross-sectional
stock returns.


                                                    1
size has been offered as the basis for a risk factor in the three-factor model of Fama and

French (1993), and volatility can be a risk measure in models with limited diversification such

as settings with costs of trading or with asymmetric information. This raises the possibility

that effects attributed to limits to arbitrage may actually be due to rational risk premia.

   We offer here a pure test of the causal effect of limits to arbitrage on asset pricing

anomalies. Short sale constraints are one of the most important limits of arbitrage (e.g.,

Jones and Lamont (2002), Lamont and Thaler (2003), Nagel (2005), Gromb and Vayanos

(2010)). Research on the effect of short-sale constraints on asset prices relies mainly on

indirect proxies such as breadth of ownership (Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002)), institutional

ownership (Asquith, Pathak, and Ritter (2005), Nagel (2005), Hirshleifer, Teoh, and Yu

(2011)), firm size (Ali and Trombley (2006), Israel and Moskowitz (2013)), short interest

(Asquith, Pathak, and Ritter (2005)), and shorting cost estimated from stock borrowing and

lending behavior (Jones and Lamont (2002), Geczy, Musto, and Reed (2002), Drechsler and

Drechsler (2014)). Several of these proxies may be correlated across stocks or over time with

variations in factor risk.

   We exploit a natural experiment, the Rule 202T pilot program of Regulation SHO (here-

after the pilot program), to identify the causal effect of limits to arbitrage, and in particular

short-sale constraints, on asset pricing anomalies. Regulation SHO was adopted by the Se-

curities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in July 2004. Within stocks in the Russell 3000

index as of June 2004, the pilot program designated every third stock ranked by average

daily trading volume (in the prior year) on each of NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq as pilot

stocks. The pilot program then removed short sale price tests on this quasi-randomly se-

lected group of pilot stocks. Prior to Regulation SHO, the specific form of short sale price

tests differed across different stock markets. NYSE/AMEX imposed the uptick rule, which

only allowed a short sale to be placed on a plus tick or a zero-plus tick. Nasdaq imposed

the bid price test, which did not allow short sales at or below the (inside) bid when the

inside bid was at or below the previous inside bid. From May 2, 2005 to August 6, 2007,

                                               2
the pilot stocks on NYSE/AMEX were exempted from the uptick rule and those on Nasdaq

were exempted from the bid price test. The pilot program therefore made it easier to short

sell pilot stocks relative to non-pilot stocks. Because the assignment of pilot and non-pilot

firms is quasi-random, the program provides an ideal setting to examine the causal effect of

short-sale constraints on asset pricing anomalies. It is known that (see Diether, Lee, and

Werner (2009) and discussion in Section 2) the bid price test for Nasdaq stocks is not very

restrictive, and a significant fraction of trading volume in Nasdaq-listed stocks is executed

on ArcaEx and INET, which do not enforce the bid price test. We therefore exclude Nasdaq

stocks and only include pilot and non-pilot stocks traded on NYSE/AMEX in our main

analysis.

   We examine two main hypotheses regarding the differential performance of pilot versus

non-pilot anomaly portfolios, during the pilot period of Regulation SHO. The first is that

the anomalies become weaker for pilot firms relative to non-pilot firms during the pilot

period. During the pilot period, arbitrageurs could more easily short pilot stocks to construct

arbitrage portfolios, which should reduce mispricing. It follows that the return spread of

arbitrage portfolios should decline for pilot stocks relative to non-pilot stocks.

   To test the first hypothesis, for each asset pricing anomaly, we construct long-short

portfolios with pilot and non-pilot stocks separately. Specifically, we first sort all pilot

stocks into deciles according to the return-predicting characteristic, and then calculate the

anomaly returns as the return differences between the highest performing decile based on

existing anomaly evidence (the long leg) and the lowest performing decile (the short leg). We

then do the same with all non-pilot stocks. In a difference-in-differences framework, we find

that the anomalies were much weaker in long-short portfolios constructed using pilot stocks

during the pilot period. The effect is statistically significant in five of the 11 anomalies.

When the 11 anomalies are combined in a joint test, the effect is both statistically and

economically significant. The pilot program reduced the anomaly returns by 72 basis points

per month, or 8.64% per year.

                                               3
       The second hypothesis is that the decrease in anomaly returns for pilot stocks during

the pilot period comes mostly from the short leg portfolios. In general, anomaly returns can

come from either overpriced short legs or underpriced long legs. A loosening of short-sale con-

straints should reduce profitability of short leg arbitrage portfolios. In the same difference-in-

differences framework, we find that the returns of short leg portfolios constructed with pilot

stocks were significantly and substantially higher during the pilot period, i.e., short strategies

became less profitable. In contrast, there is no significant effect of the pilot program on long

leg portfolios.

       We consider two additional hypotheses. First, the difference in anomaly returns between

pilot and non-pilot stocks should vanish after the ending of the pilot program, with the disap-

pearance of the difference in short-sale restrictions between pilot and non-pilot stocks.2 We

find empirical evidence consistent with this hypothesis. Furthermore, we expect to observe

return dynamics of short-leg portfolios at the beginning and the end of the pilot program.

Specifically, pilot short legs should underperform non-pilot short legs at the beginning of the

pilot program, right after the uptick rule was lifted for pilot stocks. Similarly, pilot short

legs should outperform non-pilot short legs at the end of the pilot program, right after the

uptick rule was lifted for non-pilot stocks. We find evidence supporting this hypothesis as

well.

       We provide a battery of robustness checks for our main results derived from testing the

two main hypotheses. We first show that our main results are robust to different sample

periods. Furthermore, we carry out a set of falsification tests. As a placebo test, we main-

tain the assignment of pilot and non-pilot firms but change the timing of the pilot period

fictitiously to 2001-2003 and test whether this fictitious pilot program also affected the asset

pricing anomalies during the 1980-2003 period.3 We find that the fictitious pilot program

had no effect on asset pricing anomalies, suggesting that the main results are indeed driven
   2
     After the pilot program ended, the uptick rule was lifted for non-pilot stocks as well.
   3
     We end the placebo test sample in year 2003 so that the actual pilot program does not affect the placebo
test results.


                                                     4
by the pilot program. As another falsification test, we show that the difference in anomaly

strength between pilot and non-pilot stocks during the pilot period was small and insignifi-

cant for Nasdaq stocks, which again confirms that our main results come from the relaxation

of short-sale constraints.

   Lastly, we perform several subsample analyses for our main results. As argued and

documented by Diether, Lee, and Werner (2009), small and less liquid stocks were more

affected by the suspension of the uptick rule (see the discussion in Section 5.4). Consistent

with this, we find that the main effect (i.e. the effect of easier short selling on anomalies

during the pilot period) is more pronounced among small and less liquid stocks. We further

perform a more direct subsample analysis that splits stocks based on the extent to which

they were restricted by the uptick rule before the pilot program. We find that our main

effect is stronger among stocks that were more restricted by the uptick rule before the pilot

program, which again corroborates our mechanism.

   Collectively, these results show that limits to arbitrage, and in particular, short-sale

constraints play an important role in generating the 11 well-known anomalies. These findings

therefore suggest that these anomalies are, at a minimum, driven in substantial part by

mispricing.

   A potential alternative explanation for our main results is that the pilot program made

pilot stocks more salient. Even though the pilot program is a quasi-experiment, it is not a

double blind study; market participants were aware of the change. It is possible that the

sheer fact that the list of pilot stocks was publicly known drew attention to these stocks,

and that higher investor attention to pilot stocks weakened anomalies, driving our main

results. The results on Nasdaq stocks indicate that this mechanism is less plausible than

our proposed mechanism of change in limits to arbitrage, since under this story Nasdaq

pilot stocks that experienced an increase in investor attention should also have weakened

anomalies, which is not the case. In contrast our limits to short arbitrage hypothesis explains

why the pilot effects are not present on Nasdaq. Furthermore, the results on shorting activity

                                              5
and subsample results based upon uptick rule restrictiveness probe further into whether

short-sale constraints are the source of the effects of the pilot program, and lend further

support to our proposed mechanism. However, we do not assert that our tests rule out the

alternative mechanism completely.

       The behavioral finance literature has long argued that limits to arbitrage help explain

the persistence of asset pricing anomalies despite the incentives of sophisticated investors

to trade profitably against such anomalies (Shleifer and Vishny (1997), Hirshleifer (2001),

Barberis and Thaler (2003), Gromb and Vayanos (2010)). Empirical tests have examined the

association between various proxies for limits to arbitrage and asset returns. These prox-

ies for limits to arbitrage include stock price (Pontiff (1996), Mashruwala, Rajgopal, and

Shevlin (2006)), size (Pontiff (1996), Ali, Hwang, and Trombley (2003), Israel and Moskowitz

(2013)), idiosyncratic volatility (Ali, Hwang, and Trombley (2003), Mashruwala, Rajgopal,

and Shevlin (2006)), transaction costs (Ali, Hwang, and Trombley (2003)), investor sophis-

tication (Ali, Hwang, and Trombley (2003)), dollar trading volume (Mashruwala, Rajgopal,

and Shevlin (2006)), and capital constraints of merger arbitrageurs (Baker and Savaşoglu

(2002)) in the context of merger arbitrage.

       Many of the proxies for limits to arbitrage used in existing literature may actually capture

risk, which makes it hard to distinguish between risk-based and mispricing-based explana-

tions of anomalies. As documented by Lam and Wei (2011), proxies for limits to arbitrage

are often highly correlated with proxies for investment frictions (risk).4

       Our paper is more closely related to the empirical literature on how short sale constraints

or short sale costs affect asset prices and asset pricing anomalies.5 One strand of this litera-
   4
     Lam and Wei (2011) attempt to distinguish between mispricing-based and risk-based (q-theory with
investment frictions) explanations of the asset growth anomaly. They examine a comprehensive list of proxies
for limits to arbitrage: idiosyncratic volatility, the number of institutional shareholders, three measures of
information uncertainty including analyst coverage, dispersion in analysts’ earnings, and cash flow volatility,
and five measures of transaction costs including stock price, effective bid-ask spread, institutional ownership,
Amihud illiquidity, and dollar trading volume.
   5
     See Reed (2013) and the references therein for more discussion on the role of short selling in financial
markets.



                                                       6
ture employs indirect proxies for short-sale constraints (Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002), Nagel

(2005), Ali and Trombley (2006), Asquith, Pathak, and Ritter (2005), Hirshleifer, Teoh, and

Yu (2011), Israel and Moskowitz (2013)). The indirect proxies of short-sale constraints used

in this strand of literature may, however, also capture variations in risk.

   Another strand of this literature uses more direct proxies for short sale constraints or

short sale costs, measured using data of stock borrowing and lending (D’Avolio (2002),

Geczy, Musto, and Reed (2002), Jones and Lamont (2002), Cohen, Diether, and Malloy

(2007), Cao, Dhaliwal, Kolasinski, and Reed (2007), Saffi and Sigurdsson (2010), Drechsler

and Drechsler (2014), Beneish, Lee, and Nichols (2015), Engelberg, Reed, and Ringgenberg

(2017)). These proxies are more direct in the sense that they are associated with the equity

lending process, e.g. with stock loan fees and stock lending supply. Nevertheless, these

proxies can still be correlated across stocks or over time with shifts in factor risk, so that

the return effects can still be driven by risk premia. In contrast, the natural experiment in

our paper focuses on a regulatory shift that only alters permitted short-selling behavior, and

therefore is unlikely to be correlated with shifts in factor risk.

   Our paper contributes to the existing literature by providing a clean and powerful test

of the causal effect of limits to arbitrage in general and short-sale constraints in particular

on asset pricing anomalies. In contrast to existing literature that mainly relies on proxies

for limits to arbitrage and short-sale constraints (which may capture risk or be correlated

with risk as discussed above), we use exogenous shocks to short-sale constraints generated

by a natural experiment, the pilot program of Regulation SHO. The quasi-randomness of the

assignment of pilot and non-pilot stocks makes a stock’s assignment unlikely to be correlated

with the loadings of stocks on risk factors. We are therefore able to conclude from our analysis

whether limits of arbitrage and thereby mispricing actually affect asset pricing anomalies.

   Our paper also adds to the literature that studies the impact of the pilot program of

Regulation SHO. A few recent papers examine its effect on aspects related to stock prices.

Diether, Lee, and Werner (2009) examine whether the suspension of short-sale price tests by

                                                7
the pilot program affects market quality. They find that short-selling activity increases for

NYSE and Nasdaq pilot stocks and NYSE pilot stocks experience a slight increase in spreads

and intraday volatility, while the effect on market quality for Nasdaq stocks is smaller.

Grullon, Michenaud, and Weston (2015) find that the pilot program leads to an increase in

short-selling activity and a decline in prices for pilot stocks and this effect is stronger for

small firms, and these firms react by reducing equity issues and investment. Li and Zhang

(2015) show that the pilot program increases price sensitivity to bad news and thereby makes

managers more likely to reduce the precision of bad news forecasts. Fang, Huang, and Karpoff

(2016) show that the pressure of short-selling on stock prices due to the pilot program curbs

managers’ willingness to manipulate earnings. To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the

first to show that the pilot program affects the strength of well-known anomalies and reduces

overpricing on short legs of these anomalies. Moreover, the implications of our results go

beyond the effect of the pilot program per se and provide insight to a broad question in the

asset pricing literature, whether these anomalies reflect mispricing or compensation for risk.



2     Background on Regulation SHO

    Following the stock market crash of 1929, short-selling restrictions (price tests) were

introduced in the 1930s on stocks traded in the United States. Prior to Regulation SHO, the

specific form of short selling price tests differed across different stock markets. NYSE/AMEX

imposed the uptick rule, which only allowed a short sale to be placed on a plus tick or a

zero-plus tick. The zero-plus tick is a zero tick where the most recent price change preceding

the trade was a plus tick. Nasdaq imposed the bid price test. Short sales on Nasdaq stocks

were not allowed at or below the (inside) bid when the inside bid was at or below the previous

inside bid.

    Regulation SHO was designed by the SEC to investigate whether the uptick rule imposed

by NYSE (and also AMEX) and the bid price test imposed by Nasdaq affect market quality,


                                              8
and to develop potential uniform price tests if these rules are necessary. It was announced

by the SEC on July 28, 2004. For stocks in the Russell 3000 index as of June 2004, the pilot

program of Regulation SHO designated every third stock ranked by average daily trading

volume (in the prior year) on each of NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq as pilot stocks. The

Russell 3000 stocks were chosen by the SEC as they represent a broad cross-section of U.S.

stocks. The volume-ranking design was adopted to provide a quasi-random assignment of

pilot versus non-pilot stocks. The pilot program removed the uptick rule and the bid price

test on this quasi-randomly selected group of pilot stocks. From May 2, 2005 to August 6,

2007, the pilot stocks on NYSE/AMEX were exempted from the uptick rule and those on

Nasdaq were exempted from the bid price test.

       The pilot program ended on August 6, 2007. Slightly before the ending of the pilot

program, on July 6, 2007, the SEC eliminated short-sale price tests for all exchange-listed

stocks. Therefore, the pilot program effectively ran from May 2, 2005 to July 6, 2007. As

discussed in Fang, Huang, and Karpoff (2016), the elimination of the short-sale price tests for

all exchange-listed stocks received extensive criticism from managers and politicians. This

led the SEC to partially restore a modified uptick rule on February 24, 2010. Under the

modified rule, short-sale price tests were imposed when a stock’s price declines by 10% or

more from its closing price on the previous trading day.

       As discussed in details in Diether, Lee, and Werner (2009), the bid price test is not very

restrictive (compared to the uptick rule).6 Furthermore, a significant fraction of trading

volume in Nasdaq-listed stocks is executed on ArcaEx and INET, which do not enforce the

bid price test. As a result, the effect of the pilot program on Nasdaq-listed stocks in terms

of relaxing short-sale arbitrage constraints should be minimal. We therefore exclude Nasdaq
   6
    Here, we quote the example given on page 44 of Diether, Lee, and Werner (2009) to illustrate why the
bid price test is less restrictive than the uptick rule. Suppose for a stock the last sale price is $28.05 on a
plus tick, and the quotes are $28.00 to $28.05. To comply with the bid price test, a short sale can be placed
on Nasdaq at a marketable limit sell order at $28.00, as long as the most recent bid was $28.00 or below. A
NYSE short seller, however, has to place the short-sale order at $28.05, which is 4 cents higher, in order to
comply with the uptick rule.



                                                      9
stocks and only include pilot and non-pilot stocks traded on NYSE/AMEX in our main

analysis.



3         Data and Anomalies

3.1        Sample

        Starting with the June 2004 Russell 3000 index, we follow the procedure described in

SEC’s first pilot order of Regulation SHO (Securities Exchange Act Release No. 50104) to

build our sample of pilot and non-pilot stocks. We exclude stocks that were not listed on the

NYSE, AMEX, or Nasdaq NM, and stocks that went public or had spin-offs after April 30,

2004. The initial sample consists of 986 pilot stocks (based on the list published in the SEC’s

pilot order7 ) and 1,966 non-pilot stocks. We then merge this initial sample with the Center

for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) and Compustat (both annual and quarterly data)

data sets to form portfolios and analyze portfolio returns of the 11 anomalies. As discussed

in the introduction and Section 2, the bid price test for Nasdaq-listed stocks is likely to

have minimal effect. Our final sample therefore consists of pilot and non-pilot stocks in the

pilot program that are listed on NYSE or AMEX at portfolio formation. Within the initial

sample of pilot and non-pilot stocks of the pilot program, 1,025 non-pilot stocks and 515

pilot stocks are included in our final sample, among which 1,477 stocks are traded on NYSE

and 63 stocks are traded on AMEX. The ratio of non-pilot stocks to pilot stocks is roughly

2:1.8 The sample period for our main empirical analysis is from January 1980 to June 2007,

after which the pilot program of Regulation SHO ended.9
    7
     https://www.sec.gov/rules/other/34-50104.htm
    8
     In untabulated analysis, we examine the robustness of our results when we set the number of pilot and
non-pilot firms to be equal, by randomly removing half of the non-pilot firms with simulation. We show that
our main results are robust in this aspect.
   9
     The pilot program officially ended on August 6, 2007. However, on July 6, 2007, all exchange-listed
stocks were exempted from short-sale price tests, which effectively ended the pilot program.




                                                    10
   Our sample of pilot and non-pilot stocks is selected at the end of June 2004. For most of

the pre-pilot period in our difference-in-differences analysis, the sample is selected (in terms

of selecting pilot versus non-pilot stocks) using information not available yet. This, however,

is not an issue for our analysis. The reason is in the pre-pilot period, the information of

a stock being pilot or not is only used to classify it into different groups of comparison.

Furthermore, Table 4 shows that our main results can also be identified using the pilot

period per se, when the information of a stock being pilot or not is available.


3.2    Anomalies

   We focus on the 11 anomalies studied by Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012), which they

select based on survival after adjustment for the Fama-French three factors.

   Below we briefly describe each anomaly, relegating details of variable construction to the

Appendix. For each anomaly, there is a corresponding long-short trading strategy that goes

long in the stocks that earn high returns (the long leg) and goes short in those that earn low

returns (the short leg). The relationship between the subsequent stock performance and the

ranking variable is positive for some anomalies and negative for others. For example, stocks

with high past returns outperform those with low past returns for the momentum anomaly,

while stocks with low asset growth rate outperform those with high asset growth rate for the

anomaly of asset growth. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of stocks in the long and

short legs for each anomaly.


Anomaly 1: Momentum. The momentum effect in stock returns was first documented by

Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), and is one of the most prominent anomalies in asset pricing.

It refers to the phenomenon that stocks with higher past recent returns continue to outper-

form stocks with lower past recent returns. We employ the conventional 11-1-1 momentum

strategy to construct our momentum portfolios. The ranking period is 11-month from t − 12




                                              11
to t − 2. The holding period is month t. Month t − 1 is skipped to eliminate the short-run

reversal effect.


Anomaly 2: Gross profitability. As documented by Novy-Marx (2013), stocks with high

gross profitability on average earn higher returns than stocks with low gross profitability.

He further shows that the profitability premium becomes more pronounced after controlling

for the value premium. Following Novy-Marx (2013), we measure gross profitability as total

revenue minus cost of goods sold, scaled by total assets.


Anomaly 3: Asset growth. Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008) find that stocks with a high

growth rate in their total assets earn low subsequent returns. A possible explanation for this

phenomenon is that investors tend to overreact to growth rates in total assets. We measure

asset growth as the change in total assets, scaled by lagged total assets.


Anomaly 4: Investment to assets. Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004) find that firms increasing

capital investments earn negative benchmark-adjusted returns subsequently. They propose

that this phenomenon is consistent with the hypothesis that investors underreact to the

empire building implications of increased investment expenditures. We measure investment

to assets as the annual change in gross property, plant, and equipment plus the annual change

in inventories, scaled by lagged total assets.


Anomaly 5: Return on assets. Fama and French (2006) document that in Fama-MacBeth

cross-sectional regressions, earnings can predict stock returns. Chen, Novy-Marx, and Zhang

(2011) and Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012) find that return on assets, measured on a

quarterly basis, can predict subsequent stock returns. A higher past return on assets leads

to higher subsequent stock returns. We measure return on assets as quarterly earnings scaled

by quarterly total assets.


Anomaly 6: Net operating assets. Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang (2004) find that firms


                                                 12
with higher net operating assets earn lower subsequent returns. They attribute this phe-

nomenon to investor limited attention. Net operating assets capture cumulative differences

between operating income and free cash flow. Investors with limited attention may not pro-

cess all information thoroughly and therefore may focus on accounting profitability without

sufficiently taking into account cash profitability information, leading to overvaluation of

firms with higher net operating assets. We measure net operating assets as the difference be-

tween all operating assets and all operating liabilities on the balance sheet, scaled by lagged

total assets.


Anomaly 7: Accruals. As documented by Sloan (1996), firms with higher accruals on average

earn lower subsequent returns. This suggests that stock prices fail to fully reflect information

contained in the accruals and cash flow components of current earnings, which is consistent

with investors having limited attention. We measure operating accruals as changes in non-

cash working capital minus depreciation expense, scaled by lagged total assets.


Anomaly 8: Net stock issues. As documented by Loughran and Ritter (1995) and Pontiff

and Woodgate (2008), net share issues negatively predict stock returns in the cross section.

One explanation for this phenomenon in the literature is that firms issue stocks when they

are overvalued and retire stocks when they are undervalued. We measure net stock issues

on the annual basis as the change in the natural logarithm of a firm’s adjusted shares over

the last year.


Anomaly 9: Composite equity issues. Daniel and Titman (2006) find that an alternative

measure of equity issuance, the composite equity issuance, is also a negative predictor of stock

returns in the cross section. They propose that this measure is related to the “intangible”

component of past returns. Measured as the part of growth rate in market equity not

attributable to stock returns, composite equity issuance captures the amount of equity a

firm issues (or retires) in exchange for cash or services. As a result, this measure increases


                                              13
with seasoned equity issuance, employee stock option plans, and share-based acquisitions,

and decreases with share repurchases, dividends, and other actions that take cash out of the

firm.


Anomaly 10: Failure probability. We use the failure probability proposed by Campbell,

Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008) to measure financial distress, which is estimated from a dynamic

logit model to match empirically observed default events, with both market and accounting

information taken into account. Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008) show that with this

measure, more distressed firms earn lower subsequent returns on average than less distressed

firms, especially after 1981.


Anomaly 11: O-score. We also use an alternative measure of financial distress, the O-score

proposed by Ohlson (1980). Dichev (1998) shows that with this measure, more distressed

firms earn lower subsequent returns on average than less distressed firms.


3.3     Summary of Anomaly Returns in Our Sample

   Before proceeding to the main empirical analysis, we first verify the existence of the 11

anomalies in our sample of pilot and non-pilot firms. For each anomaly, we sort stocks in

our sample into deciles based on the corresponding ranking variables and calculate the gross-

return-weighted anomaly returns as the return differences between the highest performing

decile (the long leg) and the lowest performing decile (the short leg). In other words, the

portfolio break points we use are the decile break points in our pilot and non-pilot samples

(that contain only NYSE/AMEX stocks), respectively.

   Equal-weighted portfolio returns can lead to various statistical and microstructure biases

(Asparouhova, Bessembinder, and Kalcheva (2013)). On the other hand, it is useful for

testing purposes to make use of the information in small firm returns, because small firms

are especially informative in understanding the effects of limits to arbitrage. As discussed



                                             14
in Diether, Lee, and Werner (2009), the suspension of short-sale price tests is likely to affect

smaller stocks more. So a test that makes use of small firm returns maximizes our power to

test the relevant hypothesis, whether limits to short arbitrage (in the form of short-sale price

tests) affect anomalies. Our main tests therefore use gross-return-weighted portfolio returns

unless otherwise noted. The gross-return weight for stock i at each month t, is its gross

return Ri,t−1 in the preceding month t − 1. As discussed in Asparouhova, Bessembinder, and

Kalcheva (2010, 2013), gross-return-weighting places similar weight in drawing inferences on

the information provided by each stock in the sample while mitigating the statistical and

microstructure biases associated with equal-weighted portfolio returns.

   To evaluate how different the effects of the uptick rule are on small versus large stocks, we

also report the main difference-in-differences results using value-weighted portfolio returns

in Table A.1 of the Appendix, and find a small effect. Comparing with the results using

gross-return-weighted portfolio returns in Table 4 indicates that the uptick rule is indeed

more important for small stocks.

   We use data from CRSP to construct portfolios of Anomalies 1 and 9, use Compustat

annual data to construct portfolios for Anomalies 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, and 8, use Compustat quarterly

data to construct portfolios for Anomaly 5, and use CRSP and Compustat quarterly data

to construct portfolios for Anomalies 10 and 11. For anomalies that use annual Compustat

data, we follow Fama and French (1992) to match the accounting data for all fiscal years

ending in calendar year t − 1 with the stock returns from July of year t to June of t + 1. For

anomalies that use quarterly Compustat data, we use accounting information lagged by one

quarter to match with stock returns.

   We examine the average of raw anomaly returns and benchmark-adjusted anomaly re-

turns controlling for the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) and the Fama-French three

factor model over the sample period of January 1980 to December 2004. We end the sample

period in December 2004 to avoid overlap with the pilot program. The average of benchmark-

adjusted returns is the alpha from regressing the time series of excess returns onto the time

                                              15
series of the appropriate factors (the market excess return for the CAPM, and two addi-

tional factors, the SMB and HML factors, for the Fama-French three-factor model). Table

2 reports these average returns.

    Table 2 shows that the long-short portfolio returns for all 11 anomalies survive risk-

adjustment with the Fama-French three-factor model. The average Fama-French-three-

factor-adjusted anomaly returns are presented in the last column of Table 2 and they are

positive and statistically significant for all 11 anomalies. These results are consistent with

the evidence in Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012). We therefore confirm that these anomalies

exist on our more restricted sample of stocks.



4     Empirical Analysis

    As stated in the introduction, our two main hypotheses are:

Hypothesis 1. The relaxation of short sale constraints caused by the pilot program of Reg-

ulation SHO reduces anomaly returns for pilot stocks relative to non-pilot stocks during the

pilot period.

Hypothesis 2. This decrease in anomaly returns comes primarily from the short leg anomaly

portfolios. Short legs of pilot stocks outperform those of non-pilot stocks during the pilot

period.

    We also test two additional hypotheses:

Hypothesis 3. The difference in anomaly returns between pilot and non-pilot stocks disap-

pears after the ending of the pilot program.

Hypothesis 4. At the beginning of the pilot program, short legs of pilot stocks underperform

those of non-pilot stocks. At the end of pilot program, short legs of pilot stocks outperform

those of non-pilot stocks.


                                               16
4.1       Verifying the Quasi-Randomness of Pilot Stock Assignment

       As discussed in Section 2, the pilot firms were assigned in a quasi-random experiment

(every third firm in a sorting of firms by trading volume on NYSE and, separately, on

AMEX).

       In our context, we further confirm that the pilot firms were in fact quasi-randomly as-

signed, with respect to firm characteristics associated with the 11 anomalies. To do so, we

compare these firm characteristics between pilot and non-pilot firms at the end of year 2003,

before the announcement of the pilot program (July 2004). We calculate the mean of these

anomaly variables for pilot and non-pilot firms at the end of year 2003, and calculate their

differences and the robust t-statistics of the differences. All variables are winsorized at the

1st and 99th percentiles of all firm-month observations to limit the effect of outliers. The

results are reported in Panel A of Table 3. Except for the measure of gross profitability, for

which the difference is only significant at the 10% level, other anomaly predictors show no

statistically significant differences between pilot and non-pilot firms. Furthermore, the differ-

ence in gross profitability between pilot and non-pilot firms is small in magnitude compared

with the two sample means.10 As our empirical analysis focuses on the long legs and short

legs of anomalies, in Panels B and C of Table 3, we also compare the mean of these anomaly

variables for pilot and non-pilot stocks that fall in these two legs. The differences are again

mostly small and statistically insignificant. Collectively, these results suggest that there was

no significant difference between pilot and non-pilot firms prior to the announcement of the

pilot program.


4.2       Main Difference-in-Differences Results

       We now test the two main hypotheses, Hypotheses 1 and 2. We explore whether the

pilot program led to differences in anomaly returns for the pilot stock sample relative to
  10
    In untabulated results, we confirm that the difference in size and book-to-market ratio between pilot
and non-pilot firms is also small and statistically insignificant.


                                                   17
the non-pilot stock sample, during the pilot period. We first construct anomaly portfolios

based on pilot and non-pilot firms separately. Specifically, we sort all pilot stocks into deciles

according to the predictors of the anomalies, and then calculate the returns of the highest

performing decile (the long leg returns), the returns of the lowest performing decile (the

short leg returns), and the differences between the two (the long-short returns). We then

do the same on all non-pilot firms. We then examine whether returns of pilot portfolios are

different from returns of non-pilot portfolios during the pilot period (relative to the pre-pilot

period), using a difference-in-differences approach. Throughout the paper, we use the terms

difference-in-differences and DiD interchangeably.

       The main difference-in-differences test employs the following specification:


                            rit = γt + βP iloti × Duringt + β1 P iloti + it ,                                (1)


where rit is the gross-return-weighted monthly return of portfolio i, which can be the long

leg, the short leg, or the long-short portfolio of an anomaly, in month t; γt is the time fixed

effects; P iloti is a dummy variable which is equal to one if portfolio i is formed on pilot firms,

and zero otherwise; Duringt is a dummy variable, which equals one if month t is between

July 2005 and June 2007, i.e. during the pilot period of Regulation SHO. Since Duringt

is subsumed by the time fixed effects, it is dropped from the regression. The time fixed

effects γt capture the common factors and/or common macroeconomic variables that drive

the portfolio returns for both pilot and non-pilot portfolios. In all analysis involving equation

(1), we drop the two months (May and June 2005) at the beginning of the pilot program, to

avoid capturing price movement over this short time window. In these regressions, the unit

of analysis is a portfolio month observation. We estimate equation (1) for the long leg, the

short leg, and the long-short portfolios separately.11 The difference-in-differences coefficient
  11
     We also explore an alternative empirical design to capture the effect of the pilot program on anomalies.
Specifically, for each portfolio (the long/short leg or the long-short portfolio) of an anomaly, we take the
return difference between the pilot portfolio and the non-pilot portfolio and denote the time series of this
                d
difference as rit . By doing so, we isolate the cross-sectional difference between pilot and non-pilot portfolios.


                                                       18
β in equation (1) is the main coefficient of interest. It captures the difference in anomaly

portfolio returns between pilot stocks and non-pilot stocks during the pilot period, relative

to that in the pre-pilot period. We run the regression in equation (1) for each individual

anomaly and also for all 11 anomalies combined. In the aggregate analysis, we replace the

time fixed effects by the anomaly-time fixed effects, i.e. the fixed effects associated with

each pair of anomaly and time. The aggregate analysis enhances the power of our test and

produces the average effect of the pilot program across all 11 anomalies. The results are

reported in Table 4.

    Hypothesis 1 predicts that β is negative for anomaly long-short returns. Hypothesis 2

predicts that β is positive for short-leg returns, and will be close to zero for long-leg returns.

The results support these two hypotheses. For the long-short returns (the last two columns

of Panel A of Table 4), β’s are consistently negative for all 11 anomalies and are statistically

significant for five of them. When the 11 anomalies are combined, i.e. in the aggregate

analysis where equation (1) is estimated for all 11 anomalies together with the time fixed

effects replaced by the anomaly-time fixed effects, β is −0.72% with a t-statistic of −4.37.

In other words, the pilot program reduced the monthly anomaly returns by 72 basis points

per month, or 8.64 percentage points per year, on average. These results are consistent with

Hypothesis 1.

    In addition to the difference-in-differences coefficient β, we report the mean anomaly

returns for non-pilot and pilot stocks, in the pre-pilot and during-pilot periods. They are

presented in the first eight columns of Table 4, together with the differences in anomaly

returns between pilot and non-pilot stocks in the pre-pilot and during-pilot periods. The

results in Panel A of Table 4 show that the difference between pilot and non-pilot anomaly
We expect that this difference will only predict returns when Duringt = 1. Therefore, we run the regression
 d
rit = α + βDuringt + it , where the coefficient β captures the difference in portfolio returns between pilot
and non-pilot stocks during the pilot period (relative to that in the pre-pilot period). It can be shown
that this specification and the specification in equation (1) are mathematically equivalent, and we confirm
in untabulated results that they produce identical estimates of β’s. In the rest of the paper, we focus our
discussion on results from the specification in equation (1).



                                                     19
returns does not exist in the pre-pilot period: it is small and insignificant for all 11 anomalies.

Instead, the effect of the pilot program on anomaly returns comes mainly from the during-

pilot period. The average difference in anomaly returns between pilot and non-pilot stocks

in the during-pilot period is −0.65% with a t-statistic of −4.36. This evidence again suggests

that our results are driven by the pilot program.

   The results in Panels B and C indicate that the decreases in anomaly returns come almost

entirely from the short legs. For short leg portfolios (Panel C), β’s are consistently positive

for all 11 anomalies and are statistically significant for five of them. When the 11 anomalies

are combined, β is 0.63% with a t-statistic of 5.31. Again, the first eight columns of Panel

C show that the effect comes mainly from the during-pilot period. In contrast, for long leg

portfolios (Panel B), β’s are close to zero and statistically insignificant for most anomalies.

When the 11 anomalies are combined, β is still close to zero and statistically insignificant.

These results support Hypothesis 2.

   In the Appendix, we show that using benchmark-adjusted (CAPM- and FF-three-factor-

model-adjusted) returns as the dependent variable in equation (1) delivers almost identical

results as those in Table 4. This is expected, because the loadings on the benchmark factors

of pilot versus non-pilot firms should also be similar, as the selection of pilot firms is quasi-

random.

   Our main tests for Hypotheses 1 and 2 based on equation (1) use a relatively short

(two years) pilot period to estimate the effect of relaxing short-sale constraints on anomaly

returns. This immediately raises the question of whether the sample size generates enough

power to distinguish hypotheses. In the results presented in Table 4, we do indeed obtain

statistically significant effects on some individual anomalies, especially on the short legs,

as well as strong significance for the results that aggregate across the 11 anomalies. This

is reassuring, and we discuss why our testing approach has sufficient power to distinguish

hypotheses in the Appendix.



                                                20
4.3    Post-Pilot-Program Results

   After the ending of the pilot program, the difference in short-sale restrictions between

pilot and non-pilot stocks disappeared. If our main results in Table 4 are indeed driven by

the pilot program, we should expect that the difference in anomaly returns between pilot

and non-pilot firms also vanish after the ending of the pilot program. This is formally stated

in Hypothesis 3. To test this, we estimate a revised difference-in-differences specification as

follows:

              rit = γt + βP iloti × Duringt + β1 P iloti + β2 P iloti × P ostt + it ,         (2)

where P ostt is a dummy variable that represents the post-pilot period and equals 1 if month

t is after August 2007 and zero otherwise, and other notations are defined exactly the same

as in equation (1). The difference-in-differences coefficient β2 in equation (2) is the coefficient

of interest in this subsection and we expect it to be close to zero.

   We run the regression in equation (2) for the whole sample period of January 1980 to

December 2016. For this analysis, in addition to dropping the two months at the beginning

of the pilot program (May and June 2005) as in the main analysis, we also drop the two

months at the end of the pilot program (July and August 2007) to avoid capturing price

movement over this short time window. The coefficients β (representing the effect of the

pilot program during the pilot period) are identical to those reported in Table 4 (which can

be shown mathematically) and therefore are not shown. Table 5 reports the coefficients

β2 for the 11 anomalies individually and in aggregate. All coefficients β2 are statistically

insignificant and close to zero when the 11 anomalies are combined. This confirms that as

the difference in short-sale restrictions between pilot and non-pilot firms disappeared, the

difference in anomaly returns between them also vanished, which is consistent with our main

conclusion.

   We now test between two possible scenarios for what may have happened after the ending

of the pilot program. First, as we hypothesize, the non-pilot stocks became like the pilot


                                                21
stocks because they also experienced relaxation of short-sale constraints, which is also our

main proposed mechanism. Second, the pilot stocks reverted back and became once again

like non-pilot stocks, if they were subject to some unknown temporary influence other than

the relaxation of short-sale constraints. We can have an insignificant β2 in both cases. We

now perform further tests to distinguish between these two possible scenarios.

   To this end, we examine and compare the strength of anomaly returns in the during-pilot

and post-pilot periods, for pilot versus non-pilot stocks. The average anomaly raw return

across 11 anomalies in the during-pilot period is 0.51% (t = 2.82) for non-pilot stocks (see

also Table A.3) and −0.14% (t = −0.85) for pilot stocks.

   In Scenario 1 (our paper’s main proposed mechanism), we should see anomaly returns

also become weaker for non-pilot stocks right after the ending of the pilot program. In

Scenario 2, we should see anomaly returns become stronger for pilot stocks right after the

ending of the pilot program.

   We find that in September 2007 to August 2009, which covers a time period of equal

length to the pilot period right after the pilot program, the average anomaly raw return

across 11 anomalies during the pilot period is −0.10% (t = −0.12) for non-pilot stocks and

0.04% (t = 0.04) for pilot stocks. This evidence is consistent with Scenario 1, not Scenario 2.

This further supports our paper’s main proposed mechanism and shows that easier arbitrage

also reduced anomaly returns for non-pilot stocks right after the ending of the pilot program.


4.4    Return Dynamics of Short Legs

   Our main results show that short-leg portfolios of pilot stocks outperformed those of

non-pilot stocks during the pilot period. As stated in Hypothesis 4, there are additional

implications of our mechanism regarding the price movement of short legs at the beginning

and the end of the pilot program. Specifically, if the relaxation of short-sale constraints is

indeed the underlying driving force of our main results, we should see a large price decrease



                                              22
(negative returns) at the beginning of the pilot program for pilot short legs (relative to non-

pilot short legs), right after the uptick rule was lifted for pilot stocks. Similarly, at the end of

the pilot program, when the uptick rule was lifted for non-pilot stocks as well, the relaxation

of short-sale constraints would reduce overpricing for non-pilot short legs relative to pilot

short legs. We therefore expect to see a price increase in the short legs of pilot stocks relative

to those of non-pilot stocks.

   We next test Hypothesis 4. We also provide a more complete view of return dynamics of

pilot short-leg portfolios (relative to non-pilot short-leg portfolios), over time windows that

cover the pre-pilot, during-pilot, and post-pilot periods.

   Specifically, we construct a set of consecutive rolling time windows that begins in May

1999 to cover the three periods. Most of the time windows are two years long, in line with

the length of the during-pilot period. At the beginning and the end of the pilot program,

we use a short window of two months, to capture potential large price movements around

these two dates. The exact timing of these windows is: May 1999 to April 2001, May 2001

to April 2003, May 2003 to April 2005, May 2005 to June 2005, July 2005 to June 2007, July

2007 to August 2007, September 2007 to August 2009, September 2009 to August 2011, and

September 2011 to December 2013. The first three windows cover the pre-pilot period. The

fourth (two-month) window covers the beginning of the pilot program. The fifth window

covers the during-pilot period and corresponds to the dummy variable During in equation

(1). The sixth (two-month) window covers the end of the pilot program. The last three

windows cover the post-pilot period. The last rolling window is longer than two years to

cover the full sample period ending in December 2013, and our results are similar if we

instead use a two-year period, September 2011 to August 2013, for the last window.




                                                23
       We define a dummy variable for each of these rolling windows, W indowj , j = 1, 2, ..., 9,

and then estimate the following difference-in-differences specification:

                                    9
                                    X
                       rit = γt +         βwj P iloti × W indowjt + β1 P iloti + it ,               (3)
                                    j=1



where rit is the monthly return of short-leg portfolio i in month t; γt is the time fixed effects;

P iloti is a dummy variable that equals one if portfolio i is formed on pilot firms, and zero

otherwise; W indowjt is a dummy variable that equals one if month t is in W indowj . We

carry out this analysis for all 11 anomalies in aggregate, to provide an overall view of the

return dynamics on the short-leg portfolios and also to enhance the power of the test.12 The

sample period for this analysis is January 1980 to December 2013.

       We obtain nine DiD coefficients βwj , one for each window. Figure 1 plots these coefficients

over time, together with their 90% confidence intervals.

       In the pre-pilot period, the three DiD coefficients are close to zero and statistically in-

significant, which indicates that there was no notable difference between pilot and non-pilot

short-leg returns before the pilot program. In the during-pilot period, the DiD coefficient

is positive and significant, which is consistent with our main DiD results in Table 4. In

unreported results, we define a dummy variable for the transition period between the an-

nouncement and introduction of the pilot program (i.e. August 2004 to April 2005) and

find that the DiD coefficient for this transition period is also close to zero and statistically

insignificant. This suggests that the actual lifting of the uptick rule introduced by the pilot

program was needed to reduce overpricing of short legs.

       In the post-pilot period, the three DiD coefficients are close to zero and statistically

insignificant. This suggests that the difference between pilot and non-pilot short-leg returns

vanished in the post-pilot period, as all stocks were exempted from the uptick rule, which is
  12
    This aggregation is especially needed for the short two-month windows at the beginning and the end of
the pilot program, i.e. for testing Hypothesis 4.




                                                      24
consistent with the results in Table 5.

       As for Hypothesis 4, at the beginning of the pilot program, we find that the DiD coefficient

is large and negative. It is −1.30% (t = −4.27) per month over the two-month window of

May to June 2005. This suggests that there was a large initial price decrease on pilot short

legs once the uptick rule was lifted, which is consistent with Hypothesis 4 and provides direct

evidence that overpricing is reduced once short-sale constraints are relaxed.

       At the end of the pilot program, the uptick rule was lifted for non-pilot stocks as well.

This relaxation of short-sale constraints should reduce overpricing for non-pilot short legs

relative to pilot short legs. Hypothesis 4 predicts a price increase in the short legs of pilot

stocks relative to those of non-pilot stocks, i.e. a positive DiD coefficient. Consistent with

this, the DiD coefficient, 1.22% (t = 1.99), is positive and statistically significant and large

in magnitude, over the two-month window of July to August 2007.

       Overall, the results presented in Figure 1 support the conclusion that the relaxation of

short-sale constraints reduced the mispricing associated with the asset pricing anomalies.


4.5       Shorting Activity

       We hypothesize that the introduction of the pilot program will result in an increase in

shorting for pilot short-leg portfolios relative to non-pilot short-leg portfolios, and that this

increase will be sustained throughout the pilot period. At the end of the pilot program,

the difference in shorting activity between pilot and non-pilot short-leg portfolios should

decrease, as the uptick rule was also lifted for non-pilot stocks.13
  13
    Rational arbitrageurs might potentially short preemptively, resulting in a relative increase in shorting
on pilot short legs after the announcement but before the introduction of the pilot program. For two
reasons, this effect may not be strong enough to leave clear tracks in the data. First, the expected benefit of
preemptive shorting is not realized until the pilot program starts; during the interim, it is costly/risky to hold
a short position from pilot program announcement to the start of the pilot program without commensurate
incremental compensation. Second, since anomaly characteristics tend to revert to the mean over time,
the shorting opportunity presented by an anomaly characteristic before the pilot period will on average be
weaker by the time the pilot program starts, which reduces the expected amount of post-initiation shorting.




                                                       25
    We focus our analysis on the window of January 2005 to October 2007. Over this window,

we compare the difference in the amount of short selling between pilot and non-pilot short-

leg portfolios using weekly Markit Securities Finance data. For each stock and during each

week, we measure the amount of shorting selling as the ratio between the number of shares on

loan and the number of shares outstanding. We calculate the portfolio-level amount of short

selling as the average amount of short selling across all stocks in the short-leg portfolios. We

take the difference in the amount of short selling between pilot and non-pilot short legs, and

average this difference across the 11 anomalies. We normalize the difference to be zero at

the beginning of the window.

    Figure 2 plots the difference (together with its 90% confidence interval) and confirms the

hypotheses above. There is no apparent increase in shorting on pilot short legs (relative to

non-pilot short legs) until the beginning of the pilot program. The increase is then sustained

throughout the pilot period. There is a decrease in the difference around the end of the pilot

program, when the uptick rule was also lifted for non-pilot stocks. In unreported analysis, we

find that the results using short interest from Compustat as a measure of shorting activity

are qualitatively similar.

    Overall, this set of results suggests that pilot short-leg portfolios indeed experience more

short selling once short-sale constraints are relaxed, and is consistent with our argument that

the relaxation of short-sale constraints reduces mispricing associated with the asset pricing

anomalies.



5     Robustness Checks and Subsample Analyses

    In this section, we present a battery of robustness checks and subsample analyses corre-

sponding to the main results in Table 4.




                                               26
5.1       Different Sample Periods

       We conduct robustness checks with respect to the sample period for our main results.

By doing so, we address the possible concern that the during-pilot period is shorter than the

pre-pilot period and examine whether our choice of the sample period is critical. Specifically,

we explore two shorter sample periods: January 1990 to June 2007 and January 2000 to June

2007, and estimate equation (1) over these two sample periods. The results are presented

in Panels A and B of Table 6. The β estimates are qualitatively similar to those in Table

4. In aggregate, the β estimates are both statistically and economically significant for the

short leg and the long-short portfolios with the two different sample periods. With all 11

anomalies combined, the coefficient β for the long-short portfolio is −0.53% with a t-statistic

of −3.06 from 1990 to 2007 and −0.72% with a t-statistic of −3.46 from 2000 to 2007. The

coefficient β for the short leg is 0.50% with a t-statistic of 3.98 from 1990 to 2007 and 0.74%

with a t-statistic of 4.98 from 2000 to 2007.


5.2       Placebo Tests

       In general, a potential problem with the difference-in-differences method is that the

results can be driven by unobservable shocks that affect pilot and non-pilot firms differently,

which may then undermine the causal inference of the main difference-in-differences results.

The volume-ranking design used to choose pilot firms (in which every third firm in a sorting

of firms by trading volume on NYSE and, separately, on AMEX was chosen as a pilot firm)

makes the assignment of pilot and non-pilot firms quasi-random and unlikely to be highly

correlated with unobserved shocks. Nonetheless, as a precaution, we still conduct a set of

falsification tests.

       As a first placebo test, we create a pseudo-event in year 2000 and perform a test as if

the pseudo-event relaxed short-sale constraints for pilot firms.14 To mimic the actual pilot
  14
    We choose year 2000 for a pseudo-event as it is prior to the real event and the pseudo pilot program
created accordingly does not overlap with the real pilot program. In untabulated results, we find similar


                                                   27
program closely, we assume that this pseudo pilot program was effective from May 2001 to

July 2003. We then run the difference-in-differences regression as follows:


                      rit = γt + βP iloti × P seudoDuringt + β1 P iloti + it ,               (4)


where P seudoDuringt is a dummy variable that equals one if month t is between July 2001

and June 2003, i.e., when the pseudo-event was effective, and other notations are defined

exactly the same as in equation (1). Following closely the main analysis in Table 4, the sample

period is from January 1980 to June 2003 and we drop the two months at the beginning of

the pseudo pilot program (May and June 2001) from the sample.

    The results of the placebo test are presented in Table 7. The coefficients on P iloti ×

P seudoDuringt are mostly statistically insignificant and have mixed signs. When all 11

anomalies are combined, the coefficients are much smaller in magnitude than those in Table

4 for the short leg and the long-short portfolio and are statistically insignificant. The placebo

test results therefore suggest that our main results are unlikely to be driven by unobserved

shocks that affect pilot and non-pilot firms differently.

    We further carry out a set of more systematic falsification tests, in which we recreate

the stratified trading volume design the SEC used in the pilot program for rolling synthetic

samples and examine how likely our main results can arise in a random two-year period.

    Specifically, at the end of June of each year τ (from 1991 to 2000), we create the stratified

sample following closely the trading volume design the SEC used for the pilot program. We

select the largest (in terms of market capitalization at the end of June of year τ ) 3,000 stocks.

We then rank stocks on each of NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq based on their average daily

trading volume during the prior year (June of year τ − 1 through May of year τ ) and select

every third stock (beginning with the second one) as a pilot stock and the remainder as

non-pilot stocks. We then re-do our main DiD analysis for these rolling stratified samples,
results when we create a pseudo-event in e.g. year 1998 or year 1999.



                                                    28
and we keep only NYSE and AMEX stocks to be consistent with the main analysis. For

each sample created at the end of June of year τ , we define a pseudo pilot program that was

effective from May of year τ + 1 to July of year τ + 3. We then run the following regression:


                    rit = γt + βP iloti × P seudoDuringτ,t + β1 P iloti + it ,                (5)


where P seudoDuringτ,t is a dummy variable that equals one if month t is between July of

year τ + 1 and June of year τ + 3, and other notations are defined exactly the same as in

equations (1) and (4). The sample period is from January 1980 to June of year τ + 3. We

drop the two months at the beginning of the pseudo pilot program (May and June of year

τ + 1) from the sample.

   None of these falsification tests generates results that are similar to our main results in

Table 4. The most positive β for the short-leg portfolios (all 11 anomalies in aggregate) is

0.18% (t = 0.54), which is much weaker than our main result, 0.63% (t = 5.31). The most

negative β for the long-short portfolios (all 11 anomalies in aggregate) is −0.10% (t = −0.38),

which is much weaker than our main result, −0.72% (t = −4.37). This evidence further

suggests that our main results are unlikely to arise by chance.


5.3    Results from Nasdaq Stocks

   Our main empirical analysis is carried out on the sample of pilot and non-pilot stocks

traded on NYSE/AMEX. In this subsection, we conduct a falsification test using the sample

of pilot and non-pilot stocks traded on Nasdaq. As stated in the introduction and Section 2,

the pilot program also removed the bid price test for pilot stocks traded on Nasdaq. However,

the bid price test for Nasdaq stocks is not very restrictive, and a significant fraction of trading

volume in Nasdaq-listed stocks is executed on ArcaEx and INET, which do not enforce the

bid price test (see e.g. Diether, Lee, and Werner (2009)). We therefore expect at most a

minimal effect of the pilot program on anomaly returns of Nasdaq-listed stocks.

                                                29
   This falsification test helps rule out a potential alternative explanation for our main re-

sults. Specifically, one may argue that the pilot program made pilot stocks more salient to

investors, and the increase in investor attention to pilot stocks weakened anomalies, driv-

ing our main results. Since both Nasdaq pilot stocks and NYSE/AMEX pilot stocks were

included in the pilot program, under this explanation, the same shift in investor attention

would also occur for Nasdaq pilot stocks during the same pilot period. It follows that if this

salience mechanism were driving our main results, we should observe an apparent effect of

the pilot program on anomaly returns of Nasdaq stocks similar to that on anomaly returns

of NYSE/AMEX stocks. On the other hand, if the relaxation of short-sale constraints drives

our main results, we would expect to see a minimal effect on anomaly returns of Nasdaq

stocks.

   We repeat our main DiD analysis (equation (1)) on the sample of pilot and non-pilot

stocks traded on Nasdaq National Market. The results are reported in Table 8. The DiD

coefficient β is mostly statistically insignificant and has mixed signs across the 11 anomalies,

for the long-leg, short-leg, and long-short returns. In aggregate, the coefficient is also small

and insignificant for the long-leg, short-leg, and long-short returns. Overall, these results

suggest that the pilot program had little effect on anomaly returns for Nasdaq stocks and

confirm that our main results derive from the relaxation of short-sale constraints generated

by the pilot program.


5.4       The Effect of Short-Sale Constraints on Mispricing of Differ-

          ent Kinds of Stocks

   We next explore whether our main results documented in Table 4 are different among

different classes of stocks. Diether, Lee, and Werner (2009) argue that small and less liquid

stocks are likely to be more affected by the suspension of the uptick rule, i.e., the uptick rule

impeded short selling more for small and less liquid stocks. The reason is that these stocks


                                               30
have wider spreads and therefore short sellers have to become liquidity providers to ensure

compliance with the uptick rule, which makes short-sale orders more passive in the presence

of the uptick rule. In addition, for small stocks, a penny tick may be a more significant

impediment to shorting them. Consistent with this argument, Diether, Lee, and Werner

(2009) find that the suspension of the uptick rule has a greater effect on spreads and some

intraday volatility measures for small and less liquid stocks. In our context, we test whether

the effect of the pilot program on asset pricing anomalies is more pronounced for small and

less liquid stocks. Furthermore, we directly construct a stock-level measure that captures

the restrictiveness of the uptick rule using TAQ data and test whether the effect of the pilot

program on asset pricing anomalies is more pronounced for stocks that are more restricted

by the uptick rule.

     We first explore the difference in the effects of the pilot program on small versus large

stocks. We split our main sample into two subsamples of small and large stocks based

on their market capitalization at the end of April 2005, before the beginning of the pilot

program. Large stocks are those with market capitalization above the median and small

stocks are those with market capitalization below the median. We then form anomaly decile

portfolios using pilot/non-pilot stocks in these subsamples, and repeat the main difference-

in-differences analysis (equation (1)) for each subsample. The results are presented in Table

9.

     Comparing Panels A and B of Table 9, the effect of the pilot program on asset pricing

anomalies is indeed more pronounced among small stocks. When we aggregate over all 11

anomalies, the pilot program reduced the long-short portfolio return by 95 basis points for

small stocks compared with 47 basis points for large stocks. The DiD estimate on the short

legs is 88 basis points for small stocks compared with 37 basis points for large stocks. The

results from subsample analysis split by liquidity are similar to those in Table 9 and are

therefore omitted for brevity.

     Next, we conduct subsample analysis split by the uptick-rule restrictiveness. We measure

                                              31
the uptick-rule restrictiveness in April 2005 (right before the beginning of the pilot program)

using TAQ data as follows.

   For each stock on each trading day of April 2005 and at a given time of day, we calculate

the minimum shortable price that complies with the uptick rule. We then compare the

minimum shortable price with the current bid. If the minimum shortable price is lower than

or equal to the bid, then a short seller can potentially execute a short sale transaction at

this price successfully. For each stock on each day of April 2005, we calculate the frequency

of these potential short sale transactions under the restriction of the uptick rule. Taking

the average of this frequency over all trading days in April 2005, we obtain the stock-

level measure of uptick-rule restrictiveness. A stock for which short sales can be carried

out more frequently has a lower degree of uptick-rule restrictiveness. We then split our

main sample into two subsamples based on their uptick-rule restrictiveness in April 2005.

More restricted stocks have above-median restrictiveness and less restricted stocks have

below-median restrictiveness. For more restricted stocks, the average waiting time for a

short seller before she can short is 1.62 days, which seems a meaningful restriction. The

average magnitude of price change (return) during this waiting time is 1.90%. We form

anomaly decile portfolios using pilot/non-pilot stocks in these subsamples, and repeat the

main difference-in-differences analysis (equation (1)) for each subsample. The results are

presented in Table 10.

   Comparing Panels A and B of Table 10, the effect of the pilot program on asset pricing

anomalies is indeed more pronounced among stocks that are more restricted by the uptick

rule. It is also useful to note that the difference between the two subsamples is slightly larger

than the difference between small and large stocks in Table 9. When we aggregate over all

11 anomalies, the pilot program reduced the long-short portfolio return by 109 basis points

for more restricted stocks compared with 33 basis points for less restricted stocks. The DiD

estimate on the short legs is 96 basis points for more restricted stocks compared with 30 basis

points for less restricted stocks. The results from this subsample analysis further suggest

                                               32
that the lift of the uptick rule is the underlying driving force of our main results.



6     Conclusion

    Using the pilot program of Regulation SHO, which relaxed short-sale constraints for

a quasi-random set of stocks, we examine the causal effect of limits to arbitrage, and in

particular short sale constraints, on 11 well-known asset pricing anomalies. We find that

the long-short strategies for the 11 anomalies produced much smaller abnormal returns on

portfolios constructed with pilot stocks during the pilot period. This suggests that these

anomalies reflect mispricing, and that making arbitrage easier reduces such mispricing. The

effect of the pilot program is only significant for the short legs of the anomaly long-short

portfolios, which is consistent with the prediction that easy short arbitrage weakens the short

side of the anomalies.

    Furthermore, we show that the difference in anomaly returns between pilot and non-pilot

stocks vanished after the pilot program ended, as the difference in short-sale constraints

between pilot and non-pilot stocks disappeared. We also show that pilot short legs under-

performed (outperformed) non-pilot short legs at the beginning (end) of the pilot program.

Lastly, we find that the difference in anomaly portfolio returns between pilot and non-pilot

stocks during the pilot period was more pronounced among small stocks and stocks that were

more restricted by the uptick rule before the pilot program. Taken together, these findings

provide strong and clear-cut confirmation that limits to arbitrage have a causal effect on the

strength of well-known asset pricing anomalies and that these anomalies reflect to a large

extent mispricing.




                                              33
A      Appendix

A.1       Definition of Anomaly Variables

    The data to construct anomaly variables are from CRSP and annual and quarterly Com-

pustat.

    Anomaly 1: Momentum (RET). The past return RETt for a stock is calculated as

the compounded return over the 11-month ranking period t − 12 to t − 2.

    Anomaly 2: Gross profitability (GP/A). The gross profitability measure GP/At for

a firm is calculated as the difference between total revenue (REV Tt ) and cost of goods sold

(COGSt ), scaled by total assets ATt .

    Anomaly 3: Asset growth (AG). The asset growth measure AGt for a firm is calcu-

lated as the change in total assets ATt − ATt−1 , scaled by lagged total assets ATt−1 .

    Anomaly 4: Investment to assets (IVA). Investment to assets IV At is defined as the

annual change in gross property, plant, and equipment plus the annual change in inventories,

P P EGTt − P P EGTt−1 + IN V Tt − IN V Tt−1 , scaled by lagged total assets ATt−1 .

    Anomaly 5: Return on assets (ROA). Return on assets ROAt is measured as the

quarterly earnings, or income before extraordinary item, IBQt , scaled by quarterly total

assets AT Qt .

    Anomaly 6: Net operating assets (NOA). Net operating assets are calculated as the

difference between operating assets and operating liabilities, scaled by lagged total assets:

N OAt = (Operating Assetst − Operating Liabilitiest )/ATt−1 , where Operating Assets =

T otal Assets (AT )−Cash and Short-term Investment (CHE), and Operating Liabilities =

T otal Assets (AT ) − Short-term Debt (DLC) − Long-term Debt (DLT T )

− M inority Interests (M IB) − P ref erred Stocks (P ST K) − Common Equity (CEQ).

    Anomaly 7: Accruals (AC). Operating accruals are measured as the change in

non-cash current assets, less the change in current liabilities (exclusive of short-term debt

and taxes payable), and less depreciation and amortization, all divided by lagged total

                                              34
assets: Accrualst = [(∆Current Assets − ∆Cash) − (∆Current Liabilities − ∆Short-

term Debt−∆T axes P ayable)−Depreciation and Amortization Expense)]/ATt−1 . In terms

of Compustat item notations, Current Assets is ACT, Cash is CHE, Current Liabilities is

LCT, Short-term Debt is DLC, T axes P ayable is TXP, and Depreciation and Amortization

is DP.

   Anomaly 8: Net stock issues (NSI). Net stock issues on the annual basis are mea-

sured as the change in the natural logarithm of a firm’s split-adjusted shares over the last

year, N SIt = Ln(Adjusted Sharest ) − Ln(Adjusted Sharest−1 ), where Adjusted Sharest

is the product of the common shares outstanding (CSHOt ) and the adjustment factor

(AJEXt ).

   Anomaly 9: Composite equity issues (CEI). Composite equity issues are measured

over the past five-year window and are defined as the part of the growth rate in market

equity not attributable to stock returns, CEIt = Ln(M Et /M Et−5 ) − r(t − 5, t). In June of

year t, for example, M Et is the market equity at the end of June of year t and M Et−5 is the

market equity at the end of June of year t − 5, while r(t − 5, t) is the cumulative log return

of the stock from the end of June of year t − 5 to the end of June of year t.

   Anomaly 10: Failure probability (FP). Following Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi

(2008), we use coefficients in Column 4 of their Table IV to construct the measure of F Pt ,

which is related to the failure probability through a monotonic transformation. Specifically,

F Pt is measured as:

F Pt = − 9.16 − 20.26N IM T AAV Gt + 1.42T LM T At − 7.13EXRET AV Gt

         + 1.41SIGM At − 0.045RSIZEt − 2.13CASHM T At + 0.075M Bt − 0.058P RICEt ,

where the details of variables can be found in Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008).

   Anomaly 11: O-score (OS). Following Ohlson (1980) and Chen, Novy-Marx, and

Zhang (2011), we construct the O-score as:

  OSt = − 1.32 − 0.407log(ADJASSETt ) + 6.03T LT At − 1.43W CT At + 0.076CLCAt

                                             35
             − 1.72OEN EGt − 2.37N IT At − 1.83F U T Lt + 0.285IN T W Ot − 0.521CHINt ,

where ADJASSET is the adjusted total assets and equals total assets (ATQ)+0.1× (market

equity-book equity). T LT A is the leverage ratio and equals the book value of debt (DLCQ

plus DLTTQ) divided by ADJASSET . W CT A is working capital (ACTQ minus LCTQ)

divided by ADJASSET . CLCA is current liabilities (LCTQ) divided by current assets

(ACTQ). OEN EG is one if total liabilities (LTQ) exceeds total assets (ATQ) and is zero

otherwise. N IT A is net income (NIQ) divided by ADJASSET . F U T L is the fund provided

by operations (PIQ) divided by liabilities (LTQ). IN T W O is equal to one if net income (NIQ)

is negative for the last two quarters and zero otherwise. CHIN is (N It − N It−1 )/(|N It | +

|N It−1 |), where N I is net income (NIQ).15


A.2        Benchmark-Adjusted Returns

       In the main empirical analysis, we use raw portfolio returns as the dependent variable

in equation (1). In this subsection, we test the validity of our main results when we use

benchmark-adjusted portfolio returns as the dependent variable in equation (1). If the mean

return premia of the Fama-French three factors represent rational risk premia (an issue on

which we do not take a stand here), then this analysis would verify whether relaxation of

short sale constraints reduces mispricing measured against this benchmark.

       To obtain benchmark-adjusted returns, we first regress the time series of excess returns

onto the time series of appropriate factors (the market excess return for the CAPM, and two

additional factors, the SMB and HML factors, for the Fama-French three-factor model). We

then obtain the time series of benchmark-adjusted returns as the constant plus the residuals

from the regression.
  15
    Further details of these variables can be found in the Appendix of Chen, Novy-Marx, and Zhang (2011).
They have −0.407log(ADJASSETt /CP It ), where CP I is the consumer price index, as the second term of
O-score. Since scaling ADJASSET by CP I or not does not affect the cross-sectional sorting of stocks based
on O-score, we drop CP I in our calculation of O-score.




                                                   36
       We would not expect this factor adjustment to change the results much, since the selection

of pilot firms is quasi-random, implying similar loadings on the benchmark factors of pilot

versus non-pilot firms. The results for benchmark-adjusted returns are presented in Table

A.2. Consistent with this intuition, all the β estimates are similar to those in Table 4 of

main results.


A.3        Power of the Main Tests

       Our main tests for Hypotheses 1 and 2 based on equation (1) use a relatively short (two

years) pilot period to estimate the effect of relaxing short-sale constraints on anomaly returns.

Here, we address the issue of power explicitly. Intuitively, our main tests using equation (1)

gain power by two means. First is the aggregation across 11 anomalies. Second, even for a

single anomaly during the pilot period, what is relevant for our test is not the raw strength

of that anomaly, it is the difference in strength of an anomaly between pilot versus non-pilot

firms over the same time period.16 This differencing effectively hedges away much of the

factor volatility of returns, greatly increasing the precision of the test. To see this in a very

simple way, suppose that the momentum return of Portfolio A were equal to the return of

Portfolio B plus a constant. Then even if both portfolios were highly volatile, the difference

in returns would be a constant, implying that the difference would be significant with an

infinite t statistic. Of course a constant difference is unrealistic, but this example illustrates

that testing for a difference filters out a large amount of variability from the test.

       Consistent with this point, in untabulated results, we show that taking differences be-

tween portfolios constructed with pilot and non-pilot stocks substantially reduces return

volatility. Monthly standard deviations of return differences between long-leg/short-leg port-

folios constructed with pilot and non-pilot stocks are much smaller than those of returns on

long-leg/short-leg portfolios themselves. For example, averaged across the 11 anomalies, the
  16
     Econometrically, this is achieved by including anomaly-time fixed effects in our regression specification.
Also, our tests actually examine the difference in this difference between the pilot and non-pilot periods, but
this is not crucial for our argument.

                                                      37
monthly standard deviation of return differences between pilot and non-pilot stocks for the

short leg is 1.71%, while the monthly standard deviation of short leg returns is 3.64% for

non-pilot stocks and 3.70% for pilot stocks.

   This contrasts with conventional tests for estimating average anomaly returns (rather

than differences in returns), in which sampling noise derived from factor realizations reduces

power. In such tests, much longer time periods are often needed to confirm an anomaly

reliably. It is of course sometimes possible to identify anomaly returns using a sample

period measured in years rather than decades. For example, in an out-of-sample test of their

1993 paper (Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)), Jegadeesh and Titman (2001) find significant

momentum in the sample period of 1990 to 1998 (9 years), with a t-statistic of 4.71.

   A further consideration which enhances the power of our tests is that the pilot period

is one in which the 11 anomalies are relatively strong. If we estimate the mean anomaly

returns (long-minus-short returns) on non-pilot stocks during the pilot period, the anomalies

tend to be stronger, both economically and statistically, than might ordinarily be expected

for a two-year period.

   Specifically, we calculate the mean monthly anomaly returns and CAPM/Fama-French-

three-factor alphas for the 11 anomalies individually and in aggregate, over the pilot period

from July 2005 to June 2007. Table A.3 presents the results for non-pilot stocks. It shows

that the anomaly returns and alphas of the 11 anomalies for non-pilot stocks are mostly

positive (31 out of 33). When we combine the 11 anomalies together, both the mean return

and alphas are positive and statistically significant. The magnitudes are also large. The

mean monthly return and alphas are about 51-69 bps, when the 11 anomalies are combined.




                                               38
                  Table A.1: Results using value-weighted portfolio returns
This table reports the coefficient β from the regression rit = γt + βP iloti × Duringt +
β1 P iloti + it , for the 11 anomalies individually and all of them in aggregate. The portfolio
returns are value weighted. The sample consists of non-pilot and pilot stocks from the pilot
program that are traded on NYSE/AMEX. The sample period is January 1980 to June 2007.
We drop two months at the beginning of the pilot program (May and June 2005) from the
sample. The unit of β is percentage. Robust t-statistics are presented in the parentheses
below the coefficient estimates. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

                                        Long leg Short leg Long-short
                 Momentum                  0.29    -0.33       0.62
                                         (0.56)   (-0.61)    (0.75)
                 Gross profitability      -0.17     0.70      -0.87
                                         (-0.44)  (1.42)     (-1.39)
                 Asset growth             -0.33     0.26      -0.59
                                         (-0.85)  (0.58)     (-1.11)
                 Investment to assets      0.10     0.34      -0.24
                                         (0.24)   (0.78)     (-0.40)
                 Return on assets          0.50    -0.22       0.72
                                         (1.42)   (-0.39)    (1.23)
                 Net operating assets     -0.34     0.60      -0.94
                                         (-0.87)  (1.30)     (-1.36)
                 Accruals                 -0.14     0.54      -0.68
                                         (-0.26)  (1.20)     (-1.31)
                 Net stock issues         -0.12     0.02      -0.14
                                         (-0.37)  (0.04)     (-0.30)
                 Composite equity issues -0.52      0.01      -0.53
                                         (-1.32)  (0.02)     (-0.80)
                 Failure probability       0.41     0.33       0.07
                                         (1.14)   (0.54)     (0.11)
                 O-score                  -0.45     0.52      -0.97
                                         (-1.07)  (1.13)     (-1.60)
                 Combination              -0.07    0.25*     -0.32*
                                         (-0.56)  (1.66)     (-1.70)




                                              39
                           Table A.2: Benchmark-adjusted returns
 This table reports the coefficient β from the regression rit = γt +βP iloti ×Duringt +β1 P iloti +
 it , for the 11 anomalies individually and all of them in aggregate, with benchmark-adjusted
 returns used as the dependent variable. Panel A displays results for CAPM-adjusted returns
 while Panel B displays results for Fama-French-three-factor-adjusted (FF-adjusted) returns.
 The sample consists of non-pilot and pilot stocks from the pilot program that are traded
 on NYSE/AMEX. The sample period is January 1980 to June 2007. We drop two months
 at the beginning of the pilot program (May and June 2005) from the sample. The unit of
 β is percentage. Robust t-statistics are presented in the parentheses below the coefficient
 estimates. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                           Panel A: CAPM-adjusted returns          Panel B: FF-adjusted returns
                           Long leg   Short leg    Long-short     Long leg   Short leg   Long-short
Momentum                      0.03       0.65             -0.62     0.01        0.66         -0.65
                            (0.07)      (1.37)          (-0.92)   (0.03)       (1.39)      (-0.93)
Gross profitability          -0.04     0.81**            -0.85*    -0.05      0.80**        -0.86*
                            (-0.13)     (2.24)          (-1.81)   (-0.17)      (2.23)      (-1.85)
Asset growth                 -0.18       0.42             -0.60    -0.19       0.43*         -0.62
                            (-0.46)     (1.64)          (-1.40)   (-0.48)      (1.67)      (-1.41)
Investment to assets         -0.01       0.15             -0.16    -0.02        0.16         -0.19
                            (-0.01)     (0.43)          (-0.27)   (-0.06)      (0.45)      (-0.30)
Return on assets              0.05       0.74             -0.69     0.03        0.73         -0.70
                            (0.23)      (1.26)          (-1.08)   (0.14)       (1.25)      (-1.09)
Net operating assets         -0.11     0.88***          -0.99**    -0.12      0.87***      -1.00**
                            (-0.32)     (3.50)          (-2.11)   (-0.34)      (3.46)      (-2.10)
Accruals                     -0.51     0.80**          -1.31***    -0.51       0.80**     -1.31***
                            (-1.41)     (2.29)          (-2.61)   (-1.45)      (2.24)      (-2.73)
Net stock issues             -0.08     0.77***          -0.85**    -0.08      0.79***      -0.86**
                            (-0.26)     (3.24)          (-2.25)   (-0.26)      (3.22)      (-2.26)
Composite equity issues     -0.56*      0.54*          -1.10***   -0.55*       0.54*      -1.09***
                            (-1.80)     (1.78)          (-2.73)   (-1.79)      (1.78)      (-2.75)
Failure probability           0.16       0.45             -0.29     0.14        0.45         -0.30
                            (0.56)      (1.12)          (-0.62)   (0.48)       (1.12)      (-0.64)
O-score                       0.36       0.80             -0.44     0.35        0.79         -0.43
                            (0.76)      (1.39)          (-0.54)   (0.73)       (1.40)      (-0.54)
Combination                  -0.08     0.64***         -0.72***    -0.09      0.64***     -0.73***
                            (-0.76)     (5.34)          (-4.36)   (-0.83)      (5.36)      (-4.39)




                                                  40
             Table A.3: Asset pricing anomalies during the pilot period
This table presents the mean monthly raw return, the CAPM α, and the Fama-French three
factor α of the 11 asset pricing anomalies individually and in aggregate, during the pilot
period from July 2005 to June 2007. The sample consists of non-pilot and pilot stocks
from the pilot program that are traded on NYSE/AMEX. The anomaly portfolios are con-
structed with non-pilot stocks. Robust t-statistics are presented in the parentheses below
the estimates. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                            Raw CAPM α             FF α
                   Momentum                  1.02   1.11             0.84
                                           (1.47)  (1.24)          (0.92)
                   Gross profitability       0.47   0.24            0.40
                                           (1.24)  (0.64)          (1.06)
                   Asset growth             0.50   0.71**          0.82**
                                           (1.33)  (2.26)          (2.27)
                   Investment to assets      0.31   0.66           1.02*
                                           (0.62)  (1.35)          (1.85)
                   Return on assets         0.83    0.82             0.79
                                           (1.54)  (1.27)          (1.09)
                   Net operating assets      0.63  0.86**         1.16***
                                           (1.71)  (2.09)          (2.99)
                   Accruals                 -0.11   0.17            -0.27
                                           (-0.24) (0.31)         (-0.53)
                   Net stock issues          0.42   0.53           0.74**
                                           (1.30)  (1.63)          (2.24)
                   Composite equity issues 0.17     0.42             0.43
                                           (0.54)  (1.27)          (1.33)
                   Failure probability      1.02*   1.20*          1.31**
                                           (1.85)  (1.75)          (2.12)
                   O-score                   0.39   0.37             0.38
                                           (0.88)  (0.93)          (0.96)
                   Combination            0.51*** 0.64***         0.69***
                                           (2.82)  (3.12)          (3.22)




                                             41
References

Ali, A., L.-S. Hwang, and M. A. Trombley, 2003, “Arbitrage risk and the book-to-market

  anomaly,” Journal of Financial Economics, 69(2), 355–373.

Ali, A., and M. A. Trombley, 2006, “Short sales constraints and momentum in stock returns,”

  Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, 33(3-4), 587–615.

Asparouhova, E., H. Bessembinder, and I. Kalcheva, 2010, “Liquidity biases in asset pricing

  tests,” Journal of Financial Economics, 96(2), 215–237.

       , 2013, “Noisy prices and inference regarding returns,” Journal of Finance, 68(2),

  665–714.

Asquith, P., P. A. Pathak, and J. R. Ritter, 2005, “Short interest, institutional ownership,

  and stock returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 78(2), 243–276.

Baker, M., and S. Savaşoglu, 2002, “Limited arbitrage in mergers and acquisitions,” Journal

  of Financial Economics, 64(1), 91–115.

Barberis, N., and R. Thaler, 2003, “A survey of behavioral finance,” Handbook of the Eco-

  nomics of Finance, 1, 1053–1128.

Beneish, M. D., C. M. Lee, and D. C. Nichols, 2015, “In short supply: Short-sellers and

  stock returns,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 60(2), 33–57.

Campbell, J. Y., J. Hilscher, and J. Szilagyi, 2008, “In search of distress risk,” Journal of

  Finance, 63(6), 2899–2939.

Cao, B., D. S. Dhaliwal, A. C. Kolasinski, and A. V. Reed, 2007, “Bears and numbers: Inves-

  tigating how short sellers exploit and affect earnings-based pricing anomalies,” Available

  at SSRN 748506.



                                             42
Chen, J., H. Hong, and J. C. Stein, 2002, “Breadth of ownership and stock returns,” Journal

  of Financial Economics, 66(2), 171–205.

Chen, L., R. Novy-Marx, and L. Zhang, 2011, “An alternative three-factor model,” Available

  at SSRN 1418117.

Cohen, L., K. B. Diether, and C. J. Malloy, 2007, “Supply and demand shifts in the shorting

  market,” Journal of Finance, 62(5), 2061–2096.

Cooper, M. J., H. Gulen, and M. J. Schill, 2008, “Asset growth and the cross-section of stock

  returns,” Journal of Finance, 63(4), 1609–1651.

Daniel, K., and S. Titman, 2006, “Market reactions to tangible and intangible information,”

  Journal of Finance, 61(4), 1605–1643.

D’Avolio, G., 2002, “The market for borrowing stock,” Journal of Financial Economics,

  66(2), 271–306.

Dichev, I. D., 1998, “Is the risk of bankruptcy a systematic risk?,” Journal of Finance, 53(3),

  1131–1147.

Diether, K. B., K.-H. Lee, and I. M. Werner, 2009, “It’s SHO time! Short-sale price tests

  and market quality,” Journal of Finance, 64(1), 37–73.

Drechsler, I., and Q. F. Drechsler, 2014, “The shorting premium and asset pricing anomalies,”

  Available at SSRN 2387099.

Engelberg, J., A. V. Reed, and M. Ringgenberg, 2017, “Short selling risk,” Journal of Fi-

  nance, Forthcoming.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 1992, “The cross-section of expected stock returns,” Journal

  of Finance, 47(2), 427–465.



                                              43
       , 1993, “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,” Journal of Fi-

  nancial Economics, 33(1), 3–56.

       , 2006, “Profitability, investment and average returns,” Journal of Financial Eco-

  nomics, 82(3), 491–518.

Fang, V. W., A. H. Huang, and J. M. Karpoff, 2016, “Short selling and earnings management:

  A controlled experiment,” Journal of Finance, 71(3), 1251–1294.

Geczy, C. C., D. K. Musto, and A. V. Reed, 2002, “Stocks are special too: An analysis of

  the equity lending market,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66(2), 241–269.

Gromb, D., and D. Vayanos, 2010, “Limits of arbitrage,” Annual Review of Financial Eco-

  nomics, 2(1), 251–275.

Grullon, G., S. Michenaud, and J. P. Weston, 2015, “The real effects of short-selling con-

  straints,” Review of Financial Studies, 28(6), 1737–1767.

Harvey, C. R., Y. Liu, and H. Zhu, 2016, “ and the cross-section of expected returns,” Review

  of Financial Studies, 29(1), 5–68.

Hirshleifer, D., 2001, “Investor psychology and asset pricing,” Journal of Finance, 56(4),

  1533–1597.

Hirshleifer, D., K. Hou, S. H. Teoh, and Y. Zhang, 2004, “Do investors overvalue firms with

  bloated balance sheets?,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 38, 297–331.

Hirshleifer, D., S. H. Teoh, and J. J. Yu, 2011, “Short arbitrage, return asymmetry and the

  accrual anomaly,” Review of Financial Studies, 24(7), 2429–2461.

Israel, R., and T. J. Moskowitz, 2013, “The role of shorting, firm size, and time on market

  anomalies,” Journal of Financial Economics, 108(2), 275–301.



                                             44
Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman, 1993, “Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Impli-

  cations for stock market efficiency,” Journal of Finance, 48(1), 65–91.

       , 2001, “Profitability of momentum strategies: An evaluation of alternative explana-

  tions,” Journal of Finance, 56(2), 699–720.

Jones, C. M., and O. A. Lamont, 2002, “Short-sale constraints and stock returns,” Journal

  of Financial Economics, 66(2), 207–239.

Lam, F. E. C., and K. J. Wei, 2011, “Limits-to-arbitrage, investment frictions, and the asset

  growth anomaly,” Journal of Financial Economics, 102(1), 127–149.

Lamont, O. A., and R. H. Thaler, 2003, “Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in

  tech stock carve-outs,” Journal of Political Economy, 111(2), 227–268.

Li, Y., and L. Zhang, 2015, “Short selling pressure, stock price behavior, and management

  forecast precision: Evidence from a natural experiment,” Journal of Accounting Research,

  53(1), 79–117.

Loughran, T., and J. R. Ritter, 1995, “The new issues puzzle,” Journal of Finance, 50(1),

  23–51.

Mashruwala, C., S. Rajgopal, and T. Shevlin, 2006, “Why is the accrual anomaly not arbi-

  traged away? The role of idiosyncratic risk and transaction costs,” Journal of Accounting

  and Economics, 42(1), 3–33.

Nagel, S., 2005, “Short sales, institutional investors and the cross-section of stock returns,”

  Journal of Financial Economics, 78(2), 277–309.

Novy-Marx, R., 2013, “The other side of value: The gross profitability premium,” Journal

  of Financial Economics, 108(1), 1–28.




                                              45
Ohlson, J. A., 1980, “Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy,” Jour-

  nal of Accounting Research, 18(1), 109–131.

Pontiff, J., 1996, “Costly arbitrage: Evidence from closed-end funds,” Quarterly Journal of

  Economics, 111(4), 1135–1151.

Pontiff, J., and A. Woodgate, 2008, “Share issuance and cross-sectional returns,” Journal of

  Finance, 63(2), 921–945.

Reed, A. V., 2013, “Short selling,” Annual Review of Financial Economics, 5(1), 245–258.

Saffi, P. A., and K. Sigurdsson, 2010, “Price efficiency and short selling,” Review of Financial

  Studies, 24(3), 821–852.

Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny, 1997, “The limits of arbitrage,” Journal of Finance, 52(1),

  35–55.

Sloan, R., 1996, “Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows about

  future earnings?,” Accounting Review, 71(3), 289–315.

Stambaugh, R. F., J. Yu, and Y. Yuan, 2012, “The short of it: Investor sentiment and

  anomalies,” Journal of Financial Economics, 104(2), 288–302.

Titman, S., K.-C. Wei, and F. Xie, 2004, “Capital investments and stock returns,” Journal

  of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 39(04), 677–700.




                                              46
Figure 1: Return dynamics of short-leg portfolios. This figure illustrates the return dy-
namics of pilot short-leg portfolios relative to non-pilot short-leg portfolios, over nine rolling
windows that cover the pre-pilot, during-pilot, andP post-pilot periods, and the beginning and
end of the pilot program. The regression rit = γt + 9j=1 βwj P iloti ×W indowjt +β1 P iloti +it
is carried out for the 11 anomalies in aggregate, where rit is the monthly return of short-leg
portfolio i in month t; γt is the time fixed effects; P iloti is a dummy variable that equals
one if portfolio i is formed on pilot firms, and zero otherwise; W indowjt is a dummy vari-
able that equals one if month t is in W indowj (see text for the timing of the 9 windows).
The sample period for this analysis is January 1980 to December 2013. The blue solid line
plots the nine DiD coefficients βwj in percentage terms. The shaded area shows their 90%
confidence intervals. The two dashed vertical lines denote the beginning and the end of the
pilot program.




                                               47
Figure 2: Difference in shorting activity on short-leg portfolios between pilot and
non-pilot stocks. This figure shows the difference in the amount of short selling between
pilot and non-pilot short-leg portfolios from January 2005 to October 2007. The difference is
normalized to be zero at the beginning. We use the weekly Markit Securities Finance data.
For each stock and during each week, we measure the amount of shorting selling as the ratio
between the number of shares on loan and the number of shares outstanding. We calculate
the portfolio-level amount of short selling as the average amount of short selling across all
stocks in the short-leg portfolios. We then take the difference in portfolio-level amount of
shorting selling between pilot and non-pilot short legs, and average this difference across the
11 anomalies. The solid line plots the average difference in percentage terms, and the shaded
area shows the 90% confidence intervals. The two dashed vertical lines denote the beginning
and the end of the pilot program.




                                              48
              Table 1: Characteristics of stocks for the 11 anomalies
This table summarizes the characteristics of stocks in the long leg (the highest performing
group) and those in the short leg (the lowest performing group) for the 11 anomalies.

                                Stocks in the long leg     Stocks in the short leg
      Momentum                  High past return           Low past return
      Gross profitability       High gross profitability   Low gross profitability
      Asset growth              Low asset growth           High asset growth
      Investment to assets      Low investment to assets   High investment to assets
      Return on assets          High return on assets      Low return on assets
      Net operating assets      Low net operating assets   High net operating assets
      Accruals                  Low accruals               High accruals
      Net stock issues          Low equity issuance        High equity issuance
      Composite equity issues   Low equity issuance        High equity issuance
      Failure probabilitiy      Low failure probability    High failure probability
      O-score                   Low O-score                High O-score




                                            49
                 Table 2: Summary of anomaly returns in our sample
This table reports the mean monthly raw return, the CAPM α, and the Fama-French-three-
factor α for the 11 anomalies individually, constructed using stocks in our sample. The
sample consists of non-pilot and pilot stocks from the pilot program that are traded on
NYSE/AMEX. The sample period is January 1980 to December 2004. For each anomaly,
stocks are sorted into deciles based on the corresponding ranking variable and the raw
anomaly return is obtained as the portfolio return of buying the highest performing decile
and shorting the lowest performing decile. All returns and alphas are in percentage. Robust
t-statistics are presented in the parentheses below the estimates. *, **, and *** denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                          Raw   CAPM α       Fama-French α
              Momentum                  0.94*** 0.94***         1.13***
                                         (2.87)   (2.92)         (3.11)
              Gross profitability          0.15    0.08          0.40**
                                         (0.84)   (0.44)         (2.24)
              Asset growth              0.52*** 0.57***         0.38**
                                         (3.10)   (3.44)         (2.56)
              Investment to assets      0.45*** 0.51***          0.42**
                                         (2.84)   (3.27)         (2.58)
              Return on assets             0.22    0.28         0.60***
                                         (1.01)   (1.30)         (3.02)
              Net operating assets      0.52*** 0.49***         0.51***
                                         (3.64)   (3.50)         (3.48)
              Accruals                   0.34**   0.39**         0.36**
                                         (2.12)   (2.51)         (2.35)
              Net stock issues          0.42*** 0.45***         0.43***
                                         (3.21)   (3.51)         (3.29)
              Composite equity issues      0.27  0.43***        0.40***
                                         (1.65)   (2.76)         (2.60)
              Failure probability         -0.02    0.21          0.45**
                                        (-0.10)   (1.01)         (1.97)
              O-score                      0.06    0.09          0.48**
                                         (0.26)   (0.38)         (2.42)




                                            50
                                 Table 3: Comparing non-pilot and pilot firms: anomaly variables
     This table compares pilot and non-pilot firms in terms of the 11 ranking variables corresponding to the 11 asset pricing
     anomalies, at the end of year 2003. The sample consists of non-pilot and pilot firms from the pilot program that are traded
     on NYSE/AMEX. Panel A reports the means of these variables for non-pilot and pilot firms, respectively, and their difference,
     over the entire sample. Panel B (Panel C) reports the means of these variables for non-pilot and pilot firms, respectively, and
     their difference, for stocks that are in the long-leg (short-leg) portfolios of these anomalies. The details of variable definition
     are in the Appendix. All variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles of all firm-month observations to remove the
     effect of outliers. Robust t-statistics are presented in the parentheses below the coefficient estimates.

                                              Panel A: Whole sample            Panel B: Long leg             Panel C: Short leg
                                             Nonpilot Pilot                 Nonpilot Pilot                Nonpilot Pilot
                                  Variable                     Diff.                           Diff.                         Diff.
                                              Mean     Mean                  Mean    Mean                  Mean    Mean
      Momentum                     RET        0.452     0.442     -0.010     1.873     1.904     0.031     -0.210    -0.173   0.037
                                                                 (-0.452)                      (0.573)                      (2.463)
      Gross profitability          GP/A       0.269     0.293      0.024     0.788     0.804     0.016     0.026      0.029   0.002
51




                                                                 (1.867)                       (0.629)                      (0.874)
      Asset growth                  AG        0.166     0.134     -0.032     -0.256   -0.297    -0.042     1.418     1.282   -0.136
                                                                 (-0.772)                      (-1.506)                     (-0.386)
      Investment to assets          IVA       0.066     0.052     -0.015     -0.127   -0.166    -0.039     0.492     0.422   -0.070
                                                                 (-1.077)                      (-1.775)                     (-0.668)
      Return on assets             ROA        0.010     0.010      0.001     0.042     0.043     0.001     -0.027    -0.027   0.000
                                                                 (0.775)                       (0.567)                      (0.033)
      Net operating assets         NOA        0.593     0.605      0.012     -0.000    0.012     0.012     1.679      1.506  -0.173
                                                                 (0.474)                       (1.077)                      (-1.011)
      Accruals                      AC        -0.049    -0.048    0.001      -0.170   -0.164     0.006     0.098      0.070  -0.028
                                                                 (0.182)                       (0.704)                      (-1.517)
      Net stock issues              NSI       0.052     0.045     -0.007     -0.074   -0.094    -0.020     0.452      0.460   0.008
                                                                 (-0.603)                      (-1.629)                     (0.096)
      Composite equity issues       CEI       0.048     0.028     -0.020     -0.531   -0.453     0.078     0.987      0.867  -0.120
                                                                 (-0.847)                      (2.042)                      (-1.506)
      Failure probability           FP        -8.143    -8.172    -0.029     -9.111   -9.135    -0.024     -6.957    -6.899   0.057
                                                                 (-0.830)                      (-0.788)                     (0.691)
      O-score                       OS        -3.160    -3.179    -0.019     -5.065   -5.047     0.018     -1.054    -1.060 -0.006
                                                                 (-0.264)                      (0.299)                      (-0.072)
                                               Table 4: Main difference-in-differences results
     This table presents the main DiD analysis results. The DiD coefficient β from the regression rit = γt + βP iloti × Duringt +
     β1 P iloti +it is reported, for the 11 anomalies individually and all of them in aggregate. The mean portfolio returns for non-pilot
     and pilot stocks in the pre-pilot period and the during-pilot period, and their difference (pilot minus non-pilot) in these two
     periods are also reported. The DiD coefficient β is the difference in these two differences (one in the pre-pilot period and
     the other in the during-pilot period). Panels A, B, and C present results for the long-short anomaly portfolios, the long-leg
     portfolios, and the short-leg portfolios, respectively. The sample consists of non-pilot and pilot stocks from the pilot program
     that are traded on NYSE/AMEX. The sample period is January 1980 to June 2007. We drop two months at the beginning
     of the pilot program (May and June 2005) from the sample. Portfolio returns, difference in portfolio returns, and the DiD
     coefficient β are all in percentage. Robust t-statistics are only presented for differences in mean returns and the DiD coefficient
     β for brevity. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                   Panel A: Long-short anomaly returns
                                       Nonpilot   Pilot                Nonpilot Pilot                                DiD
                                                         Diff. t-stat                            Diff.    t-stat              t-stat
52




                                         Pre      Pre                   During During                                (β)
           Momentum                      0.96      1.04    0.08    0.31      1.02      0.47      -0.54    -0.86       -0.62   -0.93
           Gross profitability           0.06      0.39    0.34    1.60      0.47     -0.03      -0.50    -1.18      -0.83*   -1.79
           Asset growth                  0.47     0.55     0.08   0.35      0.50      -0.03      -0.53    -1.44       -0.61   -1.42
           Investment to assets          0.45      0.36   -0.09   -0.40      0.31      0.04      -0.28    -0.50       -0.19   -0.31
           Return on assets              0.27     0.21    -0.06   -0.28      0.83      0.07      -0.76    -1.22       -0.70   -1.09
           Net operating assets          0.45      0.60    0.15    0.70      0.63     -0.21     -0.84*    -1.97     -0.99**   -2.11
           Accruals                      0.29     0.40     0.12    0.47     -0.11     -1.29    -1.18**    -2.72    -1.30***   -2.62
           Net stock issues              0.39      0.50    0.11    0.54      0.42     -0.31    -0.73**    -2.25     -0.84**   -2.22
           Composite equity issues       0.16     0.41    0.25     1.14      0.17     -0.68    -0.85**    -2.43    -1.10***   -2.70
           Failure probability           0.10     0.05    -0.04   -0.20      1.02      0.69      -0.33    -0.79       -0.29   -0.61
           O-score                       0.04     -0.16   -0.19   -0.70      0.39     -0.24      -0.63    -0.82       -0.44   -0.54
           Combination                   0.33      0.40   0.07    0.97      0.51      -0.14    -0.65***   -4.36    -0.72***   -4.37
                                            Panel B: Long-leg portfolio returns
                               Nonpilot   Pilot                 Nonpilot Pilot                          DiD
                                                  Diff. t-stat                       Diff.    t-stat             t-stat
                                 Pre      Pre                    During During                          (β)
     Momentum                    2.21     2.29    0.08     0.47   1.57     1.67       0.10     0.28      0.03     0.07
     Gross profitability         1.75     1.81    0.06    0.42    1.10     1.12       0.02     0.06     -0.04    -0.14
     Asset growth                1.82     1.86    0.04    0.22    1.62     1.48      -0.15    -0.42     -0.18    -0.48
     Investment to assets        1.78     1.94   0.15      0.86   1.56     1.69       0.12    0.36      -0.03    -0.07
     Return on assets            1.73     1.75    0.02    0.17    1.52     1.58       0.06     0.35      0.04     0.17
     Net operating assets        1.77     1.86   0.09      0.55   1.31     1.28      -0.03    -0.09     -0.12    -0.33
     Accruals                    1.76     1.84    0.08    0.41    1.41     0.97      -0.44    -1.37     -0.51    -1.41
     Net stock issues            1.72     1.80    0.08     0.60   1.25     1.26       0.00     0.02     -0.08    -0.27
     Composite equity issues     1.60     1.84   0.23*    1.66    1.37     1.06      -0.31    -1.11    -0.55*    -1.75
     Failure probability         1.58     1.53   -0.06    -0.45   1.58     1.68      0.10      0.39      0.16     0.55
     O-score                     1.54     1.36   -0.18    -1.20   1.30     1.48       0.18     0.38      0.36     0.75
     Combination                 1.75     1.81   0.05    1.15      1.42      1.39    -0.03    -0.33     -0.09    -0.81
53




                                           Panel C: Short-leg portfolio returns
                               Nonpilot   Pilot                 Nonpilot Pilot                          DiD
                                                 Diff. t-stat                        Diff.    t-stat             t-stat
                                 Pre      Pre                    During During                          (β)
     Momentum                    1.25     1.25    -0.00   -0.02   0.56     1.20       0.64    1.46       0.65    1.37
     Gross profitability         1.69     1.42   -0.27*   -1.74   0.63     1.14       0.51    1.55     0.79**    2.17
     Asset growth                1.35     1.31    -0.04   -0.27   1.12     1.50      0.38*    1.79       0.42    1.64
     Investment to assets        1.33     1.58    0.25     1.57   1.25     1.65       0.40    1.22       0.16    0.44
     Return on assets            1.46     1.54     0.08    0.47   0.69     1.51       0.82    1.43       0.74    1.26
     Net operating assets        1.32     1.26    -0.06   -0.42   0.68     1.49     0.81***   3.86     0.87***   3.47
     Accruals                    1.48     1.44    -0.04   -0.24   1.52     2.26      0.74**   2.47      0.79**   2.29
     Net stock issues            1.32     1.29    -0.03   -0.19   0.83     1.56     0.73***   3.96     0.76***   3.21
     Composite equity issues     1.44     1.43    -0.01   -0.08   1.20     1.73      0.53**   2.09      0.55*    1.80
     Failure probability         1.49     1.47    -0.01   -0.07   0.55     0.99       0.43    1.18       0.45    1.11
     O-score                     1.51     1.52     0.01    0.04   0.91     1.72       0.81    1.54       0.80    1.39
     Combination                 1.42     1.41   -0.01    -0.24   0.90     1.52     0.62***   5.79     0.63***   5.31
                              Table 5: Post-pilot-program Results
This table reports the coefficient β2 from the regression rit = γt + βP iloti × Duringt +
β1 P iloti +β2 P iloti ×P ostt +it , for the 11 anomalies individually and all of them in aggregate.
The sample consists of non-pilot and pilot stocks from the pilot program that are traded on
NYSE/AMEX. The sample period is January 1980 to December 2016. We drop two months
at the beginning of the pilot program (May and June 2005) and two months at the end of the
pilot program (July 2007 and August 2007) from the sample. The unit of β2 is percentage.
Robust t-statistics are presented in the parentheses below the coefficient estimates. *, **,
and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                              Long leg    Short leg    Long-short
                 Momentum                       -0.09       0.39          -0.48
                                               (-0.31)     (0.72)        (-0.78)
                 Gross profitability             0.03        0.11         -0.08
                                               (0.12)      (0.31)        (-0.19)
                 Asset growth                    0.16       -0.07         0.23
                                               (0.45)      (-0.24)       (0.56)
                 Investment to assets           -0.21       0.06          -0.27
                                               (-0.53)     (0.16)        (-0.58)
                 Return on assets                0.26       0.49          -0.23
                                               (1.27)      (1.16)        (-0.49)
                 Net operating assets           -0.25       -0.06         -0.19
                                               (-0.76)     (-0.21)       (-0.49)
                 Accruals                        0.12       -0.17          0.29
                                               (0.26)      (-0.60)       (0.56)
                 Net stock issues               -0.16        0.18         -0.34
                                               (-0.63)     (0.59)        (-0.83)
                 Composite equity issues        -0.11        0.12         -0.23
                                               (-0.49)     (0.32)        (-0.52)
                 Failure probability             0.12       -0.10          0.21
                                               (0.58)      (-0.27)       (0.51)
                 O-score                         0.19       -0.01          0.20
                                               (0.71)      (-0.03)       (0.37)
                 Combination                    0.01         0.09         -0.08
                                               (0.07)      (0.75)        (-0.57)




                                                 54
                              Table 6: Different sample periods
 This table reports the coefficient β from the regression rit = γt +βP iloti ×Duringt +β1 P iloti +
 it , for the 11 anomalies individually and all of them in aggregate. The sample consists of
 non-pilot and pilot stocks from the pilot program that are traded on NYSE/AMEX. The
 sample period is January 1990 to June 2007 for Panel A and January 2000 to June 2007
 for Panel B. We drop two months at the beginning of the pilot program (May and June
 2005) from the sample. The unit of β is percentage. Robust t-statistics are presented in the
 parentheses below the coefficient estimates. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%,
 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                 Panel A: 1990 to 2007                  Panel B: 2000 to 2007
                           Long leg    Short leg    Long-short     Long leg   Short leg   Long-short
Momentum                     0.06         0.36            -0.30     -0.10       0.58         -0.68
                            (0.15)      (0.73)          (-0.43)    (-0.19)     (1.05)      (-0.82)
Gross profitability           0.05        0.56            -0.51      0.18       0.44         -0.26
                            (0.14)      (1.46)          (-1.04)    (0.46)      (1.05)      (-0.48)
Asset growth                 -0.19      0.48*             -0.68      0.09      0.83**        -0.74
                            (-0.48)     (1.79)          (-1.50)    (0.16)      (2.35)      (-1.18)
Investment to assets         -0.03       -0.04             0.01     -0.23       0.07         -0.30
                            (-0.08)    (-0.11)           (0.02)    (-0.47)     (0.15)      (-0.40)
Return on assets              0.19       0.66             -0.47      0.35       1.03         -0.68
                            (0.78)      (1.09)          (-0.71)    (1.00)      (1.55)      (-0.91)
Net operating assets         0.09      0.80***            -0.71     -0.08     1.11***       -1.19*
                            (0.24)      (2.99)          (-1.44)    (-0.17)     (3.07)      (-1.92)
Accruals                     -0.66      0.72*           -1.39**     -0.26     1.06**        -1.31*
                            (-1.63)     (1.95)          (-2.55)    (-0.51)     (2.23)      (-1.82)
Net stock issues              0.03      0.63**            -0.61      0.04      0.85**        -0.81
                            (0.09)      (2.32)          (-1.47)    (0.13)      (2.09)      (-1.39)
Composite equity issues     -0.56*       0.31           -0.87**     -0.52      0.74*       -1.26**
                            (-1.72)     (0.93)          (-2.00)    (-1.33)     (1.77)      (-2.24)
Failure probability           0.26       0.34             -0.08      0.16       0.64         -0.48
                            (0.87)      (0.82)          (-0.16)    (0.44)      (1.22)      (-0.83)
O-score                       0.47       0.66             -0.19      0.65       0.83         -0.17
                            (0.95)      (1.10)          (-0.23)    (1.16)      (1.21)      (-0.19)
Combination                  -0.03     0.50***          -0.53***     0.03     0.74***      -0.72***
                            (-0.26)     (3.98)           (-3.06)    (0.19)     (4.98)       (-3.46)




                                                   55
                         Table 7: Results from a placebo test
This table reports the results from a placebo test. We create a pseudo-event in year 2000
and assume the pseudo-event also relaxed short-sale constraints for the pilot firms. To mimic
the actual pilot program closely, we assume that this pseudo-event was effective from May
2001 to July 2003. We then run the difference-in-differences regression rit = γt + βP iloti ×
P seudoDuringt +β1 P iloti +it , for the 11 anomalies individually and all of them in aggregate.
The sample consists of non-pilot and pilot stocks from the pilot program that are traded on
NYSE/AMEX. The sample period is from January 1980 to June 2003. We drop two months
at the beginning of the pseudo-event (May and June 2001) from the sample. The unit of
β is percentage. Robust t-statistics are presented in the parentheses below the coefficient
estimates. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                            Long leg    Short leg   Long-short
                 Momentum                     0.88*       -0.43         1.31
                                             (1.77)      (-0.72)      (1.52)
                 Gross profitability           0.16        0.45        -0.29
                                             (0.37)      (1.16)       (-0.50)
                 Asset growth                 -0.02       -0.60         0.58
                                             (-0.03)     (-1.31)      (0.70)
                 Investment to assets         -0.43       -0.50         0.08
                                             (-0.94)     (-0.84)      (0.10)
                 Return on assets              0.06       -0.01         0.07
                                             (0.17)      (-0.02)      (0.11)
                 Net operating assets         0.14        -0.51         0.66
                                             (0.32)      (-0.95)      (0.97)
                 Accruals                      0.32       -0.13         0.45
                                             (0.41)      (-0.19)      (0.39)
                 Net stock issues             -0.23       -0.40         0.17
                                             (-0.59)     (-0.77)      (0.24)
                 Composite equity issues      -0.25        0.34        -0.59
                                             (-0.51)     (0.62)       (-0.86)
                 Failure probability           0.28       -0.62        0.90*
                                             (0.85)      (-1.18)      (1.74)
                 O-score                      -0.48        0.21        -0.69
                                             (-0.83)     (0.29)       (-0.77)
                 Combination                  0.04        -0.20         0.24
                                             (0.26)      (-1.18)      (1.02)




                                               56
                              Table 8: Results from Nasdaq stocks
This table reports the coefficient β from the regression rit = γt + βP iloti × Duringt +
β1 P iloti + it , for the 11 anomalies individually and all of them in aggregate. The sample
consists of pilot and non-pilot stocks traded on Nasdaq National Market and the sample
period is January 1980 to June 2007. We drop two months at the beginning of the pilot
program (May and June 2005) from the sample. The unit of β is percentage. Robust t-
statistics are presented in the parentheses below the coefficient estimates. *, **, and ***
denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                           Long leg   Short leg   Long-short
                Momentum                      0.40       -0.68        1.08
                                            (0.72)     (-0.90)      (1.26)
                Gross profitability          -0.41       -0.62        0.21
                                            (-0.97)    (-0.78)      (0.23)
                Asset growth                 -0.57       -0.41       -0.16
                                            (-0.74)    (-0.79)      (-0.20)
                Investment to assets         -0.48       -0.87        0.39
                                            (-0.66)    (-1.41)      (0.43)
                Return on assets             -0.19       -1.01        0.82
                                            (-0.32)    (-1.09)      (0.76)
                Net operating assets         -0.71        0.04       -0.75
                                            (-0.97)     (0.07)      (-0.89)
                Accruals                      0.30        0.49       -0.19
                                            (0.47)      (1.10)      (-0.22)
                Net stock issues             -0.36     -1.05**        0.69
                                            (-0.85)    (-2.06)      (0.97)
                Composite equity issues      0.60*        0.56        0.05
                                            (1.76)      (0.83)      (0.07)
                Failure probability        -1.01**       -0.35       -0.67
                                            (-2.10)    (-0.41)      (-0.63)
                O-score                     -0.86*       -0.30       -0.56
                                            (-1.76)    (-0.35)      (-0.51)
                Combination                  -0.30       -0.38        0.08
                                            (-0.96)    (-1.03)      (0.17)




                                             57
                   Table 9: Different effects on small and large stocks
This table reports the coefficient β from the regression rit = γt +βP iloti ×Duringt +β1 P iloti +
it , for the 11 anomalies individually and all of them in aggregate. The sample consists of
non-pilot and pilot stocks from the pilot program that are traded on NYSE/AMEX. Panel
A displays results for the subsample of small stocks and Panel B contains results for the
subsample of large stocks. The subsample is split based on the market capitalization at the
end of April 2005. The sample period is January 1980 to June 2007. We drop two months
at the beginning of the pilot program (May and June 2005) from the sample. The unit of
β is percentage. Robust t-statistics are presented in the parentheses below the coefficient
estimates. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                 Panel A: Small stocks                 Panel B: Large stocks
                           Long leg   Short leg    Long-short     Long leg   Short leg   Long-short
Momentum                     -0.08      0.56             -0.64       0.19       0.74        -0.55
                            (-0.15)    (0.61)           (-0.57)    (0.31)     (1.38)       (-0.61)
Gross profitability          -0.30     1.23**           -1.53**      0.35       0.39        -0.05
                            (-0.62)    (2.32)           (-2.05)    (0.95)     (0.97)       (-0.09)
Asset growth                  0.25      0.69             -0.45      -0.66       0.08        -0.74
                            (0.41)     (1.59)           (-0.66)   (-1.35)     (0.24)       (-1.28)
Investment to assets          0.08      0.41             -0.33      -0.12      -0.11        -0.02
                            (0.14)     (0.60)           (-0.32)   (-0.26)     (-0.30)      (-0.03)
Return on assets             -0.17      0.97             -1.15       0.16       0.51        -0.35
                            (-0.41)    (1.11)           (-1.15)    (0.47)     (0.71)       (-0.45)
Net operating assets          0.03    1.13***            -1.10      -0.20      0.59*        -0.80
                            (0.05)     (2.92)           (-1.48)   (-0.48)     (1.68)       (-1.51)
Accruals                     -0.25      0.66             -0.92      -0.74      0.82*      -1.55***
                            (-0.31)    (1.16)           (-0.92)   (-1.47)     (1.93)       (-2.96)
Net stock issues             -0.33    1.73***          -2.06***     0.12       -0.24        0.36
                            (-0.65)    (5.15)           (-3.88)    (0.35)     (-0.70)      (0.70)
Composite equity issues      -0.30     1.27**           -1.57**   -0.79**      -0.17        -0.62
                            (-0.58)    (2.39)           (-2.45)   (-2.01)     (-0.46)      (-1.23)
Failure probability          -0.43      0.12             -0.55     0.74*        0.76        -0.02
                            (-0.97)    (0.18)           (-0.65)    (1.94)     (1.32)       (-0.03)
O-score                       0.72      0.89             -0.17      -0.13       0.70        -0.83
                            (1.10)     (1.05)           (-0.13)   (-0.25)     (1.18)       (-1.14)
Combination                  -0.07    0.88***          -0.95***    -0.10     0.37***      -0.47**
                            (-0.42)    (4.51)           (-3.50)   (-0.73)     (2.59)      (-2.41)




                                                  58
        Table 10: Different effects on stocks spilt by uptick-rule restrictiveness
This table reports the coefficient β from the regression rit = γt +βP iloti ×Duringt +β1 P iloti +
it , for the 11 anomalies individually and all of them in aggregate. The sample consists of
non-pilot and pilot stocks from the pilot program that are traded on NYSE/AMEX. We
split the sample into two subsamples based on the uptick-rule restrictiveness measured over
April 2005, right before the beginning of the pilot program. For each stock on each trading
day of April 2005 and at a given time of day, we calculate the minimum shortable price
that complies with the uptick rule. We then compare the minimum shortable price with
the current bid. If the minimum shortable price is lower than or equal to the bid, then a
short seller can potentially execute a short sale transaction at this price successfully. The
uptick-rule restrictiveness is measured as the average frequency of these potential short sale
transactions under the restriction of the uptick rule over April 2005. Panel A displays
results for the subsample of stocks that are more restricted by the uptick rule (low average
frequency) and Panel B contains results for the subsample of stocks that are less restricted
by the uptick rule (high average frequency). The sample period is January 1980 to June
2007. We drop two months at the beginning of the pilot program (May and June 2005) from
the sample. The unit of β is percentage. Robust t-statistics are presented in the parentheses
below the coefficient estimates. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

                            Panel A: More restricted stocks        Panel B: Less restricted stocks
                           Long leg   Short leg    Long-short     Long leg   Short leg   Long-short
Momentum                     -0.02      1.04              -1.06     0.09        0.26        -0.17
                            (-0.04)    (1.22)           (-1.00)   (0.17)      (0.50)      (-0.21)
Gross profitability          -0.58      0.79             -1.37*     0.50       0.80*        -0.30
                            (-1.25)    (1.51)           (-1.86)   (1.15)      (1.91)      (-0.51)
Asset growth                  0.48     0.80*              -0.33   -0.84*       -0.00        -0.83
                            (0.75)     (1.66)           (-0.41)   (-1.76)     (-0.01)     (-1.43)
Investment to assets         -0.19      0.70              -0.88     0.13       -0.38         0.52
                            (-0.32)    (1.09)           (-0.87)   (0.33)      (-1.00)      (0.94)
Return on assets             -0.10      1.32              -1.42     0.18        0.14         0.04
                            (-0.29)    (1.43)           (-1.38)   (0.58)      (0.23)       (0.06)
Net operating assets          0.44    1.07***             -0.63   -0.68*        0.67      -1.34**
                            (0.72)     (2.60)           (-0.81)   (-1.74)     (1.55)      (-2.21)
Accruals                     -0.68     1.04*            -1.73**    -0.33       0.52        -0.85*
                            (-1.02)    (1.95)           (-2.18)   (-0.92)     (1.23)      (-1.74)
Net stock issues             -0.27    1.50***          -1.76***    0.12        0.02         0.10
                            (-0.55)    (3.62)           (-3.40)   (0.30)      (0.05)       (0.18)
Composite equity issues      -0.76     0.96*            -1.72**    -0.32        0.13        -0.45
                            (-1.61)    (1.76)           (-2.55)   (-0.81)     (0.36)      (-0.90)
Failure probability          -0.08      0.37              -0.45     0.40        0.52        -0.12
                            (-0.19)    (0.60)           (-0.53)   (0.96)      (0.92)      (-0.16)
O-score                       0.32      0.98              -0.66     0.38        0.60        -0.23
                            (0.44)     (1.15)           (-0.53)   (0.85)      (0.92)      (-0.31)
Combination                  -0.13    0.96***          -1.09***    -0.03      0.30**      -0.33*
                            (-0.79)    (4.96)           (-4.08)   (-0.26)     (2.05)      (-1.72)
                                                  59
