NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARS OR MERCURY? THE GEOPOLITICS OF INTERNATIONAL CURRENCY CHOICE
Barry Eichengreen
Arnaud J. Mehl
Livia Chitu
Working Paper 24145
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24145

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017

The authors are grateful to Thorsten Beck, Benjamin Cohen, Giancarlo Corsetti, Georgios
Georgiadis, Jonathan Kirshner, Peter Lindert, Frank Moss, Andy Rose, Cédric Tille and to
participants in an ECB internal seminar for comments and helpful discussions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the ECB, of
the Eurosystem or of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Barry Eichengreen, Arnaud J. Mehl, and Livia Chitu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mars or Mercury? The Geopolitics of International Currency Choice
Barry Eichengreen, Arnaud J. Mehl, and Livia Chitu
NBER Working Paper No. 24145
December 2017
JEL No. F0,F33,F51,N0,N1
ABSTRACT
We assess the role of economic and security considerations in the currency composition of
international reserves. We contrast the “Mercury hypothesis” that currency choice is governed by
pecuniary factors familiar to the literature, such as economic size and credibility of major reserve
currency issuers, against the “Mars hypothesis” that this depends on geopolitical factors. Using
data on foreign reserves of 19 countries before World War I, for which the currency composition
of reserves is known and security alliances proliferated, our results lend support to both
hypotheses. We find that military alliances boost the share of a currency in the partner’s foreign
reserve holdings by 30 percentage points. These findings speak to current discussions about the
implications of possible U.S. disengagement from global geopolitical affairs. In a hypothetical
scenario where the U.S. withdraws from the world, our estimates suggest that long-term U.S.
interest rates could rise by as much as 80 basis points, assuming that the composition of global
reserves changes but their level does not.
Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu
Arnaud J. Mehl
European Central Bank
Sonnemannstrasse 20
60314 Frankfurt am Main
Arnaud.Mehl@ecb.int

Livia Chitu
European Central Bank
Sonnemannstrasse 20
60314 Frankfurt am Main
livia.chitu@ecb.europa.eu

1.

Introduction

Scholarly work on the national currency used in international transactions
distinguishes two views. One, familiar to economists, emphasizes pecuniary motives.
Safety, liquidity, network effects, trade links and financial connections explain why
some currencies are used disproportionally as a medium of exchange, store of value
and unit of account by governments and private entities engaged in cross-border
transactions (see e.g. Krugman 1980, 1984, Matsuyama, Kiyotaki and Matsui 1993,
Zhou 1997, Rey 2001 and Devereux and Shi 2013). We refer this as the “Mercury
hypothesis.” 1
Another view, due principally to political economists and applied mainly to
the choice of reserve currency or currencies, emphasizes strategic, diplomatic and
military power. 2 Insofar as a country has such power, governments of other countries
may see it as in their geopolitical interest to conduct the majority of their international
transactions using its currency. That leading power will in turn possess political
leverage with which to encourage the practice (see e.g. Kindleberger 1970, Strange
1971, 1988, Kirshner 1995, Williamson 2012, Cohen 1998, 2015, Liao and McDowell
2016). International currency choice is from Mars, in other words, rather than
Mercury. 3
This “Mars hypothesis,” when added to the intellectual portfolio of
economists, may help to explain some otherwise perplexing aspects of the currency
composition of international reserves. 4 It may explain why Japan holds a larger share
of its foreign reserves in dollars than China (as illustrated in Figure 1). It may explain
why Saudi Arabia holds the bulk of its reserves in dollars, unlike another oil and
commodity exporter, Russia. It may explain why Germany holds virtually all of its

1

In ancient Roman religion and myth, Mercury was the god of commerce while Mars, which we
discuss below, was the god of war.
2
Cohen (2015) argues that military power or reach may also affect the decision of private entities to
rely on a foreign currency as a store of value, since such military prowess makes the issuer’s currency a
“safe asset.”
3
Courtesy of John Gray’s book Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus (Gray 1992) and Robert
Kagan’s phrase “Americans are from Mars, Europeans are from Venus” (Kagan 2002). An episode
epitomizing the importance of geopolitical motives in international currency choice is the so-called
“Blessing Letter” (see Posen 2008). In the 1960s, West Germany’s peg to the U.S. dollar was seen by
German authorities as problematic because it led to significant imported inflation and overheating.
However, the commitment of the United States to maintaining troops on German soil to deter threats
from the U.S.S.R. was linked to Germany’s maintenance of its U.S. dollar peg and continued
investment in dollar reserves. Under U.S. pressure, Karl Blessing (Bundesbank president at the time)
sent a confidential letter to the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
pledging to keep Germany’s dollar reserves against its best economic interest as a quid pro quo for U.S.
security guarantees.
4
International relations scholars have looked at specific country cases, such as Spiro (1999) on the
dollar holdings of countries in the Middle-East, or Zimmermann (2011) on those of West Germany in
the period between 1950 and 1971.

2

official reserves in dollars, unlike France. 5 Germany, Japan and Saudi Arabia all
depend on the United States for security; they are U.S. allies and non-nuclear powers. 6
China, Russia, and France, on the other hand, possess their own nuclear weapons as
deterrents against potentials threats. Comparing nuclear-weapon states and states
dependent on the U.S. for their security, as in Figure 1, suggests that the difference in
the share of the U.S. dollar in foreign reserve holdings is on the order of 35
percentage points.
[Figure 1 about here]
Testing the Mars and Mercury hypotheses is not easy. Causality between
reserve-currency decisions and geopolitics may run in both directions. Not only may
geopolitical alliances and security guarantees encourage a particular pattern of reserve
holdings, but holding a country’s currency may encourage governments to seek out
geopolitical alliances and security guarantees. 7
Addressing this endogeneity requires a measure of geopolitical leverage that is
exogenous to currency choice and varies across time or space. It requires data on
governments’ decisions about currency choice, insofar as governments remain leading
geopolitical players. The currency composition of official foreign reserves is one
such variable, but central banks and governments regard such data as sensitive and
general treat them as confidential. 8 While information on the composition of reserves

5

While Germany can’t hold reserves in euros, before 1999 it could hold reserves in European
currencies other than its own, and even today it can hold reserves in inter alia, Japanese yen and British
pounds. Historically, France has been reluctant to hold a large share of its international reserves in
gold, since at least the 1960s when Charles de Gaulle and his finance minister, Valery Giscard
d’Estaing, railed against the dollar’s “exorbitant privilege.” Similarly, France has been reluctant to
participate in the U.S.-led North Atlantic Treaty Alliance (unlike Germany), where Germany hosts
thousands of U.S. troops and important U.S. military bases (unlike France).
6
Historically, the U.S. has guaranteed Germany’s security mainly against Russia, Japan’s mainly
against China, and Saudi Arabia’s mainly against Iran.
7
Examples from the distant and recent past epitomize the point. After World War II lending by the
U.S. to Europe through the Marshall Plan paved the way for the creation of the North Atlantic Treaty
Alliance (NATO) and buttressed the greenback’s role amidst Cold War threats and a pervasive shortage
of dollars on the old continent. Dollar liquidity swap lines between the Federal Reserve and foreign
central banks created in the wake of the global financial crisis of 2007-09 were given to close U.S.
allies like South Korea and helped solidify the dollar’s international status, notwithstanding the fact
that the crisis had started in the United States. In a similar vein, the People’s Bank of China’s network
of swap lines is believed to serve the ambition to foster the renminbi’s international role and China’s
geopolitical interests.
8
Data on the currency composition of international reserves are made available to the public by only a
limited number of central banks, as Truman and Wong (2006) describe. The I.M.F. publishes only
global aggregates and, recently, breakdowns between advanced economies and emerging and
developing countries. These underlying data, known as the Currency Composition of Official Foreign
Exchange Reserves (C.O.F.E.R.) data base, are confidential; the individual country data have been used
only by two internal I.M.F. staff studies (Dooley, Lizondo and Mathieson 1989, and Eichengreen and
Mathieson 2001).

3

is publicly available for a handful of countries and can be estimated for others, it is
difficult to build a large and representative sample for countries today.
But it is easier to build this kind of sample for earlier periods. Governments
did not always regard data on the composition of reserves as sensitive and confidential
and, even where they did, a more limited menu of options makes it easier for that
composition to be inferred. In this paper we therefore assess the importance of
pecuniary and geopolitical motives in international currency choice using the currency
composition of foreign reserves prior to World War I. We measure geopolitical
motives using data on military alliances, including defense pacts, non-aggression
treaties, neutrality treaties, and ententes. Endogeneity is addressed with an
instrumental variable strategy where the instrument is the presence and rank of
diplomats, suitably lagged and orthogonalized with respect to trade.
We make use of a panel data set providing detailed information on the foreign
exchange reserves of 19 countries between 1890 and 1913. The data distinguish five
reserve currencies: sterling, the French franc, the German mark, the U.S. dollar and
the Dutch guilder. The period we consider culminated in a full-blown global military
conflict, pointing to the salience of geopolitical considerations. Moreover,
governments and central banks were accumulating significant foreign exchange
essentially for the first time, suggesting that pecuniary and geopolitical motives were
not (yet) dominated by simple habit formation. 9 Although gold was the main reserve
asset, foreign exchange played a significant and growing role. 10 This was an era when
currency choice was, well, a choice. Sterling was the leading reserve unit but, as we
show below, governments and central banks could also hold reserves in German
marks and French francs, among other currencies, if they so chose. 11
The period leading up to World War I was also one of proliferating security
alliances and defense pacts (Miller 2012). With the industrialization of significant
parts of the European continent in the second half of the 19th century and the creation
of a unified German Empire in 1870-1, the balance of power created by the Concert of
Europe (made up of Austria, Prussia, Russia and Great Britain, the members of the socalled Quadruple Alliance that defeated France and restored the Bourbon monarchy)
was cast into doubt. Tension among the principal European powers rose further as
they came into conflict over the scramble for African colonies. Germany and AustriaHungary reached an understanding about a defense pact, known as the Dual Alliance,
in 1879. Germany, Austria-Hungary and Italy signed a secret agreement, the Triple
Alliance, in 1882, committing to support one another if any of them was attacked by
either France or Russia, allowing Austro-Hungarian troops to be redeployed from the
9

See Eichengreen, Mehl and Chiţu (2017) and de Vries (1988) for a discussion of habit formation in
this context.
10
Lindert (1969) estimates that foreign exchange accounted for 16% of official reserves held globally
in 1913.
11
The Dutch guilder and U.S. dollar played a role as foreign reserve currencies as well. See Lindert
(1969) for an early account of multipolarity in the international monetary system in the 19th century and
Eichengreen, Mehl, and Chiţu (2017) for a recent discussion.

4

Italian to Russian borders. Partly in response, France and Russia negotiated their own
pact, also known as the Dual Alliance, in 1894; this Dual Alliance was then expanded
into the Triple Entente of Britain, France and Russia, achieved through negotiation of
the Entente Cordiale between Britain and France in 1904 and the Anglo-Russian
Entente in 1907, to counter the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria and Italy. The
traditional interpretation of these alliances is as an attempt to recreate a balance of
power and to balance threats (Walt 1990). We will, of course, have to also consider
the possibility that security alliances grow out prior of economic links (Jackson and
Nei 2015).
We estimate the influence of pecuniary and geopolitical motives using paneldata and two-stage least square methodologies. Our results lend support to both
hypotheses. In particular, we find a sizeable geopolitical or security premium in
international currency choice. 12 By our estimates, military alliances boost the share of
the currencies of alliance partners in foreign reserve portfolios by close to 30
percentage points. 13
This security premium has implications for the benefits accruing to the United
States as issuer of the leading international currency. This status allows the U.S.
government to place dollar-denominated securities at a lower cost because demand
from major reserve holders is stronger than otherwise. The cost to the U.S. of
financing budget and current account deficits is correspondingly less. Our findings
thus suggest that the dollar’s dominance as an international unit is buttressed by the
country’s role as a global power guaranteeing the security of allied nations. If that
role were seen as less sure and that security guarantee as less iron clad, because the
U.S. was disengaging from global geopolitics in favor of more stand-alone, inwardlooking policies, the security premium enjoyed by the U.S. dollar could diminish. 14
Our estimates suggest, in this scenario, that $750 billion worth of official U.S. dollardenominated assets – equivalent to 5 percent of US marketable public debt – would be
liquidated and invested into other currencies such as the yen, the euro or the renminbi,
if the composition of global reserves changes but their level remains stable, an event
that would presumably have significant implications for U.S. bond markets and the
dollar exchange rate.

12

The term “security premium” is from Cohen (2015).
A related paper in political science is Li (2003), who studies the effect of security alliances on
exchange rate regime choice in the Bretton Woods and post-Bretton Woods periods. Our focus is
different, however, insofar as we aim to estimate a geopolitical risk premium, address endogeneity
between currency choice and security alliances, and examine official foreign reserves in order to study
the implications of our findings for America’s “exorbitant privilege”.
14
For instance, UN Secretary-General António Guterres declared on 20 June 2017 that: “If the United
States disengages in relation to many aspects of foreign policy and many aspects of international
relations, it will be unavoidable that other actors will occupy that space. And I don't think this is good
for the United States, and I don't think this is good for the world.” In a similar vein, Germany’s
Chancellor Angela Merkel declared end-May 2017 that the “the times in which we can fully count on
others [i.e. the U.S.] are somewhat over…We Europeans must really take our destiny into our own
hands.”
13

5

Section 2 presents our data. Section 3 reviews our empirical specification.
Section 4 presents the basic results on the Mercury hypothesis. Section 5 turns to
extended results on the Mars hypothesis, after which Section 6 considers the
instrumental variable estimates. Section 7 examines a scenario analysis, while
Section 8 concludes and draws implications for policy.

2.

Data

Our data on the currency composition of foreign exchange reserves are taken from
Lindert (1967). Lindert built on an earlier data set constructed by Bloomfield (1963),
which provided foreign-exchange-reserve totals but no information on the currency
composition of reserves. Lindert used year-end balance sheets of central banks,
national treasuries, exchange stabilization funds, and commercial banks, and obtained
some data from private correspondence with the institutions in question. The
aggregates for the years 1899 and 1913 that he published in Lindert (1969) remain the
best available estimates of the currency composition of foreign exchange reserves
held globally prior to World War I.
For this paper we digitized country-level and currency-specific information in
Lindert (1967). This yields annual observations for 19 countries (Australia, Austria,
Brazil, Canada, Ceylon, Chile, Finland, Germany, Greece, India, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands Indies, Norway, the Philippines, Romania, Russia, Sweden, and
Switzerland) for the apex of the classical gold standard era from 1890 to 1913. 15
Official foreign exchange in five currencies are distinguished: sterling, French francs,
German marks, U.S. dollars, and Dutch guilders.
The institution in charge of managing foreign exchange reserves in this period
was not always the central bank, since in a non-negligible number of cases central
banks were first established after World War I. In some countries without a central
bank, the treasury held the foreign exchange reserves. In others, reserves were held in
a special fund or account created to manage the currency’s parity to gold. In still
other cases other public-sector banks were involved, such as the Yokohama Specie
Bank in Japan or the Caisse Générale d’Epargne et de Retraite in Belgium. 16 And in a
few countries, such as Canada, South Africa and New Zealand, no official institution
was in charge of managing the currency’s parity to gold; instead the task instead
delegated to private commercial banks.
The holdings in question were liquid foreign assets, including commercial and
financial bills drawn on foreign places, foreign treasury bills, deposits in foreign

15
16

Some observations are missing in some years for some countries.
See the data appendix and Lindert (1967) for a discussion of these cases.

6

banks, current account balances with banking correspondents abroad, and current
account credits with banking branches abroad. 17
Figure 2 shows the global stock of foreign exchange reserves by currency in
1899 and 1913 (following Lindert 1969). The overall picture is clearly inconsistent
with the “natural monopoly” view that one currency is in sole possession of this
international-currency role at any point in time. 18 We see how circa 1899 sterling
accounted for the majority (about 65%) of identified foreign exchange reserves. 19 But
French francs and German marks accounted for nonnegligible shares of the total (15%
and 17%, respectively). Sterling’s dominance declined over the subsequent decade
and a half, with gains mainly accruing to the French franc, which was held by Russia
and a number of other countries. In 1913 the share of sterling had fallen to 48%, the
share of the French franc had risen to 31%, and the share of the German mark had
remained stable.
[Figure 2 about here]
Figure 3 shows the evolution of currency shares between 1890 and 1913. The
sample of countries reporting data varies over time, complicating interpretation, but
the pattern suggests that sterling’s dominance peaked in the early 1890s. 20 Whether
this is due to economic or geopolitical factors remains to be determined.
[Figure 3 about here]
Figure 4 shows the evolution between 1890 and 1913 of the currency
composition of official foreign exchange holdings by country. Several economies,
generally those with strong political or colonial ties to a major metropolitan center,
held their reserves in a single currency: Australia, Ceylon and India held only sterling;
the Philippines held only dollars; and the Netherlands Indies held only Dutch guilder.
That the countries in question were colonies or dominions of the U.K., the U.S. or the
Netherlands underscores the importance of institutional or geopolitical factors in
international reserve currency choice, as emphasized by inter alia Strange (1988). 21
The remaining countries held multiple currencies, suggesting that the
aggregate evidence above against the natural-monopoly view is not due to one or a
few large reserve holders. Moreover, the countries in question adjusted the currency
composition of their holdings over the sample period. Here again these changes are
17

Lindert (1967), pp. 14-15.
We discuss estimation problems arising from measurement error below.
19
The dominance of sterling then consequently resembled the dominance of the U.S. dollar now, with
the greenback accounting for roughly two-thirds of global foreign exchange reserves in 2017.
20
This, too, is inconsistent with the view that international reserve currency status is a natural
monopoly or that a currency’s leader status, once acquired cannot erode rapidly.
21
Strange referred to currencies held under such circumstances as “master currencies.”
18

7

suggestive of political and geopolitical factors. The growing share of German marks
in Austria-Hungary’s reserves went hand in hand with the Triple Alliance, i.e. the
secret agreement between Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy signed in 1882 and
renewed periodically until World War I, committing each member to provide mutual
support in the event of an attack by another great power. 22 The increasing importance
of French francs in Russia’s reserves in the years after the Franco-Russian alliance of
1894 highlights a similar point.
[Figure 4 about here]

3.

Specification

Our basic specification follows previous literature (see e.g. Chinn and Frankel 2007,
2008; Li and Liu 2008; Chiţu, Eichengreen and Mehl 2014 and Eichengreen, Mehl
and Chiţu 2016). It models the choice of reserve currency as:

sharei , j ,t = β1sharei , j ,t −1 + β 2

sizei ,t
size j ,t

+ β3

credibilityi ,t
credibility j ,t

+

(1)

β′4 Xi, j + α i + α j + λt + ε i , j ,t
where i, j, and t are the country, currency (dyadic) and time dimensions (i = 1…5; j =
1…19; t = 1…23) and share is the share of currency i in country j’s foreign exchange
reserves in year t; X is a vector of control variables; λ a vector of time effects; ε is the
residual; and the βs are the coefficients to estimate. We control for unobserved
heterogeneity by including dyadic-fixed-effects αi,j when X comprises variables that
vary across both dyads and time, such as bilateral trade and financial depth. When the
variables in question vary across dyads only, such as the proxies for international
transaction costs discussed below, we include currency-fixed effects and countryfixed effects, denoted αi and αj, respectively, as shown in Equation (1).
We draw on analytical models emphasizing inertia, economic size, credibility,
trade relations and financial depth as pecuniary determinants of international currency
status that underpin the Mercury hypothesis. Triffin (1960) was among the first to
emphasize persistence or inertia effects in international currency use by arguing that it
took from 30 to 70 years, depending on the aspects of economic and international
currency status considered, from when the United States overtook Britain as the
leading economic and commercial power and when the dollar overtook sterling as the
dominant international currency. Persistence or inertia effects also feature in the
models of e.g. Krugman (1980, 1984), Matsuyama, Kiyotaki and Matsui (1993) and
22

Romania secretly joined the Triple Alliance in October 1883, which partly explains its significant
holdings of German marks. See also below for more details.

8

Rey (2001). We measure the persistence or inertia effects in question with a lagged
dependent variable.
Economic size is another standard determinant of international currency
choice. It captures the network effects discussed by e.g. Krugman (1980, 1984), who
focused on the increasing returns that result from economies of scale. In his model, a
collective choice to engage in trade using a particular unit reduces transactions costs
associated with that unit, further encouraging the practice. Strategic
complementarities and economies of scale also feature in the random matching model
of Matsuyama, Kiyotaki and Matsui (1993), who model the choice of international
currencies as a double-coincidence-of-wants problem, where the incentive of an agent
to accept a nation’s currency depends on how often he/she trades with a national from
that country. Rey (2001) stresses the self-reinforcing effects on transaction costs of
using a particular unit in foreign exchange markets arising from the pattern of bilateral
trade (what she calls “thick market externalities”). 23 Empirically, we measure
economic size as the output of the country issuing reserve currency i, relative to the
output of reserve holder j, taking data from Maddison (2010).
Persistence and network effects are distinct, and one does not imply the other.
Persistence can have other sources besides network effects giving rise to first-mover
advantage. Examples include habit formation (see e.g. De Vries 1988) and the
absence of low-cost alternatives to the dominant unit. Conversely, network effects
may increase the attractions of a particular standard (in this case, a currency standard)
at a specific point in time without preventing market participants from shifting to
another standard at the next point in time, assuming that lock-in is weak and agents
can coordinate their actions (as argued by David 1986, 1990). The success with
which open standards for personal electronics have been developed in recent years,
weakening lock-in and facilitating shifts between operating systems, illustrates the
point (West 2007).
The credibility term is motivated by models in which currency depreciation
can make holding a unit unattractive and discourage its international use, as in
Devereux and Shi (2013). Stability is important for credibility because reserve
holders prefer reliable stores of value and may be reluctant to hold reserves in units
that depreciate by too much or for too long. We measure credibility as time in years
spent by reserve issuer i on the gold standard minus time spent by reserve holder j
taking data from Reinhart and Rogoff (2011). This is in keeping with the observation
that adherence to the gold standard served as a “good housekeeping seal of approval”
strengthening country’s credibility and access to foreign capital (Bordo and Rockoff
1996).
Trade relations may influence reserve currency status, insofar as commercial
transactions are a source of information useful for informing foreign investment
23

Devereux and Shi (2013) take the argument to a dynamic general equilibrium model in which vehicle
currencies enable agents to economize on the number of currency trading posts.

9

decisions (Antràs and Caballero 2007). Trade links may also make foreign
investments more secure insofar as strategic default is deterred by the threat of
commercial retaliation (Rose and Spiegel 2004). Aviat and Coeurdacier (2007), Lane
and Milesi-Ferreti (2008a) and (2008b), Coeurdacier and Martin (2009), Forbes
(2010) and Coeurdacier and Rey (2011) all provide evidence that trade in goods is an
important determinant of trade in assets. We measure trade relations as the logarithm
of the sum of bilateral exports and imports, using data from Jacks, Meissner and Novy
(2011).
Financial depth is a final pecuniary factor thought to be important in the
choice of reserve currency (as in Portes and Rey 1998 and Papaioannou and Portes
2008). Eichengreen and Flandreau (2012) show that financial deepening was a key
determinant of the rise of dollar-denominated trade credits in the 1920s. Chiţu,
Eichengreen and Mehl (2014) show that financial deepening was the main factor
helping the dollar overcome sterling’s head start as an international financing
currency in the interwar period. Following King and Levine (1993), we measure
financial depth by the financial monetisation ratio (broad money to GDP), taking data
from Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2017). 24
We include year effects throughout. These capture changes in the structure of
the international monetary and financial system as well as other changes in the world
economy for which we do not otherwise control. In addition, we estimate the
resulting equations with dyadic effects to account for unobserved country-currency
specific variation.
We implement Equation (1) using ordinary least squares and report standard
errors robust to autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity and clustered by dyad (to
control for possible residual correlation between country-currency observations in
each year). 25 In robustness checks we report estimates obtained with a random effects
estimator. Given that a country’s currency shares are bounded between zero and one,
a tobit estimator might have been warranted. However, since our data are censored
neither from above nor from below, this is not necessary. That said, we also report
results using a panel tobit estimator. Finally, insofar as the lagged dependent variable,
our proxy for persistence or inertia, can also reflect serially correlated omitted
variables, we report estimates using the Griliches (1961)-Liviatan (1963) and
Hatanaka (1974) estimators.

4.

Mercury Hypothesis

24

In robustness checks we also consider the financial intermediation ratio (private credit to GDP); see
below.
25
Instrumental variables estimates are also reported below.

10

Table 1 presents the benchmark results, where the four pecuniary variables are entered
first one-by-one and then together. Half of the adjustment to the long run in
international currency shares in global foreign reserves is estimated to occur in a
single year, ceteris paribus. This is lower than the 0.9 estimate of Chinn and Frankel
(2007, Table 8.4, p. 303) using reserve data for 1973-1998. 26 This suggests that
inertia was weaker and that the currency composition of foreign reserves could
change more rapidly in this earlier era.
Table 1 lends support to the Mercury hypothesis. To start, credibility
matters: the share of a particular currency in foreign reserves increases significantly
with the time spent on the gold standard, in line with the observation that the latter
served as a “good housekeeping seal of approval.” 27 The full model estimates
(column 6 of Table 1) suggests that the short run (one year) effect of an additional
year on the gold standard is an increase in the share of a particular reserve currency
of about 0.2 percentage point. 28 That by 1899 Britain had been on the gold standard
for 56 years longer than France explains a quarter of the 48 percentage-point
difference in their respective shares of global reserve portfolios, other things equal.
The coefficient on economic size is positive, in line with theory, but
statistically insignificant (columns 3, 6 and 7). 29 It may be that we lack
heterogeneity sufficient to identify its effect, insofar as three of the five reserve
issuers we consider (the U.K., France and Germany) were of roughly equal size (i.e.
9% to 14% of global output over the sample period, against 23% for the U.S. and 1%
for the Netherlands).
Data availability is more limited for trade relations and financial depth. 30
Trade relations enter with a positive coefficient, in line with theory, and are
significant at the 15% level (see columns 4 and 6). The effect of financial depth is
positive as well, in line with the findings of earlier studies mentioned above, and
significant at the 15% level, too.
[Table 1 about here]
Skeptics may worry that we overlook the fact that gold, not currency, was the
main component of official reserves. We address this by re-estimating Equation (1)

26

When we control for the standard gravity covariates, we still obtain a coefficient on the order of 0.9
(see below).
27
Again, this is in line with the estimates of Chinn and Frankel (2007), who also found evidence of
significant credibility effects on reserve data for the modern era.
28
That increase in the share is almost half a percentage point in the long run.
29
However, insofar as economic size is a dyadic variable, like all variables in vector X it depends on
the economic size of the reserve holding countries and on time as well.
30
We lose up to half of the observations in the estimates reported in columns (4) to (7).

11

using currency shares adjusted for gold holdings. 31 The estimates are reported in
Table A2 in the appendix. Again we find that inertia and credibility effects matter
significantly. Magnitudes are comparable to those of the baseline estimates. 32
Previous studies found that the dyadic covariates typically used in gravity
models, such as common border, common language, common colonial relationship
and geographic distance, influence the geography of international finance and affect
bilateral patterns of cross-border financial flows and holdings. 33 These variables aim
to capture transaction costs or information asymmetries that affect trade and financial
relations between nations; they are sometimes described as picking up “familiarity” or
“connectivity” frictions. We take data on these dyadic covariates from CEPII’s
GeoDist data base. 34
These are entered one-by-one and then together in Table 2. The estimates
control for currency fixed effects, country effects and time effects. The results
confirm the importance of pecuniary factors, in line with the Mercury hypothesis.
Estimated persistence is now stronger, with the point estimate on lagged currency
share reaching 0.9, while the coefficient estimates on credibility and economic size
are smaller. Conceivably, this reflects the fact that we can no longer control for
dyadic fixed-effects insofar as these would be collinear with the gravity covariates
capturing international transaction costs (which vary across countries but not over
time). When they are significant, a one percentage point relative increase in the share
of global output and an additional year on the gold standard are both associated with
an increase in the share of a particular reserve currency of about 0.4 percentage point
in the long run. The currency composition of foreign exchange reserves tends to be
tilted toward currencies issued by economies vis-à-vis which transactions costs or
information asymmetries are low, i.e. which share a common border, a common
language, a common colonial relationship with reserve currency issuers or are
geographically near the issuers in question (see columns 1 to 4 of Table 2).
The full model estimates (column 5 of Table 2) suggest that these factors are
economically important. Sharing a common border with a reserve currency issuer is
associated with an increase in the share of the issuer’s currency of more than 5
percentage points in the short run, while a common colonial relationship is associated
31
Specifically we scale currency shares by the proportion of gold and silver in reserve holders’ total
foreign reserves.
32
The effects of trade relations and financial depth are no longer statistically significant, but the fact
that we lose a large number of observations due to lack of data for gold holdings for several countries
likely explains much of the loss in estimation efficiency. The effect of economic size is not statistically
significant, as in Table 1.
33
See e.g. Portes and Rey (2005), Aviat and Coeurdacier (2007), Lane and Milesi-Ferreti (2008a) and
(2008b), Forbes (2010).
34
See Mayer and Zignago (2011). The data consist of binary dummy variables that equal 1 if two
countries are contiguous (common border), share a common official language (common language), and
were ever in a colonial relationship (common colony); distance is the simple distance (in kilometres)
between the two most populated cities of a particular dyad. Gravity covariates have been used in other
studies of international currency status using dyadic panel data, such as He et al. (2015).

12

with an increase of 7 percentage points. 35 Long-run effects are sizeable, on the order
of 50-70 percentage points.
[Table 2 about here]
Table 3 examines the robustness of the results to use of a linear random effect
estimator (column 1), and a panel tobit estimator (column 2). Signs, magnitudes, and
significance levels are similar to those in our baseline model. Note that our data are
censored neither from above nor from below (see column 2 of Table 3, last row),
which suggests that tobit estimation is not necessary.
Interpretation of the lagged dependent variable in terms of inertia will be
problematic if the latter is simply picking up persistent error terms. 36 One treatment is
to instrument the lagged dependent variable with its second lag and the first lags of
the independent variables (see e.g. Griliches, 1961; Liviatan, 1963). This will yield
consistent, albeit inefficient, estimates. 37 Intuitively, including only the predicted
component of lagged currency shares enhances the plausibility that the lag is picking
up genuine inertia effects rather than persistent random errors. Another treatment is
that of Hatanaka (1974), which includes both the fitted value and the residual from the
first-stage regression in the second stage and yields estimates that are both consistent
and efficient.
Results using these techniques (columns 3 and 4 of Table 3) are close to our
earlier estimates in terms of economic magnitude and sign, but statistical significance
of the estimated coefficients is weaker, with the exception of the coefficient on inertia.
This suggests that there may be omitted variables leading to persistent errors picked
up in the lagged dependent variable, such as geopolitical factors, an explanation to
which we turn below. 38
Finally, we replaced the monetization ratio with the credit intermediation ratio
as our metric of financial depth and used alternative measures for the common
language dummy and for distance. 39 We dummied out Germany insofar as it is the
only country of our sample that is both a reserve currency issuer and holder. We
controlled for the direction of trade using alternative data sources, including from the

35

In the full model estimates, the effect of common language is no longer statistically significant.
The combination of serially correlated errors and the lagged dependent variable also introduces the
possibility of biased coefficient estimates due to correlation between the lagged variable and the error
term.
37
These estimates are inefficient since the adjustment does not correct for error autocorrelation.
38
This is also argued by e.g. Posen (2008).
39
We use a common language dummy equalling 1 if a language is spoken by at least 9% of the
population in both countries within a dyad; and we use the simple distance (in kilometres) between the
two capital cities within a dyad as well as a measure of weighted distance (where the weights are the
shares of the cities in the respective country’s population).
36

13

Correlates of War project (http://www.correlatesofwar.org/) and Mitchell (1998a, b,
c). In all cases, our basic results remained broadly unchanged. 40
[Table 3 about here]

5.

Mars Hypothesis

To incorporate geopolitical factors, we modify equation (1) to the form:

sharei , j ,t = β1sharei , j ,t −1 + β 2

sizei ,t
size j ,t

+ β3

credibilityi ,t
credibility j ,t

+ β′4 X i, j

(2)

+ β 5 alliancei , j ,t + α i + α j + λt + ε i , j ,t
where alliance is an indicator variable equaling 1 if a defense pact, non-aggression
treaty, neutrality treaty or entente is in force between reserve currency issuer i and
reserve holder j in year t, and 0 otherwise. We take data on formal military alliances
among states between 1890 and 1913 from the Correlates of War Project. 41
One reason why the national security and foreign policy projection capabilities
of reserve currency issuers influence other countries’ decisions to use their currency is
that military alliances put pressure on both sides to link their pursuit of stability,
including monetary stability (Posen 2008). Reserve currency issuers providing
security guarantees may use them as leverage to obtain finance from securitydependent nations, or to be the financial center from which the nations in question
borrow funds. This leverage results in the anchor country having its own-currencydenominated debt held as foreign reserves by the security-dependent economy. 42
Interstate violence can also function as a tax on international trade. Blomberg
and Hess (2006) find that terrorism, together with internal and external conflicts,
place an effective 30% tariff on trade. 43 Glick and Taylor (2010) find large and
40
The effect of trade on currency shares was positive but not statistically significant using the
alternative data sources in question.
41
See Gibler (2009) on the coding of formal alliances among states in the Correlates of War data base.
Defense pacts are international agreements where the signatories promise to support each other
militarily against a specific threat. A non-aggression treaty is an agreement between countries not to
attack each other for a specified period of time. A neutrality treaty foresees that signatories observe
neutrality if one of them is attacked. An entente is a friendly understanding or informal alliance
between states.
42
That the euro area cannot at present compete with the U.S. or China in terms of “hard power” is seen
by some observers (e.g. Moss 2009) as weighing on the euro’s international role.
43
They use a panel data set with annual observations on 177 countries from 1968 to 1999. This is
larger than estimated tariff-equivalent costs of border and language barriers and tariff-equivalent
reduction through generalized systems of preference and WTO participation.

14

persistent impacts of wars on trade, national income, and global economic welfare. 44
Insofar as war is a tax on trade, formal military alliances that aim at containing
violence between signatory nations and fostering cooperation against external threats
can stimulate trade in goods and finance. This, in turn, helps to nudge reserve holders
toward the unit of issuers which are members of the same alliance. 45
If geopolitical considerations dominate, then we would expect the coefficient
on alliance to be positive and significant and the coefficients on economic size,
credibility and transaction cost dummies to be statistically insignificant. Our test of
the “Mars” vs. “Mercury” hypothesis hence is:
𝐻𝐻0 : 𝛽𝛽5 ≤ 0, ∀𝑘𝑘 ∈ [1,4], 𝛽𝛽𝑘𝑘 ≠ 0

where rejecting 𝐻𝐻0 is evidence for the Mars hypothesis against the Mercury hypothesis.

Table 4 reports OLS estimates of Eq. (2) with standard errors that are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered by dyad. The results in columns (5) to (8),
controlling for transaction costs, support the Mercury hypothesis against the Mars
hypothesis. The estimated coefficients on inertia, contiguity, common colonial
relationship and distance are similar to the basic estimates of Table 2. 46 The
estimated coefficients on military alliances and its subcategories (defense pacts,
neutrality treaties, ententes) are positive, in line with the Mars hypothesis, but
typically not statistically significant. 47

[Table 4 about here]

44

According to the authors, these may be at least as large as the conventionally measured direct costs
of war, such as lost human capital.
45
Of course, trade and military alliances can be endogenous. Causality could flow in the other
direction, too, with trade influencing security considerations. We will address this possibility below.
46
If we do not control for transaction costs, as in columns (1) to (4), only the coefficients on inertia and
on the neutrality treaty dummy are positive and statistically significant. The non-aggression treaty
dummy drops out from the regression due to multicollinearity.
47
The exception is the coefficient on the neutrality dummy, which is positive and statistically
significant. The coefficient on the entente dummy is slightly negative, albeit statistically insignificant,
when we control for transaction costs as in column (8) of Table 4.

15

6.

Instrumental Variable Estimates

When estimating Equation (2) we face endogeneity and measurement error problems,
however. Causality between currency shares and alliances can run both ways. 48
Omitted variables could influence both currency shares and military alliances
simultaneously. The bias may come, for instance, from the fact that some countries
hold a small portion of their reserves in a particular unit because of cultural, historical
or still other reasons that we cannot fully capture, while also being part of an alliance
with the issuer. 49 Finally, measurement errors on currency shares may arise because
of e.g. changes in reporting practices or in availability of data on reserve assets. If
errors are correlated with the explanatory variables, the OLS estimate of β5 will be
biased and inconsistent. 50
We seek to mitigate endogeneity and measurement error problems by
obtaining instrumental-variable estimates based on the cross-sectional dimension of
the sample. We modify equation (3) to the form:

sharei , j = γ 1

sizei
credibilityi
+γ2
+ γ′3 X i, j + γ 4 alliancei , j + α j + +ui , j
size j
credibility j

(3)

where observations for dyad (i, j) are now period averages over 1890-1913. Our
instrument for alliance is diplomatic representation, i.e. the presence and rank of
diplomats from a sending nation in the host nation. The presence of diplomats
plausibly helps to forge or sustain international agreements and will therefore be
positively correlated with alliance. At the same time, diplomatic representation is
unlikely to be correlated with currency shares for other reasons. 51 Governments send
or accredit diplomats based on broad foreign policy considerations, not to directly
affect the currency composition of foreign reserve holdings. Expulsions or
withdrawals of diplomats typically occur because of foreign policy incidents, not to
otherwise influence the currency composition of foreign exchange holdings. This
instrument plausibly satisfies the exclusion restriction, in other words. 52

48
There may be an upward bias in the OLS estimate of β5 if forging an alliance encourages official
investment in the unit of the reserve currency issuer that is part of the alliance in question, while at the
same time the official investments make the alliance in turn more solid.
49
There should be in this case a downward bias in the OLS estimate of β5.
50
If the errors are not correlated with the independent variable, the OLS estimate of β5 will be unbiased
and consistent but inefficient.
51
The simple correlation coefficient between alliance and diplomatic representation is positive and
stands at almost 0.5 excluding colonies, as against 0.2 including colonies.
52
The first-stage regressions will also include pecuniary factors as instruments, i.e. economic size,
contiguity and distance which, as political scientists posit, are correlated with power and proximity and,
in turn, with military alliance formation (see e.g. Walt 1985).

16

We take data on diplomatic representation from the Correlates of War project.
This variable is a linearly increasing function of the level of diplomatic representation.
It equals 0 if there is no presence of diplomats of country i in country j (and viceversa); 1 if a chargé d’affaires of country i is present in country j (and vice-versa); 2 if
there is a minister; 3 if there is an ambassador; and 4 if country i is a colony of
country j (and vice-versa) implying that they cannot send or host diplomats in the
traditional sense. 53
These data are available at 5-year intervals. This implies that we lose quite a
number of observations from our original sample. The data are also highly persistent
and offer limited heterogeneity in the time series dimension; presence and rank of
diplomatic representation does not change quickly. 54 We therefore average out the
dyadic observations over time. Assuming that the mean of the measurement errors in
the dependent variable is zero, this helps to mitigate biases arising from the
measurement errors in question.
We include currency fixed effects to control for unobserved heterogeneity,
leaving us with 38 degrees of freedom insofar as we have a sample of 50 observations
and no fewer than 12 coefficients to estimate. Controlling for country fixed effects
would reduce estimation efficiency more significantly still, as we would be left with
only 23 degrees of freedom.
The estimates in columns 1 to 5 of Table 5 are obtained by OLS, while those
in columns 6 to 10 are obtained by two-stage least squares using diplomatic
representation as an instrument. Standard errors are again robust to
heteroscedasticity. Pecuniary factors such as economic size and transaction costs (e.g.
contiguity and common colonial relationship) still matter, in line with the Mercury
hypothesis (columns 6 to 10 of Table 5). 55 In addition, non-pecuniary motives have
positive effects and are significant at the 12% level. 56
Formal tests suggest that diplomatic representation is a valid instrument. The
Kleinberger-Paap test of underidentification is rejected at the 10% level of
confidence, confirming that diplomatic represention is correlated with the endogenous
53

For instance, Britain was represented by a Viceroy in India, and there was an India Office in the U.K.
to oversee the administration of the provinces of British India. A chargé d’affaires is a head of mission
accredited by his country’s foreign minister to the receiving nation’s foreign minister when the two
nations have not agreed to exchange ambassadors. A Minister is a head of mission accredited to the
receiving country’s head of state; he leads a legation rather than an embassy. An ambassador is a head
of mission accredited to the receiving country’s head of state who heads an embassy in the receiving
country’s capital city.
54
A simple AR(1) model of the diplomatic-representation variable gives an autoregressive root on the
order of 0.95.
55
Other pecuniary factors have statistically insignificant effects, in contrast.
56
While this is lower than conventional significance levels, readers should keep in mind that we have
only 38 degrees of freedom, which weighs on efficiency.

17

regressor. 57 The Hansen test of overidentifying restrictions is not rejected, suggesting
that our instrument is uncorrelated with the error term.
Mars effects are economically large. According to the IV estimates, military
alliances boost the share of international units in foreign reserve holdings by 30
percentage points (see column 6 of Table 5). This is not far from the 35 percentage
point difference in dollar shares between the nuclear-weapon states and states
dependent on the U.S. for their security and integrity of Figure 1.
[Table 5 about here]
Another concern is reverse causality between trade and diplomatic
representation. It has been argued for the modern era that foreign embassies and
consulates have lost importance for foreign policy and intelligence gathering and
increasingly market themselves as agents of export promotion (see e.g. Rose 2007). If
diplomatic representation was motivated by trade-promotion goals, which would
determine the direction of trade and, in turn, currency shares, results will be biased.
To address this issue, we calculate the residuals from a regression of
diplomatic presence and rank as of 1884 (i.e. prior to the beginning of our sample) on
distance, relative GDP, contiguity, common language and common colonial
relationship, the standard arguments of the gravity model. This provides us with a
measure of diplomatic representation that is both predetermined and orthogonal with
respect to trade frictions, including trade potential, insofar as the latter is captured by
the frictions in question. The results using this measure, in Table 6, are the same as in
Table 5. 58
[Table 6 about here]
Figure 5 shows the predicted shares of selected reserve currencies in the
foreign reserve holdings of five countries that signed defense pacts with the issuer of
those currencies prior to World War I. Predicted shares are computed using the full
model estimates in Table 5, column (7), i.e. including the effects of defense pacts
(shown as dark grey bars) and, alternatively, excluding the effects of defense pacts
(shown as light grey bars). Actual currency shares are shown as black bars.
Consider the case of Japan, which is shown in the middle of Figure 4. The
actual share of sterling in Japan’s foreign reserve holdings prior to World War I was
96%. The predicted share in a model including only pecuniary factors is much lower,
The power of the instrument is low, however, insofar as the F-statistic of the first-stage regression is
below the rule-of-thumb value of 10 or the critical values tabulated by Stock and Yogo (2005).
58
One reason for this is that diplomatic representation in our 1890-1913 was very similar to that in
1884. It was decided beforehand and, insofar as we removed trade considerations, by broad
geopolitical motives. This suggests that trade promotion goals are unimportant for our results.
57

18

at 36%. That Japan signed a defense pact with the United Kingdom in 1902 to oppose
Russia’s expansion in Asia goes a long way toward explaining the difference. The
predicted share including defense-pact effects is 88%, much closer to the actual share.
Defense pacts similarly explain much of the gap between actual and predicted shares
of the Reichsmark and French franc for Austria-Hungary, Italy, Romania and Russia.
In the absence of Mars effects, our equation under-predicts currency shares in
countries with defense pacts. As Figure 6 makes clear, the forecast error for the
countries in question is negative. But under-prediction is not a systematic feature of a
model without Mars effects. Such a model, in contrast, tends to over-predict currency
shares (the forecast error is positive for over 60% of the observations shown in the
figure). This is additional evidence that the reserve allocation of countries with
defense pacts is different from other countries.

Figure 7 illustrates the point with reference five countries that depend on the
US for their security (Germany, Japan, Korea, Saudi Arabia, Taiwan) using our
estimate of the geopolitical premium obtained for the earlier era. The importance of
geopolitical factors in reserve currency choice is again readily apparent now, just as
before. 59 The figure makes clear that the Mars hypothesis goes a long way toward
explaining the dominance of the US dollar in global reserves in the modern era, too.
[Figures 5, 6 and 7 about here]

7.

Scenario Analysis

Given these findings, what would be the impact on US bond markets of a scenario in
which the U.S. is no longer be seen as a predictable guarantor of the security of its
allies? Table 7 gives a sense of the impact by contrasting the share of the US dollar in
the reserves of nuclear-weapon states, on the one hand, and states dependent on the
U.S. for their geopolitical security, on the other hand. 60 It assumes that the dollar’s
security premium disappears, in other words. It also assumes that that the level of
reserves held globally remains unchanged. The result is a 30 percentage-point
reduction in the share of the U.S. unit in the reserves of U.S.-dependent states, and an
increase the share of other reserve units such as the euro, yen and renminbi (see
column 6 of Table 7).
59

Credibility for the modern era is measured with sovereign debt ratings (instead of years in the gold
standard). Ratings are converted into a numeric variable using a linear scale, which has the same
standard deviation across countries as the credibility variable for the earlier era.
60
The table does not report nuclear-weapon states of which the currency composition of foreign
exchange reserves is not known, such as Pakistan and North Korea, or which no longer possess nuclear
weapons, such as South Africa. The table does not report major non-N.A.T.O. U.S. allies with reserve
holdings below $200 billion, such as Thailand, Poland, Egypt or Australia, with the exception of
Germany.

19

The dollar assets liquidated in this scenario, as shown in column (7), total
more than $750 billion. This is equivalent to about 5% of the stock of U.S.
marketable public debt, or about 4% of U.S. GDP. 61 U.S. disengagement would thus
have significant effects on bond markets. Adopting the elasticity estimate of Warnock
and Warnock (2009), according to which 12-month foreign flows of 1 percent of U.S.
GDP are associated with a 19 basis point reduction in US long-term interest rates, it
would raise long-term U.S. interest rates by roughly 80 basis points. With public debt
at more than $14 trillion end-2016, this would translate into roughly $115 billion in
additional interest rate payments per annum. These benefits need to be compared
with the costs of supporting the U.S.’s military presence overseas. One official
estimate put these at $10 billion per year, some 70% of which being spent in
Germany, Korea, and Japan (U.S. Senate 2013). One independent estimate is higher,
at $100 billion per year (Vine 2015). Either way, US foreign involvement remains
beneficial insofar as the geopolitical premium earned on the U.S. dollar is higher still.
The rise in U.S. long-term interest rates, in turn, would lead to depreciation of
the U.S. dollar of almost 5% after ten years, given the coefficient estimate of 0.6 on
interest rate differentials obtained by Chinn and Meredith (2004) in long-horizon
uncovered interest parity regressions. 62
[Table 7 about here]
What if the level of foreign reserves changes when the US withdraws from the
world? If the world becomes a riskier place, countries may choose to increase their
reserves holdings. Table 8 considers alternative scenarios where it is assumed both
that the U.S. dollar loses its security premium and that the level of reserves held by
states dependent on the U.S. for their geopolitical security rises by up to 30%. Two
opposing effects now need to be considered. On the one hand, dollars need to be sold
because their share in the reserves of U.S.-dependent states falls. On the other hand,
dollars need to be purchased because countries increase their overall reserve holdings.
The net effect is shown in Table 8. Plausibly, the more that U.S.-dependent
states increase their reserve holdings, the less they liquidate dollars, and the less is the
impact on U.S. bond yields and the dollar exchange rate. Figure 8 shows that the
impact in question declines linearly with the increase in the level of reserves assumed.
That said, it remains economically large. Assuming an increase in the level of
reserves of 30%, which is sizeable, US long-term interest rates would still increase by
more than 30 basis points.
[Table 8 and Figure 8 about here]
61

The former stands at $14.4 trillion, against $18.6 trillion for the latter.
The estimate is obtained with 10-year benchmark government bond yields on a panel of observations
for 5 major exchange rates against the U.S. dollar over the period 1987-2000. Updated estimates in
Chinn and Quayyum (2013) are similar.
62

20

8.

Conclusion

We have assessed the importance of pecuniary and geopolitical motives in
international currency choice using data on foreign exchange reserves prior to World
War I. Our results provide evidence of both motives. Specifically, they suggest that
military alliances boost the share of international units in foreign exchange reserve
holdings by almost 30 percentage points.
Currently, the dollar’s dominance as an international unit is supported, in part,
by America’s status as a global power, one that helps to guarantee the security of its
allies. Our findings speak to current discussions on the future of the international
monetary system, amidst concerns about possible American disengagement from the
global geopolitics in favor of a more U.S.-first, isolationist role. If this status came
to be seen as less predictable and secure, our results suggest that long-term U.S.
interest rates would increase by as much as 80 basis points, according to our
estimates.
Our findings also imply that China’s growing self-confidence and
assertiveness on the international stage could help to support the emergence of the
renminbi as an increasingly important international unit. And they suggest that deeper
European cooperation in certain domains, such as external security and defense, might
not be irrelevant for the euro’s global standing.

21

References
Antràs, Pol and Ricardo Caballero (2007), “Trade and Capital Flows: A Financial
Frictions Perspective,” NBER Working Paper no. 13241.
Aviat, Antonin and Nicolas Coeurdacier (2007), “The Geography of Trade in Goods
and Asset Holdings,” Journal of International Economics 71 pp. 22-51.
Bank of Russia (2016), Annual Report for 2015,
https://www.cbr.ru/eng/publ/God/ar_2015_e.pdf (accessed on 20 J uly 2017)
Bloomfield, Arthur (1963) “Short-Term Capital Movements under the Pre-1914 Gold
Standard,” Princeton Studies in International Finance No. 11, Princeton, New
Jersey.
Blomberg, Stephen and Gregory Hess (2006), “How Much Does Violence Tax
Trade?” Review of Economics and Statistics 88, pp. 599-612.
Bordo, Michael and Hugh Rockoff (1996), “The Gold Standard as a ‘Good
Housekeeping Seal of Approval’,” Journal of Economic History 56, pp. 389-428.
Coeurdacier, Nicolas and Philippe Martin (2009), “The Geography of Asset Trade and
the Euro: Insiders and Outsiders,” Journal of the Japanese and International
Economies 23, pp. 90-113.
Coeurdacier, Nicolas and Hélène Rey (2011), “Home Bias in Open Economy
Financial Macroeconomics,” Journal of Economic Literature 51, pp. 63-115.
China Post (2016), “Taiwan’s Foreign Exchange Reserves Set New Record in June:
Central Bank,” http://www.chinapost.com.tw/taiwanbusiness/2016/07/11/471882/taiwans-foreign.htm (accessed on 20 July 2017).
Chinn, Menzie and Guy Meredith (2004), “Monetary Policy and Long-Horizon
Uncovered Interest Parity,” IMF Staff Papers 51, pp 409-430.
Chinn, Menzie and Saad Quayyum (2013), “Long Horizon Uncovered Interest Parity
Re-Assessed,” mimeo, https://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~mchinn/chinn_quayyum_uip.pdf
(accessed November 14th, 2017)
Chinn, Menzie and Jeffrey Frankel (2007), “Will the Euro Eventually Surpass the
Dollar as Leading International Currency?” in Richard Clarida (ed.), G7 Current
Account Imbalances and Adjustment, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.
283-338.
Chinn, Menzie and Jeffrey Frankel (2008), “Why the Euro Will Rival the Dollar,”
International Finance 11, pp. 49-73.
Chiţu, Livia, Barry Eichengreen and Arnaud Mehl (2014), “When Did the Dollar
Overtake Sterling as the Leading International Currency: Evidence from the Bond
Markets,” Journal of Development Economics 111, pp. 225-245.
Cohen, Benjamin (1998), The Geography of Money, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Cohen, Benjamin (2015), Currency Power: Understanding Monetary Rivalry,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
David, Paul (1986), “Narrow Windows, Blind Giants and Angry Orphans: The
Dynamics of Systems Rivalries and Dilemmas of Technology Policy,” Technology

22

Innovation Project Working Paper No. 10, Center for Economic Policy Research,
Stanford University (March).
David, Paul (1990), “The Economics of Compatibility Standards: An Introduction to
Recent Research,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology 1, pp. 3-41.
Dellas, Harris and Chin Bang Yoo (1991), “Reserve Currency Preferences of Central
Banks: The Ccase of Korea,” Journal of International Money and Finance 10, pp.
406-419.
Devereux, Michael and Shouyong Shi (2013), “Vehicle Currency,” International
Economic Review 54, pp. 97-133.
De Vries, Casper (1988), “Theory and Relevance of Currency Substitution with Case
Studies for Canada and the Netherlands Antilles,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 70, pp. 512-515.
Dooley, Michael, Saul Lizondo and Donald Mathieson (1989), “The Currency
Composition of Foreign Exchange Reserves,” IMF Staff Papers 36, pp. 385-434.
Eichengreen, Barry and Marc Flandreau (2012), “The Federal Reserve, the Bank of
England, and the Rise of the Dollar as an International Currency, 1914-1939,”
Open Economies Review 23, pp. 57-87.
Eichengreen, Barry, Arnaud Mehl and Livia Chiţu (2016), “Stability or Upheaval?
The Currency Composition of International Reserves in the Long Run,” IMF
Economic Review 64, pp. 354-380.
Eichengreen, Barry, Arnaud Mehl and Livia Chiţu (2017), How Global Currencies
Work – Past, Present and Future, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Eichengreen, Barry and Donald Mathieson (2001), “The Currency Composition of
Foreign Exchange Reserves: Retrospect and Prospect,” in Charles Wyplosz (ed.),
The Impact of EMU on Europe and the Developing Countries, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Forbes, Kristin (2010), “Why do Foreigners Invest in the US?” Journal of
International Economics 80, pp. 3-21.
Gibler, Douglas (2009), International Military Alliances, 1648-2008, CQ Press.
Glick, Reuven and Alan Taylor (2010), “Collateral Damage: Trade Disruption and the
Economic Impact of War,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92, pp. 102-127.
Gray, John (1992), Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus, Harper Collins.
Griliches, Zvi (1961), “A Note on the Serial Correlation Bias in Estimates of
Distributed Lags”, Econometrica 29, pp. 65-73.
Henning, Randall (1994), Currencies and Politics in the United States, Germany and
Japan, Washington D.C.: Institute for International Economics.
HM Treasury (2004), Exchange Equalisation Account: Report and Accounts 2004-05,
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130129110519/http://www.hmtreasury.gov.uk/ukecon_eea_index.htm (access ed on 20 July 2017)
Indian Express (2015), “RBI: Raise Share of Dollar in Foreign Exchange Reserves,”
by Ritu Sarin and Sandeep Singh |
http://indianexpress.com/article/business/business-others/rbi-raise-share-of-dollarin-foreign-exchange-reserves/ (accessed on 20 July 2017).

23

Jacks, David, Christopher Meissner and Dennis Novy (2011), “Trade Booms, Trade
Busts, and Trade Costs,” Journal of International Economics 83, pp. 185-201.
Jackson, Matthew and Stephen Nei (2015), “Networks of Military Alliances, Wars
and International Trade,” unpublished manuscript, Stanford University (October).
Jordà, Oscar, Moritz Schularick and Alan M. Taylor (2017), “Macrofinancial History
and the New Business Cycle Facts,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016,
volume 31, Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan Parker (eds). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Hatanaka, Michio (1974), “An Efficient Two-Step Estimator for the Dynamic
Adjustment Model with Autoregressive Errors,” Journal of Econometrics 2, pp.
199-220.
Kagan, Robert (2002), “Power and Weakness” Policy Review, No. 113, June and July
2002.
Kindleberger, Charles (1970), Power and Money: The Politics of International
Economics and the Economics of International Politics, New York: Basic Books.
King, Robert and Ross Levine (1993), “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be
Right,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, pp. 717-737.
Kirshner, Jonathan (1995), Currency and Coercion: The Political Economy of
International Monetary Power, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Krugman, Paul (1980), “Vehicle Currencies and the Structure of International
Exchange,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 12, pp. 513-526.
Krugman, Paul (1984), “The International Role of the Dollar: Theory and Prospect,”
in John Bilson and Richard Marston (eds), Exchange Rate Theory and Practice,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 261-278.
He, Qing, Iikka Korhonen, Junjie Guo and Fangge Liu (2015), “The Geographic
Distribution of International Currencies and RMB Internationalization,” BOFIT
Discussion Paper No. 20/2015.
Li, David and Linlin Liu (2008), “RMB Internationalization: An Empirical Analysis,”
Journal of Financial Research 11, pp. 1-16.
Li, Quan (2003), “The Effect of Security Alliances on Exchange Rate Regime
Choices,” International Interactions 29, pp. 159-193.
Lane, Philip. and Gian-Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2008a), “The Drivers of Financial
Globalization,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 98(2), pp.
327-332.
Lane, Philip and Gian-Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2008b), “International Investment
Patterns,” Review of Economics and Statistics 90, pp. 538-549.
Lindert, Peter (1967), Key Currencies and the Gold Exchange Standard, 1900-1913,
PhD dissertation, Cornell University, Ithaca.
Lindert, Peter (1969), “Key Currencies and Gold: 1900-1913,” Princeton Studies in
International Finance, No. 11, Princeton, New Jersey.
Liu, Steven and Daniel McDowell (2016), “No Reservations: International Order and
Demand for the Renminbi as a Reserve Currency,” International Studies Quarterly
60, pp.272-293

24

Liviatan, Nissan (1963), “Consistent Estimation of Distributed Lags,” International
Economic Review 4, pp. 44-52.
Maddison, Angus (2010), Statistics on World Population, GDP and Per Capita GDP,
1-2008 AD, unpublished manuscript, University of Groningen.
Miller, Gregory (2012), The Shadow of the Past: Reputation and Military Alliances
before the First World War, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Martin, Philippe, Thierry Mayer and Mathias Thoenig (2008), “Make Trade Not
War?” Review of Economic Studies, 75, pp. 865-900.
Matsuyama, Kiminori, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki and Akihiko Matsui (1993), “Toward a
Theory of International Currency,” Review of Economic Studies 60, pp. 283-307.
Mitchell, B. (1998a), International Historical Statistics, Europe, 1750-1993, London:
Macmillan, 4th edition.
Mitchell, B. (1998b), International Historical Statistics, Africa, Asia & Oceania,
1750-1993, London: Macmillan, 4th edition.
Mitchell, B. (1998c), International Historical Statistics, the Americas, 1750-1993,
London: Macmillan, 4th edition.
Moss, Frank (2009), “The Global Vocation of the Euro”, L'Europe en Formation 351,
pp. 9-34.
New York Times (2016), “Saudi Arabia Warns of Economic Fallout if Congress
Passes 9/11 Bill,” by Mark Mazzettia,
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/16/world/middleeast/saudi-arabia-warnsofeconomic-fallout-if-congress-passes-9-11-bill.html (accessed on 20 July 2017).
Pan, Liu and Junbo, Zhu (2008), “The Management of China’s Huge Foreign Reserve
and its Currency Composition,” Working Papers of the Institute of Management
Berlin at the Berlin School of Economics (FHW Berlin), No. 37.
Papaioannou, Elias and Richard Portes (2008), “The International Role of the Euro: A
Status Report,” European Economy-Economic Papers No. 317, Directorate
General Economic and Monetary Affairs, European Commission.
Portes, Richard and Hélène Rey (1998), “The Emergence of the Euro as an
International Currency,” Economic Policy 13, pp. 307-343.
Portes, Richard and Hélène Rey (2005), “The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity
Flows,” Journal of International Economics 65, pp. 269-296.
Posen, Adam (2008), “Why the Euro will Not Rival the Dollar,” International
Finance 11, pp. 75-100.
Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff (2011), “From Financial Crash to Debt Crisis,”
American Economic Review 101, pp. 1676-1706.
Rey, Hélène (2001), “International Trade and Currency Exchange,” Review of
Economic Studies 68, pp. 443-464.
Rose, Andrew and Mark Spiegel (2004), “A Gravity Model of Sovereign Lending:
Trade, Default and Credit,” IMF Staff Papers 51, pp. 64-74.
Rose, Andrew (2007), “The Foreign Service and Foreign Trade: Embassies as Export
Promotion,” The World Economy 30, pp. 22-38.

25

Spiro, David (1999), The Hidden Hand of American Hegemony: Petrodollar
Recycling and International Markets. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Stock James and Motohiro Yogo (2005), “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
Regression,” in Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in
Honor of Thomas Rothenberg, ed. D. W. K. Andrews and J. H. Stock, New York:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 80-108.
Strange, Susan (1971), Sterling and British Policy, London: Oxford University Press.
Strange, Susan (1988), States and Markets, London: Pinter.
Triffin, Robert (1960), Gold and the Dollar Crisis: The Future of Convertibility, New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Truman, Edwin and Anna Wong (2006), “The Case for an International Reserve
Diversification Standard,” Working Paper no. 06-2, Washington, D.C.: Institute for
International Economics (May).
United Nations (2017), Press Conference by Secretary-General António Guterres at
United Nations Headquarters,
https://www.un.org/press/en/2017/sgsm18580.doc.htm (accessed on 19 July 2017).
U.S. Senate (2013), Inquiry into U.S. Costs and Allied Contributions to Support the
U.S. Military Presence Overseas, Report of the Committee on Armed Services,
Washington D.C., https://www.congress.gov/113/crpt/srpt12/CRPT-113srpt12.pdf
(accessed on 14 November 2017).
Vine, David (2015), Base Nation: How U.S. Military Bases Abroad Harm America
and the World, Henry Holt and Company, New York.
Walt, Stephen (1985), “Alliance Formation and the Balance of World Power,”
International Security 9, pp. 3-43.
Walt, Stephen (1990), The Origins of Alliance, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Warnock, Francis and Veronica Warnock (2009), “International Capital Flows and
U.S. Interest Rates,” Journal of International Money and Finance 28, pp. 903-919.
West, Joel (2007), “The Economic Realities of Open Standards: Black, White and
Many Shades of Gray,” in Shane Greenstein and Victor Stango (eds), Standards
and Public Policy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 87-122.
Williamson, John (2012), “Currencies of Power and the Power of Currencies: The
Geo-Politics of Currencies, Reserves and the Global Financial System,”
unpublished manuscript, Washington, DC: International Institute for Strategic
Studies.
Zimmerman, Hubert (2011), Money and Security: Troops, Monetary Policy, and West
Germany's Relations with the United States and Britain, 1950-1971, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Zhou, Ruilin (1997), “Currency Exchange in a Random Search Model,” Review of
Economic Studies 64, pp. 289-310.

26

Figure 1: Share of the US dollar in the Foreign Reserves of Selected Countries in the
Modern Era

US share of trade (%)
20
10

30

KR

IL

JP
CN

TW

GB

SA

IN
DE

0

RU

40

60
80
US dollar share in FX reserves (%)
Nuclear-weapon states

100

US-dependent states for security

Note: The figure plots publicly available estimates of the share of the US dollar in the foreign exchange
reserves of nuclear-weapon states (dark grey dot) and US-dependent states for security (light grey
diamond) against the share of the US in the trade in goods (exports and imports) of the countries in
question (see Table A1 for details and data sources). GB: United Kingdom (estimate for 2004); RU:
Russia (estimate for 2016); CN: China (estimate for 2008); IL: Israel (estimate for 2015); IN: India
(estimate for 2015); JP: Japan (estimate for 2006); KR: Korea (estimate for 1987); TW: Taiwan (estimate
for 2016); SA: Saudi Arabia (guesstimate for 2016); DE: Germany (estimate for 2004). France is not
reported due to lack of data.

27

Figure 2: Currency Composition of Foreign Exchange Reserves – 1899 vs. 1913
As a % of known FX reserves held globally
1913
1899

Other
German mark

Other
German mark

Sterling
French franc
Sterling
French franc

Note: The figure shows for 1899 and 1913 the global stock of foreign exchange reserves broken down
by currency. Reserves held by the Canadian chartered banks are not included to be consistent with the
data reported in Lindert (1969). Currency shares are calculated at market exchange rates.

0

As a % of known FX reserves held globally
20
40
60
80
100

Figure 3: Currency Composition of Foreign Exchange Reserves – 1890-1913

1890

1895

1900
Sterling
German mark

1905

1910

1913

French franc
Other

Note: The figure shows the evolution between for 1890 and 1913 of the currency composition of the
global stock of foreign exchange reserves. Currency shares are calculated at market exchange rates.

28

100

AUT

BRA

CAN

CHE

CHL

DEU

FIN

GRC

IDN

IND

ITA

JPN

LKA

NOR

0

50

100

0

50

100

0

50

AUS

1890

ROM

RUS

1910

1920

SWE

50

100

PHL

1900

0

As a % of known FX reserves held locally

Figure 4: Currency Composition of Foreign Exchange Reserves – Breakdown by Reserve Holders

1890

1900

1910

1920 1890

1900

1910

1920 1890

1900

Sterling
German mark
US dollar

1910

1920 1890

1900

1910

1920

French franc
Dutch guilder

Graphs by ISO3 alphanumeric

Note: The figure shows the evolution over time of the shares of sterling, the French franc, the German mark, the US dollar and the Dutch guilder in each of our sample's
19 countries (in % and at market exchange rates). Data are linearly interpolated between missing observations for ease of reading. The currency breakdown for South
Africa is not available owing to lack of data for currencies other than sterling.

29

100

Figure 5: Importance of Geopolitical vs. Pecuniary Factors in Reserve Currency Choice –
Then

80

Sterling

60

Reichsmark

Reichsmark
Reichsmark

French franc

0

20

40

Reichsmark

Aust.-H.

Italy

Japan

Romania

Actual
Predicted (incl. defense pacts)

Russia

Russia

Predicted (ex. defense pacts)

Note: The figure shows the predicted shares of selected reserve currencies in the foreign reserve holdings of five
countries which had signed a defense pact with the issuer of the currencies in question prior to World War I.
Predicted shares are computed under two scenarios: (i) using the full model estimates reported in Table 5, column
(7), i.e. including the effects of defense pacts (shown as dark grey bars); (ii) excluding the effects of defense pacts
(shown as light grey bars). Actual currency shares are shown as black bars.

Forecast error
-50
0

50

Figure 6: Forecast Error of Estimated Model without Mars Effects

Russia (M)
Austria-Hungary (M)

Italy (M)
Romania (M)
Russia
(FRF)

-100

Japan (GBP)

0

20

40

60
Actual share

80

100

Note: The figure shows the forecast error (predicted minus actual currency shares in percentage points) using the
full model estimates reported in Table 5, column (7) excluding the effects of defense pacts. M: German mark;
FRF: French franc; GBP: pound sterling.

30

0

20

40

60

80

100

Figure 7: Importance of Geopolitical vs. Pecuniary Factors in Reserve Currency Choice –
Now

Germany

Japan

Korea

Actual
Predicted (incl. Mars effects)

Saudi Arabia

Taiwan

Predicted (ex. Mars effects)

Note: The figure shows the predicted shares of the US dollar in the foreign reserve holdings of five countries
which depend on the US for their security now. Predicted shares are computed under two scenarios: (i) using the
full model estimates reported in Table 5, column (6), i.e. including the effects of military alliances (shown as dark
grey bars); (ii) excluding the effects of military alliances (shown as light grey bars). Actual currency shares are
shown as black bars. Credibility effects are measured using sovereign debt ratings.

Impact on US dollar (%)
6
0
2
4

0
10
20
30
Increase in FX reserves (%)

Impact on US yields (bps)
20 40 60 80

$ to be liquidated ($ bn)
200 400 600 800

Figure 8: Impact on Financial Markets of Loss of US Dollar’s Security Premium

0
10
20
30
Increase in FX reserves (%)

0
10
20
30
Increase in FX reserves (%)

Note: The figure shows estimates of the impact on bond and exchange markets of hypothetical scenarios which
assume that the U.S. withdraws from the world and the U.S. dollar loses its geopolitical/security premium, hence

31

leading to a change in the composition of global foreign exchange reserves. The scenarios further assume that the
level of the reserves in question increases by up to 30%. The top left-hand side chart shows the estimated amount
of US dollars to be liquidated conditional on the hypothesized increase in global foreign exchange reserves. The
top right-hand side chart shows the estimated impact on long-term US interest rates conditional on the
hypothesized increase in global foreign exchange reserves. The bottom left-hand side chart shows the estimated
US dollar depreciation conditional on the hypothesized increase in global foreign exchange reserves.

32

Table 1: Baseline Estimates without Mars
(1)
Inertia
Credibility
Economic size
Trade relations
Financial depth
Constant

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.539*** 0.549*** 0.533*** 0.507*** 0.562*** 0.506*** 0.562***
(0.023)
(0.028)
(0.029)
(0.036)
(0.038)
(0.036)
(0.039)
0.201***
0.191*** 0.146***
(0.010)
(0.061)
(0.013)
0.012
-0.017
0.033
(0.091)
(0.286)
(0.049)
1.201+
1.338+
(0.768)
(0.865)
2.184+
2.848+
(1.404)
(1.893)
0.000
3.812*
-0.126
7.126
-4.184+ -17.746
-2.785
(1.871)
(2.146)
(2.109) (13.267) (2.565) (15.010) (4.008)

Dyadic effects
Time effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations

860

755

760

476

405

441

370

Adjusted R
Log likelihood

0.946
-2971

0.946
-2604

0.958
-2539

0.967
-1551

0.977
-1242

0.964
-1454

0.974
-1151

2

Note: The table reports OLS estimates of Eq. (1) based on our sample of 73 dyads (19 countries/5 reserve
currencies) over the period 1890-1913 including key pecuniary determinants of international reserve currency
status (inertia, credibility, economic size, trade relations and financial depth) dyadic effects and time effects. The
standard errors reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by dyad; *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0 .1, + p<0.15.

33

Table 2: Estimates Controlling for Standard Gravity Covariates

Inertia
Credibility
Economic size
Common border

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.947***
(0.020)
0.040*
(0.021)
0.038
(0.035)
4.883***
(1.838)

0.949***
(0.020)
0.029
(0.023)
0.049
(0.036)

0.942***
(0.025)
0.001
(0.023)
0.020
(0.028)

0.947***
(0.021)
-0.004
(0.013)
0.051+
(0.032)

0.897***
(0.033)
-0.020
(0.030)
0.021
(0.024)
5.650*
(2.918)
-1.784
(1.524)
7.293**
(2.912)
-0.001**
(0.000)
11.195*
(5.653)

Common language

3.190**
(1.421)

Common colonial relationship

3.146+
(2.078)

Distance
-1.244
(1.709)

-1.563
(2.259)

1.066
(2.326)

-0.001***
(0.000)
6.618**
(2.951)

Currency effects
Country effects
Time effects

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations

685

685

685

685

685

Adjusted R
Log likelihood

0.942
-2421

0.941
-2424

0.941
-2425

0.941
-2426

0.943
-2411

Constant

2

Note: The table reports OLS estimates of Eq. (1) based on our sample of 68 dyads (19 countries/5 currencies)
over the period 1890-1913. The estimates include key pecuniary determinants of international reserve currency
status and control for currency fixed effects, country fixed effects and time effects. The standard errors reported
in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by dyad; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0 .1, + p<0.15.

34

Table 3: Estimates with Selected Alternative Estimation Methods
(1)
Random
effects

(2)
Panel tobit

(3)
Griliches
(1961)
Liviatan
(1963)

(4)
Hatanaka
(1974)

0.931***
(0.024)
0.027**
(0.013)
0.015
(0.017)
5.337**
(2.342)
-1.133
(1.228)
4.338**
(2.014)
-0.000
(0.000)

0.931***
(0.012)
0.027**
(0.013)
0.015
(0.020)
5.337***
(1.434)
-1.133
(1.039)
4.338***
(1.315)
-0.000
(0.000)

0.938***
(0.071)
-0.013
(0.054)
0.012
(0.039)
2.810
(5.218)
0.047
(2.779)
4.282
(6.066)
-0.000
(0.001)

0.304
(1.251)

0.304
(1.247)

7.936
(12.697)

0.938***
(0.046)
-0.010
(0.037)
0.014
(0.025)
3.247
(3.914)
-0.126
(1.930)
4.149
(3.971)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.640***
(0.043)
8.127
(7.890)

Currency effects
Country effects
Time effects

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations

685

685

596

589

0.946
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
-2418
0

0.932
-2178
n.a.

0.952
-2051
n.a.

Inertia
Credibility
Economic size
Common border
Common language
Common colonial relationship
Distance
1st stage residual
Constant

R
Log likelihood
Right/left-censored observations
2

Note: The table reports estimates of Eq. (1) based on our sample of 68 dyads (19 countries/5 reserve currencies)
over the period 1890-1913 using alternative estimators: (1) a random-effect estimator; (2) a panel tobit estimator;
(3) the Griliches (1961)-Liviatan (1963) estimator; and (4) the Hatanaka (1974) estimator. The estimates control
for currency fixed effects, country fixed effects and time effects. The standard errors reported in parentheses are
robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by dyad with the exception of column (2); *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0 .1, + p<0.15; n.a.: not available.

35

Table 4: Testing the Mercury vs. Mars Hypotheses
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Inertia

0.957*** 0.958*** 0.955*** 0.959*** 0.894*** 0.896*** 0.894*** 0.897***
(0.018) (0.019) (0.018) (0.018) (0.035) (0.036) (0.032) (0.036)
Credibility
0.017
0.016
0.021
0.015
-0.025 -0.022 -0.043 -0.020
(0.019) (0.019) (0.021) (0.019) (0.033) (0.033) (0.032) (0.033)
Economic size
0.035
0.034
0.036
0.034
0.021
0.021
0.022
0.021
(0.035) (0.034) (0.036) (0.033) (0.025) (0.025) (0.025) (0.025)
Common border
5.444* 5.593*
3.383
5.653*
(2.977) (2.958) (3.083) (2.916)
Common language
-2.103 -1.944 -2.849** -1.775
(1.488) (1.548) (1.356) (1.559)
Common colonial relationship
7.572** 7.422** 7.827*** 7.286**
(3.102) (3.142) (2.821) (3.156)
Distance
-0.001** -0.001* -0.001** -0.001*
(0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
Any formal alliance
1.613
1.317
(2.922)
(2.495)
Defense pact
0.806
0.575
(4.164)
(3.214)
Neutrality treaty
7.471***
6.616*
(1.349)
(3.346)
Entente
0.286
-0.033
(3.698)
(2.703)
Constant
-0.314 -0.313 -0.283 -0.303 12.187* 11.614* 15.752** 11.172*
(2.094) (2.077) (2.119) (2.060) (6.646) (6.705) (6.989) (6.545)
Currency effects
Country effects
Time effects

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations

685

685

685

685

685

685

685

685

Adjusted R 2
Log likelihood

0.941
-2428

0.941
-2428

0.942
-2423

0.941
-2428

0.943
-2411

0.943
-2411

0.944
-2409

0.943
-2411

Note: The table reports OLS estimates of Eq. (2) obtained by OLS based on our sample of 68 dyads (19 countries/5
reserve currencies) over the period 1890-1913. The estimates include key pecuniary determinants of international
reserve currency status and dummy variables which equal 1 for formal alliances, defense pacts, neutrality treaties
and ententes, respectively, for dyad i, j in year t and 0 otherwise. The estimates control for currency fixed effects,
country fixed effects and time effects. The standard errors reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity
and clustered by dyad; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0 .1, + p<0.15.

36

Table 5: Cross-Sectional IV Estimates using Diplomatic Representation as Instrument
(1)

Credibility

0.134
(0.191)
Economic size
0.173
(0.171)
Common border
25.290+
(16.440)
Common language
-11.245
(11.206)
Common colonial relationship 62.798***
(15.659)
Distance
-0.001
(0.001)
Any formal alliance
16.878+
(10.548)
Defense pact

(2)

(3)
OLS estimates

0.078
(0.186)
0.196
(0.162)
29.001*
(15.175)
-15.705+
(10.705)
63.473***
(15.290)
-0.001
(0.001)

0.145
(0.194)
0.083
(0.156)
19.882
(20.081)
-12.220
(11.232)
63.030***
(15.937)
-0.001
(0.001)

(4)

0.168
(0.192)
0.071
(0.162)
27.532*
(15.910)
-15.225
(11.157)
63.860***
(15.745)
-0.001
(0.001)

37.134***
(10.172)

Neutrality treaty

(6)

(7)

(8)
IV estimates

0.131
0.411
0.214
(0.191)
(0.341)
(0.369)
0.184
0.757**
0.740*
(0.171)
(0.376)
(0.414)
29.553*
15.103
30.907*
(15.324)
(16.950) (15.792)
-13.251
-12.171 -26.638+
(10.790)
(18.069) (16.983)
64.196*** 60.079*** 63.273***
(15.359)
(19.893) (19.292)
-0.001
0.001
0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
29.884+
(19.461)
53.328+
(33.963)

22.167
(22.963)

Non-aggression treaty

0.362
(0.341)
0.502*
(0.303)
-17.930
(56.076)
-8.020
(25.670)
58.451***
(21.924)
-0.000
(0.001)

18.716
(14.226)

9.534
(11.787)

10.491
(10.629)

16.943+
(11.113)

(9)

(10)

0.362
(0.356)
0.498+
(0.346)
18.214
(18.243)
-32.367*
(19.398)
67.462***
(20.156)
0.001
(0.001)

0.382
(0.351)
0.764*
(0.392)
30.612**
(15.099)
-22.996
(16.180)
67.576***
(18.299)
0.001
(0.001)

66.620
(72.706)

Entente
Constant

(5)

15.779
(10.951)

96.320
(77.535)
19.686*
(10.815)
8.565
(11.545)

-32.867+
(22.249)

-24.415
(18.823)

-11.970
(13.021)

-18.612
(17.636)

33.165+
(20.959)
-33.437+
(22.843)

37

Table 5: Cross-Sectional IV Estimates using Diplomatic Representation as Instrument (cont’d)
Currency effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

81

81

81

81

81

50

50

50

50

50

0.365
-374

0.420
-370.4

0.352
-374.9

0.345
-375.3

0.373
-373.5

0.351
-231.9
5.862
0.053
3.725
1.201
0.273

0.391
-230.3
4.841
0.089
1.836
0.648
0.421

0.273
-234.8
3.736
0.154
1.072
1.569
0.210

0.139
-239
3.391
0.184
1.246
0.165
0.684

0.358
-231.7
5.842
0.054
3.684
0.984
0.321

Adjusted R
Log likelihood
Kleibergen-Paap statistic
p -value
F statistic
Hansen J statistic
p -value
2

Note: The table reports cross-sectional estimates of Eq. (3); those in columns (1) to (5) are obtained by OLS while those in columns (6) to (10) are obtained by twostage least squares using as instrument diplomatic representation at the level of chargé d’affaires, minister, and ambassador between states. Each cross-sectional unit
represents a country/reserve currency dyad with time series observations averaged out over the period 1890-1913. The estimates control for currency fixed effects.
The standard errors reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0 .1, + p<0.15.

38

Table 6: Cross-Sectional IV Estimates using an Alternative Instrument Definition

Credibility
Economic size
Common border
Common language
Common colonial relationship
Distance
Any formal alliance

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.411
(0.341)
0.757**
(0.376)
15.103
(16.950)
-12.171
(18.069)
60.079***
(19.893)
0.001
(0.001)
29.884+
(19.461)

0.214
(0.369)
0.740*
(0.414)
30.907*
(15.792)
-26.638+
(16.983)
63.273***
(19.292)
0.001
(0.001)

0.362
(0.341)
0.502*
(0.303)
-17.930
(56.076)
-8.020
(25.670)
58.451***
(21.924)
-0.000
(0.001)

0.362
(0.356)
0.498+
(0.346)
18.214
(18.243)
-32.367*
(19.398)
67.462***
(20.156)
0.001
(0.001)

0.382
(0.351)
0.764*
(0.392)
30.612**
(15.099)
-22.996
(16.180)
67.576***
(18.299)
0.001
(0.001)

Defense pact

53.328+
(33.963)

Neutrality treaty

66.620
(72.706)

Non-aggression treaty

96.320
(77.535)

Entente
-32.867+
(22.249)

-24.415
(18.823)

-11.970
(13.021)

-18.612
(17.636)

33.165+
(20.959)
-33.437+
(22.843)

Currency effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

50

50

50

50

50

0.351
-231.9
5.862
0.0533
3.725
1.201
0.273

0.391
-230.3
4.841
0.0889
1.836
0.648
0.421

0.273
-234.8
3.736
0.154
1.072
1.569
0.210

0.139
-239
3.391
0.184
1.246
0.165
0.684

0.358
-231.7
5.842
0.0539
3.684
0.984
0.321

Constant

Adjusted R
Log likelihood
Kleibergen-Paap statistic
p -value
F statistic
Hansen J statistic
p -value
2

Note: The table reports cross-sectional estimates of Eq. (3) obtained by two-stage least squares using as instrument
lagged diplomatic representation (as of 1884) orthogonalized with respect to trade determinants. Each crosssectional unit represents a country/reserve currency dyad with time series observations averaged out over the
period 1890-1913. The estimates control for currency fixed effects. The standard errors reported in parentheses
are robust to heteroskedasticity; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0 .1, + p<0.15.

39

Table 7: Scenario Analysis – Impact of US Disengagement and Loss of US Dollar’s Security Premium
(Stable Reserves Level, Changing Composition)
NATO Major nonmember NATO ally

(1)

(2)

FX reserves Actual US
holdings dollar share
as of end-2016
(USD billion)

Year of US dollar
estimate share ex.
geopolitical
premium

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

3,011
337
308
107
94
39

≈60-70?
67
43
40
68

2008
2015
2016
2004
2015

same
same
same
same
same

1,158
526
434
362
37

83-89
≈100?
≈90?
84
98

US dollar reserves to be liquidated
In USD As a % of As a % of Impact on
billion US public
US GDP
long-term
debt held by
US interest
the public
rates (bps)
(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

347
158
130
109
11

2.4
1.1
0.9
0.8
0.1

1.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.1

36
16
13
11
1

755

5.2

4.1

77

Nuclear-weapon states
China
India
Russia
United Kingdom
Israel
France

YES
YES
YES

n.a.

same

U.S. dependent states for security
Japan
Saudi Arabia
Taiwan
Korea
Germany

Total

YES
Proposed
YES
YES
YES

6,412

2006
2016
2016
1987
2004

55
70
60
54
68

Note: The table reports estimates of the impact on bond markets of hypothetical scenarios which assume that the U.S. withdraws from the world and the U.S. dollar
loses its geopolitical premium, hence leading to a change in the composition of global foreign exchange reserves away from the dollar towards other units like the
euro, yen or Chinese renminbi. NATO (the North Atlantic Treaty Organization) is a mutual defense pact established in 1949 that consists of 29 member states,
including the U.S. Article 5 of the North Atlantic treaty foresees that if an armed attack occurs against one of the member states, it should be considered an attack
against all members, and other members shall assist the attacked member, with armed forces if necessary. Major non-NATO allies have strategic working relationships
with U.S. armed forces but are not NATO members.

40

Table 8: Scenario Analysis – Alternative Assumptions
(Higher Reserves Level, Changing Composition)
FX reserves
holdings
as of end-2016
(USD billion)

U.S. dependent states for security
Japan
Saudi Arabia
Taiwan
Korea
Germany
Total
As a percentage of US GDP
Impact on long-term US interest
rates (bps)
Implied US dollar depreciation (%)

USD reserves to be liquididated
(USD billion)

Hypothetized increase in total (i.e. all currencies)
level of FX reserves:
0%
5%
10%
20%
30%
1,158
526
434
362
37

347
158
130
109
11

316
139
117
99
10

284
121
104
89
9

220
84
78
69
6

156
47
52
49
4

2,517

755

681

606

458

309

4.1

3.7

3.3

2.5

1.7

77
4.6

70
4.2

62
3.7

47
2.8

32
1.9

Note: The table reports estimates of the impact on bond markets of hypothetical scenarios which assume that the U.S. withdraws from the world and the U.S. dollar
loses its geopolitical premium, hence leading to a change in the composition of global foreign exchange reserves. The scenarios further assume that the level of the
reserves in question increases by up to 30%.

41

Data Appendix
Argentina. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the Banco de la Nación
(established in 1891) are available from 1880 to 1913. They consist of balances with foreign
correspondents.
Australia. Annual data on the liquid foreign assets of the Australian Treasury and the
commercial banks are available from 1894 to 1913. They consist of funds deposited in
London. 63 Data on known sterling holdings are available from 1894 to 1913. That there
were no holdings in other currencies besides sterling could be inferred with certainty insofar
as sterling holdings equaled total foreign assets.
Austria-Hungary. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the Oesterreichische
Nationalbank (OeNB established in 1816) are available from 1880 to 1913. They consist of
foreign bills. Data on known sterling, French franc and German mark holdings are available
from 1890 to 1913.
Belgium. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the Belgian government, the
Banque Nationale de Belgique (BNB, established in 1850) and of the Caisse Générale
d'Epargne et de Retraite are available from 1880 to 1913. 64 They consist of foreign bills and
balances.
Brazil. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the Federal Treasury are available
from 1905 to 1908. They consist of accounts with London. Data on known sterling holdings
are available from 1905 to 1907. That there were no holdings in other currencies besides
sterling could be inferred with certainty insofar as sterling holdings equaled total foreign
assets.
Bulgaria. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the Bulgarian National Bank
(BNB, established in 1879) are available from 1905 to 1908. They consist of credit balances
abroad of the BNB’s foreign portfolio.
Canada. Annual data on the liquid foreign assets of Canada’s commercial banks are
available from 1880 to 1913. They consist of claims on foreign correspondents, call and short
loans abroad and balances of the Canadian’s Finance Department balances with Bank of
Montreal, London. The Canadian monetary system before 1914 was in effect a gold- (or U.S.
dollar-) exchange standard operated, in the absence of a central bank, by the commercial
63

The Commonwealth Bank of Australia, established in 1911, had ordinary functions of commercial and
savings banking; it did not specifically have a central banking remit and was not responsible for the note issue.
The gold standard was operated by the commercial banks, not by the official authorities.
64
The Caisse Générale d'Epargne et de Retraite was a government-owned savings bank that held substantial
foreign short-term assets; the assets in question are classified as part of Belgium’s official foreign reserves in
line with Bloomfield (1963).

42

banks themselves. 65 Data on known sterling and U.S. dollar holdings are available from
1890 to 1913.
Ceylon. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of Ceylon’s government are
available from 1899 to 1913. They consist of sterling securities in reserve. Data on known
sterling holdings are available from 1899 to 1913. That there were no holdings in other
currencies besides sterling could be inferred with certainty insofar as sterling holdings
equaled total foreign assets.
Chile. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of Chilean Government’s conversion
funds in foreign banks are available from 1880 to 1913. They consist of deposits in foreign
banks of the deposits in London of the Emission Office. Data on known sterling, German
mark and U.S. dollar holdings are available from 1890 to 1913. That there were no holdings
in French francs could be inferred with certainty insofar as sterling, German mark and U.S.
dollar holdings equaled total foreign assets.
Denmark. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of Danmarks Nationalbank
(established in 1818) are available from 1880 to 1913. They consist of foreign bills and
balances with foreign correspondents.
Egypt. Data on the liquid foreign official assets of the Central Bank of Egypt are available
for 1913. They consist of foreign bills and balances.
Finland. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of Suomen Pankki (established in
1812) are available from 1880 to 1913. They consist of foreign bills and balances with
foreign correspondents. Data on known sterling, French franc, German mark and U.S. dollar
holdings are available from 1890 to 1913 (with missing observations).
France. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of Banque de France (established in
1800) are available from 1880 to 1913. They consist of foreign bills.
Germany. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the Reichsbank (established in
1876) are available from 1880 to 1913. They consist of foreign bills and balances with
foreign correspondents. Data on known sterling, French franc and U.S. dollar holdings are
available from 1890 to 1913 (with missing observations).
Greece. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the National Bank of Greece
(established in 1841) are available from 1890 to 1913. They consist of funds abroad. Data

65

Bank of Canada was established in 1934.

43

on known sterling and French franc holdings as part of the non-ordinary reserves are
available for 1912 and 1913. 66
India. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the British Raj’s government are
available from 1880 to 1913. They consist of balances held in London. Data on known
sterling holdings are available from 1890 to 1913. That there were no holdings in other
currencies besides sterling could be inferred with certainty insofar as sterling holdings
equaled total foreign assets.
Italy. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the three note issue banks,
including Banca d’Italia (established in 1893), and of the Italian Treasury, are available from
1881 to 1913. 67 They consist of foreign bills, bonds, current accounts, and of the Treasury’s
balances in foreign banks. Data on known sterling, French franc and German mark holdings
are available for 1897 and 1913 (with missing observations).
Japan. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the Bank of Japan (established in
1882), the Imperial government and the Yokohama Specie Bank are available for 1899 and
from 1903 to 1913. 68 They consist of specie held abroad and of foreign balances. Data on
known sterling, French franc, German mark and U.S. dollar holdings are available from 1903
to 1913 (with missing observations).
Netherlands. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of De Nederlandsche Bank
(established in 1814) are available from 1889 to 1913. They consist of foreign bills and
balances with foreign correspondents.
Netherlands East Indies. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the Java Bank
(established in 1826) are available from 1891 to 1913. They consist of foreign bills and
contangos in Amsterdam.
Norway. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the Norges Bank (established in
1816) are available from 1896 to 1913. They consist of foreign bills and balances with
foreign correspondents, foreign bonds and net amounts due from Danmarks Nationalbank and
Sveriges Riksbank. Data on known sterling, French franc and German mark holdings are
available from 1896 to 1913.

66
The non-ordinary reserves were introduced by the so-called Gamma-Chi MB currency law bearing this
abbreviation of 1910.
67
The other two note issue banks were Bank of Naples and Bank of Sicily; they continued to issue notes after
Banca d’Italia’s establishment in 1893.
68
The Yokohama Specie Bank was a special government-owned institution officially in charge of foreign
exchange dealings. We include its assets as part of official foreign exchange reserves in line with Lindert
(1967).

44

Philippines. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the Gold Standard Fund
(established in 1903) are available from 1880 to 1913. 69 That there were no holdings in other
currencies besides the U.S dollar could be inferred with certainty insofar as sterling holdings
equaled total foreign assets.
Romania. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the Banca Națională a
României (established in 1880) are available from 1880 to 1913. They consist of foreign bills
and balances. Data on known sterling, French franc and German mark holdings are available
from 1890 to 1913.
Russia. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the State Bank (GosBank) of the
Russian Empire (established in 1860) and the Finance Ministry are available from 1883 to
1913. They consist of “gold abroad”, foreign drafts and balances in foreign banks. 70 Data on
known sterling, French franc and German mark holdings are available for 1899 and 1900 as
well as for 1912 and 1913.
Serbia. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of Narodna banka Srbije
(established in 1884) are available from 1908 to 1913. They consist of foreign balances.
(Union of) South Africa. Annual data on the liquid foreign assets of South Africa’s
commercial banks are available from 1904 to 1913. They consist of foreign balances.
Bloomfied (1963) observes that, unlike many other British overseas territories, gold played a
much more significant role there in the reserves of the commercial banks and in currency
circulation; and monetary gold movements were an important adjusting item in the balance of
payments. 71 Data on known sterling holdings are available from 1904 to 1913.
Sweden. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of Sveriges Riksbank (established
in 1668) and the national debt office are available from 1880 to 1913. They consist of
foreign bills, foreign bonds and foreign balances. Data on known sterling, French franc,
German mark and U.S. dollar holdings are available from 1910 to 1913.
Switzerland. Annual data on the liquid foreign official assets of the Swiss National Bank
(SNB, established in 1906) are available from 1906 to 1913. 72 They consist of foreign bills
and sight deposits abroad. Data on known sterling, French franc and German mark holdings
are available from 1890 to 1913.

69

This fund was established in 1903 to maintain parity of the peso to gold. There were no foreign exchange
reserves prior to 1903.
70
The data compiled by Lindert do not provide a split between holdings of gold abroad and holdings of foreign
exchange.
71
The South African Reserve Bank was established in 1921.
72
Before the SNB took it over in 1906 the right of note issue was shared by 36 different cantonal, state and
commercial banks.

45

Table A1: Selected Indicators on a Sample of Foreign Reserve Holders in the Modern Era
Share of the US
dollar in FX reserves

Germany
United Kingdom
Israel
Russia
Saudia Arabia
China
India
Japan
Korea
Taiwan

Share of bilateral trade in goods with:

98
40

US
7.4
11.5

Japan
2.1
2.8

68
43
≈100?

20.5
4.6
12.1

1.5
3.6
8.6

7.0
14.8
14.8

≈60-70?
67
83-89
84
≈90?

13.1
9.3
16.3
30.7
12.2

10.4
2.2
0.0
25.0

0.0
10.8
17.7
n.a.
23.1

11.778

China Euro area
3.8
46.2
3.7
50.9

Year
2004
2004

Source
Truman and Wong (2006)
HM Treasury (2004)

24.6
33.3
14.4

2015
2016
2016

Bank of Israel (2015)
Bank of Russia (2016)
New York Times (2016)

13.0
10.2
9.8
10.5
8.8

2008
2015
2006
1987
2016

Liu Pan and Zhu Junbo (2008)
The Indian Express (2015)
Truman and Wong (2006)
Dellas and Yoo (1991)
China Post (2016)

Sources: IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, Taiwan’s Bureau of Trade, studies and newspapers reported in the table, and authors’ calculations.
Notes: the share of the US dollar reported in the table is the latest figure publicly available to the authors’ best knowledge; share of bilateral trade with the EU-15 for
Taiwan.

46

Table A2: Estimates Using Shares adjusted for Gold Holdings
(1)
Inertia
Credibility
Economic size
Trade relations
Financial depth
Constant

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.652*** 0.652*** 0.661*** 0.672*** 0.668*** 0.673*** 0.669***
(0.041)
(0.041)
(0.043)
(0.044)
(0.034)
(0.044)
(0.033)
0.249***
0.084* 0.222***
(0.035)
(0.040)
(0.026)
-0.090
-0.043
-0.442
(0.147)
(0.178)
(0.970)
-0.083
-0.010
(0.910)
(1.102)
-2.309
-2.168
(2.026)
(2.078)
7.409*** 0.950* 7.166*** 20.940
6.734
10.732
6.329*
(0.871)
(0.476)
(0.960) (19.479) (5.428) (21.098) (3.536)

Dyadic effects
Time effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations

385

385

315

199

166

199

166

Adjusted R
Log likelihood

0.929
-999.1

0.929
-999.1

0.941
-799.8

0.943
-537.7

0.949
-446.8

0.943
-537.7

0.949
-446.8

2

Note: The table reports OLS estimates of Eq. (1) based on our sample of 73 dyads (19 countries/5 reserve
currencies) over the period 1890-1913 including key pecuniary determinants of international reserve currency
status (inertia, credibility, economic size, trade relations and financial depth) dyadic effects and time effects. The
dependent variable is currency share adjusted for gold holdings. The standard errors reported in parentheses are
robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by dyad; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0 .1, + p<0.15.

47

Table A3: Overview of Formal Alliances in the Pre-World War I Sample

Reserve
currency
issuer
France
France
Germany
Germany
Germany
Germany
U.K.
U.K.
U.K.
U.K.
U.S.

Reserve
currency holder
Italy
Russia
Russia
Austria-Hungary
Romania
Italy
Sweden
Japan
Italy
Austria-Hungary
Japan

Defense
pact

Neutrality
treaty

Nonaggression
treaty

Entente

Start year

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

1902
1893, 1891
1905, 1890
1890
1890
1890
1890
1902
1890
1890
1908

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Note: The column “Start year” indicates the first year in the period covered by our sample when the formal
alliance reported were in vigor.

48

