NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHORT-RUN AND LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF MILTON FRIEDMAN'S PRESIDENTIAL
ADDRESS
Robert E. Hall
Thomas J. Sargent
Working Paper 24148
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24148

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017

Robert E. Hall's research is supported by the Hoover Institution. He frequently attends
conferences at the Federal Reserve system and occasionally receives honorariums from the
system. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Robert E. Hall and Thomas J. Sargent. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of Milton Friedman's Presidential Address
Robert E. Hall and Thomas J. Sargent
NBER Working Paper No. 24148
December 2017
JEL No. E31,E52,E61
ABSTRACT
The immediate effect of Friedman's 1968 AEA presidential address on the economics profession
was the introduction of an adaptive term in the Phillips curve that shifted the curve, as Friedman
proposed, based on expected inflation. Initial formulations suggested that the shift was less than
point-for-point, but later thinking, based on the emerging idea of rational expectations, together
with the experience of the 1970s, came to agree with Friedman that the shift was by the full
amount. The profession also recognized that Friedman's point was deeper---real outcomes are
invariant to the monetary policy rule, not just to the trend in inflation. The presidential address
made an important contribution to the conduct of monetary policy around the world. It ushered in
low and stable inflation rates in all advanced countries, and in many less advanced ones.

Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
rehall@gmail.com
Thomas J. Sargent
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
thomas.sargent@nyu.edu

The centerpiece of Milton Friedman’s (1968) presidential address to the American Economic Association, delivered in Washington, DC, on December 29, 1967, was the striking
proposition that monetary policy has no longer-run effects on the real economy. Friedman
focused on two real measures, the unemployment rate and the real interest rate, but the
message was broader—in the longer run, monetary policy controls only the price level. We
call this the monetary-policy invariance hypothesis.
By 1968, macroeconomics had adopted the basic Phillips curve as the favored model
of correlations between inflation and unemployment. Unemployment was taken as a good
measure of slack or tight conditions. In a slack economy, sellers would gradually cut their
prices, and in a tight one, they would gradually raise them. Friedman’s presidential address
was commonly interpreted as a recommendation to add a previously omitted variable, the
rate of inflation anticipated by the public, to the right-hand side of what then became an
augmented Phillips curve. Friedman’s emphasis on this additional variable was distinctive,
but not new. Some years earlier, Samuelson and Solow (1960) had observed that the Phillips
curve could shift in ways that depended on a number of factors, including the public’s
expectations about future inflation. Phelps (1967) offered a similar analysis shortly before
Friedman, and is often cited in conjunction with Friedman’s presidential address.
Friedman’s monetary-policy invariance hypothesis implies sharp differences in responses
of unemployment to different types of monetary impulses. If a monetary expansion is unanticipated, unemployment would increase. On the other hand, if a monetary impulse is fully
anticipated there would be no response of unemployment—all of the response would take the
form of a change in inflation. A persistently expansionary monetary policy—and therefore
a monetary policy expected to be expansionary—would raise anticipated inflation and in
this way shift the Phillips curve upward. If the shift was complete, the invariance hypothesis would hold. Friedman’s presidential address was an admonition to distinguish sharply
between short-run and long-run effects of monetary policy.
We believe that Friedman’s main message, the invariance hypothesis about long-term
outcomes, has prevailed over the last half-century based on the broad sweep of evidence
from many economies over many years. Subsequent research has modified Friedman’s ideas
about transient effects and has not been kind to the Phillips curve. But we will argue that
Friedman’s exposition of the invariance hypothesis in terms of a 1960s-style Phillips curve is
incidental to his main message. Across the broad sweep of evidence from many economies

2

over many years, we believe the invariance hypothesis has stood up well, even though the
Phillips curve has not held up as a structural equation in macro models.
We should note at the outset that we recognize that small exceptions to the monetarypolicy invariance principle are recognized. In economies with non-interest-bearing currency,
the rate of inflation influences the real cost of holding currency. We believe that these effects
are small enough to neglect in this article.

1

Friedman’s Message in 1968

Friedman (1968) set forth two propositions about monetary policy that immediately stirred
controversy, but are now close to settled: (1) “It cannot peg interest rates for more than very
limited periods”; (2) It cannot peg the rate of unemployment for more than very limited
periods”. These propositions have come to be known as the natural rate hypotheses about the
real interest rate and the unemployment rate: The two variables have natural rates. At most,
monetary policy induces only transitory deviations of the real rate and the unemployment
rate from their natural rates. We regard these natural rate hypotheses as implications of the
more general monetary-policy invariance hypothesis.
Friedman (p. 8) explained the natural real interest rate as follows:
Let the monetary authority keep the nominal market rate for a time below the
natural rate by inflation. That in turn will raise the nominal natural rate itself,
once anticipations of inflation become widespread, thus requiring still more rapid
inflation to hold down the market rate. Similarly, because of the Fisher effect, it
will require not merely deflation but more and more rapid deflation to hold the
market rate above the initial “natural” rate.
With respect to unemployment and the labor market, Friedman (p. 8) wrote:
The “natural rate of unemployment,” in other words, is the level that would be
ground out by the Walrasian system of general equilibrium equations, provided
there is embedded in them the actual structural characteristics of the labor and
commodity markets, including market imperfections, stochastic variability in demands and supplies, the cost of gathering information about job vacancies and
labor availabilities, the costs of mobility, and so on.

3

In 1968, the idea of a Phillips curve was ascendant: expansionary monetary policy could
drive down the unemployment rate, but at the cost of higher inflation. A tradeoff was thought
to exist, even in the longer run. Economies willing to accept more inflation could have tighter
labor markets with high employment and lower unemployment. Friedman explained that
such a tradeoff would not occur in the longer run:
...there is always a temporary trade-off between inflation and unemployment;
there is no permanent trade-off. The temporary trade-off comes not from inflation
per se, but from unanticipated inflation, which generally means, from a rising
rate of inflation. The widespread belief that there is a permanent trade-off is a
sophisticated version of the confusion between “high” and “rising” that we all
recognize in simpler forms. A rising rate of inflation may reduce unemployment,
a high rate will not.
To put it differently, Friedman was arguing that expected inflation was a determinant
of actual inflation. We believe that Friedman’s decision to express the monetary policy
invariance hypothesis in terms of expected inflation on the right-hand side of the Phillips
curve was understandable at a time when the Phillips curve had recently acquired a firm
grip on thinking about inflation. But we also believe that it pointed the profession toward
a limited view of the interactions between inflation and real outcomes.

2
2.1

The Profession’s Early Reaction
Adding Expected Inflation to the Phillips Curve

Evaluation of Friedman’s formulation that expected inflation shifted the Phillips curve began
immediately. Solow (1968) and Tobin (1968) added a forecast of inflation to the righthand sides of their Phillips curves, with a measure of inflation on the left-hand side, and
unemployment on the right-hand side. Gordon (1970) soon followed. In these papers, the
forecast of inflation was modeled as a distributed lag on past inflation, with lag coefficients
that summed to one. Their general finding was that the forecast of inflation received a
coefficient of less than one, which led these early investigations to conclude that Friedman
was only partly right: they inferred that the Phillips curve shifts upward by only a fraction
of expected inflation, so although the long-run Phillips curve is steeper than the short-run

4

curve, it is not vertical. And it is a vertical Phillips curve that expresses the invariance
hypothesis, in the interpretation of these authors.
Lucas (1972a) and Sargent (1971) observed that the finding in the distributed-lag-forecast
literature was not evidence against the invariance hypothesis. They noted that, under a
monetary policy that delivers mean-reverting inflation, the optimal distributed lag forecast
will embody the tendency for inflation to subside after a rise. A coefficient of less than one
on a distributed lag with coefficients summing to one is the expected outcome in the likely
case of mean reversion. The mistake in the distributed-lag approach was to assume that
the coefficients in the distributed lag summed to one. That choice amounted to assuming
the inflation was a persistent random walk, contrary to the evidence that inflation had been
mean-reverting. Because mean-reversion of inflation could be measured in a companion
equation, the early studies failed to make full use of the available data.
Further, Lucas (1972a) and Sargent (1971) observed that the problem with the first test of
the invariance hypothesis—the failure to take account of the best way to construct a forecast
of inflation—was an example of a much more general principle for testing models containing
expectations. The principle is rational expectations. Models of expectation formation should
not be based on imputing simple-minded ways that people form expectations, such as extrapolating past observations. Rather, econometricians should apply the same standards of
rational behavior to the formation of expectations as they do to other aspects of economic
choices. Sargent and Lucas recommended tests of Friedman’s invariance hypothesis based
on rational expectations instead of the model of expectations assumed by Solow, Tobin, and
Gordon. But the rational expectations assumption was foreign to macroeconometric practice
in that era.
Notice that the critique had two layers: (1) People may forecast inflation by applying
lag coefficients to past inflation, but if they do, it would not be rational to use coefficients
that sum to one if inflation was less persistent than a random walk, and (2) it’s unlikely
that expectations would consider only lagged values of inflation—for example, if an inflation
hawk has just taken over the central bank, people might reasonably expect a larger decline
in inflation than indicated by a previously successful distributed lag equation.
Sargent had a colorful way to drive the second point home. Suppose, he asked, that the
rules of American football were changed so that the offense had the ball for only three downs
rather than four. Prior to the change, nobody would expect a team to punt on third down.

5

After the change, the rational fan would expect frequent punts on third down. Historical
punting tactics would not be a rational guide to tactics under the new rule.

2.2

Rational expectations

Friedman’s presidential address, along with Phelps (1967), drew the attention of young researchers to an important part of macroeconomic theory that was unfinished in 1968—how
to build a model of expectations formation that was consistent both with optimizing behavior and the structure of a macroeconomic model. In response, they rolled up their sleeves
and learned the mathematics and probability theory required to apply the rational expectations hypothesis of Muth (1961) in macroeconomic models. Before Phelps and Friedman,
the rational expectations hypothesis, if considered at all, was just one of several possible
assumptions about expectations that an econometrician could use. The most popular model
asserted that expectations were adaptive—people extrapolated recent behavior of a variable
in a fixed way to form an expectation of its future values. The mathematics of prediction theory used by Muth (1961), and the idea of fixed points in function spaces underlying Muth’s
analysis, were unfamiliar to most macroeconomists. That changed soon after Friedman’s
presidential address.
Lucas (1972b) used the rational expectations hypothesis to produce a striking strengthening and clarification of Friedman’s invariance hypothesis. Lucas’s paper offered one of
the first rigorous developments of a general-equilibrium model that imposed Muth’s rational expectations assumption. Lucas’s notion of rational expectations, and a huge successor
literature, starts by conceiving of a model as a joint probability distribution over sequences
of exogenous processes and choices. It then posits that the agents in the model also use
the model itself to make inferences about the future behavior of variables relevant to their
decisions. In a “communism of models”, comprising (1) the agents in the model, (2) nature,
and (3) the model builder, share the same statistical model. This simplifying assumption
sharpens and focuses the analysis. In Lucas’s model, agents are imperfectly informed about
random changes in the money stock. That causes agents to be only imperfectly able to distinguish outcomes caused by money supply changes, on the one hand, and the real determinants
of employment and output, on the other hand. They make decisions that are optimal given
their information limitations, but recurrently mistaken relative to those that would be made
with full information. The limitations on information cause monetary changes to affect real

6

variables. Real variables in this framework don’t respond to the systematic, predictable
component of the money supply. Thus Lucas produced a formal, rigorous expression of
Friedman’s invariance principle. Two otherwise similar economies having the same money
shocks but differing with respect to the predictable parts of money growth will have the
same output and employment movements, and will differ only in their rates of inflation.
In Lucas’s (1972b) model and other general-equilibrium models of money, it matters how a
government induces changes in the money supply. Most of the ways that a government injects
or withdraws money are partly fiscal policies and are not neutral—they affect output and
other real variables through fiscal channels—even if they are foreseen. To create an explicit
framework in which foreseen monetary shocks are neutral, the government in Lucas’s model
hands out money in a very special way: namely, proportionally to agents’ initial holdings of
money each period. These transfers are, accordingly, equivalent to a pure change in the units
in the monetary standard. To disentangle real from monetary shocks, the agents in Lucas’s
model solve a signal extraction problem. Agents know joint probability distributions and
use Bayes’s law to solve the signal extraction problem arising from their limited information.
In this way, Lucas transformed Friedman’s informal distinction between the long run and
the short run into a tight mathematical distinction between predictable and unpredictable
policies and outcomes.
Lucas did not ask how agents inside his model might have learned about a rational
expectations equilibrium. They just do—they are born knowing the relevant probability distributions. They don’t need Bayes’s Law to improve their knowledge of the model. Perhaps
their ancestors successfully resolved model uncertainty by applying Bayes’s Law. Researchers
in the 1980s took up the question of whether agents who don’t know the model might learn
about it by applying an adaptive algorithm or some version of Bayes’s Law in settings with
model uncertainty. That literature described convergence theorems in the form of conditions
under which a self-referential system comprised of agents who initially don’t know enough to
do what they are supposed to do inside a rational expectations equilibrium could converge to
a rational expectations equilibrium. Sargent (1999) summarized this literature and described
how it applies to the issues raised in Friedman’s presidential address and the analysis of Lucas, Kydland and Prescott (1977), and other contributors to this branch of macro theory.
The literature about learning about a rational expectations equilibrium relies heavily on a
theory of stochastic approximation that uses simulations to maximize an unknown function.

7

Friedman and Savage (1947) was an early technical contribution to that literature.
Although there are now serious applications of the literature on learning to macro policy
formulation, it nevertheless remains the case that most policy models today are formulated
under the communistic rational expectations principle that all agents use the author’s model
in solving their optimization and forecasting problems.
Lucas (1973) carried out an empirical investigation in the rational expectations framework, with emphasis on the invariance hypothesis. He studied panel data on inflation and
unemployment across countries and years. His concept of invariance was more general than
just comparing policies of high and low inflation—in the long run, real outcomes such as
unemployment are invariant to all types of differences in monetary policy. He summarized
the framework this way: “These data are examined from the point of view of the hypothesis
that average real output levels are invariant under changes in the time pattern of the rate
of inflation, or that there exists a ’natural rate’ of real output.” His findings gave strong
support to the invariance hypothesis. In particular, high-inflation countries did not have
lower unemployment.

2.3

The NAIRU and the Acceptance of the Natural-Rate Hypothesis

Economists who initially questioned Friedman’s monetary policy invariance hypothesis, notably Modigliani and Papademos (1975), came around to at least a more limited version
within a decade. One implication of the hypothesis is that, at the natural rate of unemployment, if inflation is replicating itself, and the price level is neither accelerating nor decelerating, the unemployment rate will be at its natural level. On this basis, some of former
skeptics renamed the natural rate the “non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment” or
NAIRU. This brand distinction followed a tribal distinction between “salt water” and “fresh
water” macroeconomics described in Hall (1976). It is unfortunate that many commentators
have misconstrued Hall’s tongue-in-cheek account of schools of macroeconomics as indicating a broader schism between coastal and mid-west approaches to macroeconomics. No
such schism existed or exists among researchers actually working in the research trenches.
Macroeconomists have their disagreements, of course, but they share beliefs about equilibrium concepts, analytical tools, and salient observations, and all have gathered insights and
inspirations from great predecessors such as Frank Ramsey, John Hicks, Kenneth Arrow,

8

Milton Friedman, and John Maynard Keynes.
A custom related to the term NAIRU was to use the term “accelerationist” to describe a
related hypothesis that Friedman considered—that an attempt to hold unemployment below
the natural rate with monetary policy would result in ever-accelerating inflation. The corollary, that a monetary policy that generated ever-higher inflation would keep unemployment
below the natural rate, is a violation of the monetary-policy invariance hypothesis. We are
not aware that any believer in the NAIRU has advocated such a policy, however.
In recent decades, the idea of a natural rate or NAIRU has become uncontroversial.
Controversy has shifted to debates over the level of the natural rate and how to model the
inflationary process in other respects.

2.4

Commitment Issues in Monetary Policy

The arrival of rational expectations in economics focused attention on the importance of
timing protocols in the analysis and design of macroeconomic policies. With forward-looking
agents who anticipate future policy decisions, equilibrium outcomes depend sensitively on
who knows and chooses what when. A natural consequence was to define economic policies
more tightly as decision rules for what the response would be to future events. Analytical
tools of backward induction and dynamic programming came to macroeconomics. Notions
of short run and long run were sharpened and economists came to understand the role of
consistency over time.
Although Friedman had earlier played an important role in the invention of sequential
analysis and dynamic programming—see Friedman and Friedman (1998), pp. 137-139 and
the introduction to Wald (1947)—he did not use them in his macroeconomic research.
Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and Gordon (1983) analyzed the consequences
of alternative timing protocols for monetary policy. They compared outcomes in economies
where the central bank is free to make policy on the spot, unable to commit to a policy in
advance, with ones in which a time-0 central bank could choose once and for all. They took
the “on the spot” timing protocol to be the one in place in practice. If there is an advantage
to creating a positive inflation surprise, the central bank faces a temptation to inflate more
than expected. Kydland and Prescott concluded that the central bank would give in to
that temptation. In this case, the rational-expectations equilibrium involves inflation rates
high enough to prevent the central bank from creating even more inflation as a surprise.

9

Barro and Gordon applied a theory of reputation to describe a better (subgame perfect)
equilibrium where fear of losing its reputation for non-inflationary policy blocks the perverse
equilibrium.
Maybe it was a coincidence, but by about 1990, central banks around the world almost
universally stopped inflationary policies. In the last quarter-century or so, high rates of
inflation have arisen only in extraordinary circumstances, like the period of the transition
economies that arose in the aftermath of the breakup of the Soviet Union, or in cases of comprehensively failed states like Zimbabwe and more recently Venezuela. Other countries now
having high inflation rates are poorly governed and rely heavily on central-bank borrowing
to finance their governments.

3

Later Responses to the Presidential Address: The
Search for a Theory of the Phillips Curve

Friedman convinced multiple generations of macroeconomists that the two forces driving
inflation were market tightness and expected inflation. The expectation-augmented Phillips
curve became a standard feature of the general-equilibrium models used by central banks
and other policymakers. As the macro profession focused more on formal modeling with
microeconomic foundations, a search began for a specification of the Phillips curve that
appeared to satisfy these advancing standards.
The general-equilibrium model resulting from this process took the general form of a
three-equation model, comprising the Phillips curve; an IS curve relating output negatively
to the real interest rate; and a Taylor rule, describing how the central bank provides a
nominal anchor by setting the interest rate to achieve a target inflation rate in the longer run.
Woodford (2003) is a canon of this literature. In that model, the Phillips curve is an equation
with inflation as the left-hand variable and two right-hand variables: 1) unemployment
or another slack-versus-tightness measure; and 2) the mathematical expectation of future
inflation, derived from the model itself. Most research in this framework adheres to the
principle of communistic rational expectations.
Calvo (1983) was a key step in the process of formalizing a modern Phillips-curve theories
based on explicit models of sticky prices. That paper led to what came to be called the New
Keynesian family of general-equilibrium macro models. Calvo hypothesized that sellers kept
their prices fixed until a random event occurred that freed them from the stale prices and
10

allowed them to set a new price. Sellers needed to form expectations of conditions in their
markets over the indefinite future to figure out how to set prices that would remain in place
in the future. Although the model can be written out in an extended form in which sellers
have expectations about the future demand functions that will determine future sales (and
thus output), the custom from the start has been to restate the model in the form suggested
by Friedman, where expected future prices stand in for the future demand functions. The
logic is that future prices will be set, in part, by firms that will have just been freed from
their sticky prices.
The Calvo setup differs fundamentally from the idea popular in 1968 that expected inflation was a distributed lag on past inflation. Sellers in the Calvo model are forward-looking.
The model is capable of addressing questions about changes in monetary policy regimes,
where the backward-looking model stumbles for reasons explained in Lucas (1976) and captured in Sargent’s football analogy. A change in monetary policy changes the coefficients of
a forecast based on a distributed lag of past inflation.
Variants of the Calvo model dominate practical macro models today. Their common
idea is that sellers put their prices on autopilot between occurrences that arise at random
times and which cause sellers to think through pricing more fully. A basic asymmetry runs
through this line of work. The autopilot governs prices between these occurrences. Buyers
have a call option, in effect, on the seller’s output. One could instead imagine that a seller
puts output on autopilot and lets the market set the price between full resets of output. The
New Keynesian paradigm requires this asymmetry, by taking it as given that a significant
part of the volatility of output reflects product demand fluctuations. With short-run sticky
prices, the call-option setup implies that movements in output are bigger than they would
be with flexible prices. The flexibility of prices absorbs demand changes and thus reduces
the response of output to the demand changes.
What we are referring to as the call-option property of New Keynesian models is also
responsible for the role of unemployment or other tightness/slack measures in the Phillips
curve. The initial effect of a decline in demand is a slacker market, with lower output and
higher unemployment in the corresponding labor market. If the drop in demand is expected
to persist, lower output and higher unemployment will cause sellers to set lower prices in
the future, so market slackness predicts lower inflation. In this way, the autopilot that keeps
a firm’s price constant into the future rationalizes the Phillips curve. If the autopilot were

11

instead to stabilize the output of a firm, the firm’s price would respond quickly and output
would be sticky. The Phillips curve would look completely different.
Our commentary concentrates on the Phillips curve, but we should mention that Friedman’s presidential address assumed that the central bank uses the money supply as an
intermediate target. Central banking practice shifted two decades later to using the interest rate as the intermediate instrument of its operating policy. Macroeconomists continue
to speak of “monetary policy” and “monetary theory”, although money has been pushed
into the background in models in the Woodford style. What serves as a nominal anchor in
these models is not the purposefully controlled supply of money advocated by Friedman, but
rather a purposeful feedback rule from prices to the real interest rate in conjunction with
assumptions that make the price level sticky in particular ways.

4

The Missing Empirical Relationship Between Slackness and Inflation

The Phillips curve originated as an observation of an empirical relationship in UK data,
a relationship which seemed to persist in US data in the 1960s. Friedman’s presidential
address adopted the assumption that measures of economic slack are inversely correlated
with inflation. But under closer examination and with more recent data, this relationship
seems weak or nonexistent.
Stock and Watson (2010) take a close look at evidence in US data, including the deep
recession years immediately following the financial crisis of 2008. They find no support for
the standard Phillips curve property that the rate of change of prices depends on the level
of unemployment. Rather, in response to an adverse shock that causes a quick increase in
unemployment which then gradually subsides, the inflation rate falls a bit immediately and
then remains constant. If anything, the rate of change in prices depends on the rate of change
of unemployment, a relation inconsistent with the Calvo model. In the near-collapse of the
US economy starting in 1929, prices and wages fell during the contraction, but stopped falling
when the contraction ended and the economy appeared to be stagnant. In this symposium,
Blanchard also discusses the weakness of the evidence for a slackness effect in the Phillips
curve.
A study of episodes of major changes in inflation rates is also instructive about the failures
of mechanical models of the Phillips curve. Sargent (1982) considers four historical examples
12

in which changes in monetary and fiscal policy regimes resulted in stabilizations following
extreme rates of inflation. These reductions in inflation occurred without major slack.
We conclude that the Phillips curve has little value as a component of a model of inflation.
It is not a description of the actual behavior of inflation, and it is incapable of dealing with the
important question of what happens when macroeconomic policy undergoes major reform.
Although Friedman tied the ideas in his presidential address to the Phillips curve, the ideas
apply much more generally. In particular, they are central to the analysis of policy regime
changes.

5

Alternative Macro Models for Testing the Invariance
Hypothesis

The missing connection between economic slack and inflation represents a challenge for
economic analysis. In his own empirical work, Friedman revealed his mistrust of models of
short-run dynamics then available, like the simultaneous equations method often associated
with the Cowles Commission. Friedman (1970) expressed sympathy with the view that, in
the very short run, an assumption of fixed prices may be reasonable, and said that in that
case generally accepted Keynesian principles govern the economy. Friedman said that the
challenge was to understand the dynamic transition from the short to the longer run, which
in 1970, in his opinion, was not well developed. About this process, Friedman wrote (p.
223):
. . . the rate of adjustment in a variable is a function of the discrepancy between
the measured and the anticipated [longer-run] value of that variable or its rate of
change, as well as, perhaps, of other variables or their rates of change. Finally, I
shall let at least some anticipated variables be determined by a feedback process
from past observed values.
These musings are both insightful and insufficiently precise to guide a tight econometric specification. Subsequent research seeking to use modern methods—like using structural vector
autoregressions, rational expectations, and recursive formulations of equilibria as tightly parameterized stochastic processes—can be read as showing why Friedman was wise to be
cautious.

13

When confronted with the challenge of doing macroeconomic modeling when causal connections are not clear, it is natural to turn to vector autoregressions, which make only limited
assumptions about the underlying structure. One enduring influential aspect of Friedman’s
informal characterizations of the short-run effects of monetary expansions is that, for a while
they drive interest rates and unemployment down. During this period, which lasts several
years in many models, inflation rises only slowly. Uhlig (2005) formalized intuitions along the
lines of Friedman’s in terms of sign restrictions on the coefficients of structural vector autoregressions that would imply this behavior of the model’s response to a monetary shock. This
approach to measuring responses to shocks continues to play an important role in building
structural macroeconometric models—see Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005)—and
in research on price stickiness.
Another line of research builds dynamic models of price stickiness from data on the
prices of individual products. The availability of micro-level data has ignited an active and
challenging research program that aims to refine models of price stickiness with an eye to
match both the VAR evidence on macroeconomic aggregates and also panel evidence about
firms’ price-setting behavior. These models have yielded a wide range of answers. Some agree
with the general conclusion of vector autoregressions that the period over which monetary
shocks affect real variables is several years. Others, such as Golosov and Lucas (2007), find
of quantitatively small effects of unanticipated monetary expansions.
We draw two conclusions from this ambitious literature. One is that the features of
models needed to replicate the findings based on macroeconomic aggregates, as studied in
the vector autoregression literature, are highly specific and therefore fragile—that is, small
and seemingly unimportant changes in such models affect the results. Our other lesson is
that Friedman’s monetary-policy invariance insight is highly robust. Research has not found
evidence that monetary policy has a lasting effect on unemployment. The puzzle remains
that it is difficult to demonstrate that monetary policy affects inflation, either.

6

The Short- and Long-Run Effects of the Presidential
Address

Friedman’s presidential address was aimed at economists, and its effects on world economies
operated through the economics profession. Within the profession, the short-run effect was to
stimulate many to check Friedman’s assertion that, not only did expected inflation matter for
14

actual inflation, it mattered point-for-point in the determination of actual inflation. Within
the then-existing framework of the Phillips curve, as Friedman pointed out, the long-run
Phillips curve became vertical and the unemployment rate or other measure of slack was
invariant to the central bank’s inflation choice. And the regressions trying to check the idea
seemed to show that it was wrong—expected inflation received coefficient less than one in
the early regressions.
In the longer run, Friedman’s hypothesis of a point-for-point shift of the Phillips curve
gained full acceptance among economists. The more-general assertion that real outcomes
such as unemployment, employment, and output were invariant to the monetary regime
began to be accepted. That idea generalized and replaced the concept of monetary neutrality. Initially, monetary neutrality was thought to apply to the level of the money stock—
changes in the stock would ultimately change the price level in proportion and leave real
variables unchanged. Some economists interpreted Friedman’s idea as involving neutrality
with respect to the money growth rate and the level of inflation. The alternative label for
the natural unemployment rate—the non-accelerating rate of inflation unemployment rate
(NAIRU)—seems to leave open the possibility of third-degree non-neutrality. In that case,
unemployment would be invariant to the price level and the inflation rate, but a central bank
could lower unemployment for as long as it wanted by generating a constantly rising rate of
inflation. Friedman seemed to leave this issue open, in the passage quoted at the beginning
of this article, ending “A rising rate of inflation may reduce unemployment, a high rate will
not.” With the advent of formal modeling of the issue with rational expectations, first in
Lucas (1972b) and later in New Keynesian models, the profession came around to the fuller
proposition of the invariance of real outcomes to monetary policies, not just to the level, rate
of change, or acceleration of the price level.
The deeper message of the presidential address is its extension of the logic of the invariance principle beyond what Friedman described as the long run and in particular to
recognize that it is a mistake for policy makers to regard the expected rate of inflation as
a determinant of or anchor for actual inflation. Rather, the message is that in a coherent
model, expected inflation is itself an outcome and that the same fundamentals determine
both inflation and the public’s expectation of it. Distinguishing the long run from the short
run is a handy way to communicate an intuitve version of ideas about the effects of policy,
but the advances Friedman stimulated replaced the distinction with a fuller analysis based

15

on optimizing behavior and rational expectations. Macroeconomists today trace the effects
of a policy change over time by calculating a response function that shows how the response
evolves over time following a policy innovation.
Although Muth had defined and discussed rational expectations almost a decade before
the presidential address, the hypothesis had not permeated macroeconomic thinking until
the sharp debates unfolded immediately after Friedman’s presidential address. One can trace
an intellectual response function to Friedman’s innovation: in the first few years, the debate
focused on whether Friedman was right that the Phillips curve shifted point for point with
expected inflation. That phase ended with the acceptance of that proposition implied by
adoption of the NAIRU label by most of Friedman’s earlier critics. Then, in the 1970s,
the validity of the rational expectations hypothesis was the subject of raging debate. By
the 1980s, the hypothesis was mostly accepted, at least as the default way to think about
expectations. Authors earn no points for embodying rational expectations in a model, any
more than they would for assuming profit or utility maximization. Rational expectations is
part of the basic conventional toolkit of macroeconomics.
Central banks are responsible for monetary policy in almost all countries. The effects
of Friedman’s presidential address on macroeconomic outcomes operated mainly through
central bankers. In 1968, and at least through the 1970s, central banking was in a state of
deep intellectual confusion. Many central banks behaved as if they lacked tools for managing
the rate of inflation. Rather than steering inflation by committing to a monetary rule, as
Friedman had recommended well before his presidential address, central banks permitted
rising inflation, then endorsed and participated in non-monetary and harmful policies to try
to bring inflation under control. The Federal Reserve, for example, endorsed price controls
from 1971 to 1974 and enforced credit controls in 1980.
We believe that Friedman’s thinking, expressed in his 1968 presidential address, began
a highly successful educational process that led most of the central banks of the world to
abandon high-inflation policies and commit to successful inflation-stabilization policies that
provided effective nominal anchors. The address itself effectively attacked the idea that
low unemployment was a benefit of tolerating high inflation. By calling attention to the
roles of forward-looking economic agents, the presidential address laid the foundations for
central bankers to believe that commitment to low-inflation policies was key to achieving low
inflation. Macroeconomists under Friedman’s influence showed central bankers the danger

16

of failing to commit and the possibility that commitment could be credible. The unfavorable
experiences in the 1970s around the world resulted from failure to commit and the successful
adoption of committed policies starting in the 1980s owes a lot to Friedman, much of it
channeled through the presidential address.

17

References
Barro, Robert J. and David B. Gordon, “Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of
Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1983, 12 (1), 101–121.
Calvo, Guillermo A., “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” September
1983, 12 (3), 383–398.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy,
February 2005, 113 (1), 1–45.
Friedman, Milton, “Presidential Address,” American Econmic Review, March 1968, 58 (1),
1–15.
, “A Theoretical Framework for Monetary Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy,
1970, 78 (2), 193–238.
and L.J. Savage, “Planning Experiments Seeking Maxima,” in Churchill Eisenhart,
Millard W. Hartay, and W. Allen Wallis, eds., Selected Techniques of Statistical Analysis
for Scientific and Industrial Research, and Production and Management Engineering,
New York and London: McGraw-Hill, 1947, pp. 363–372.
and Rose D Friedman, Two Lucky People, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998.
Golosov, Mikhail and Robert E. Jr. Lucas, “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves,” Journal of
Political Economy, 2007, 115, 171–199.
Gordon, Robert J., “The Recent Acceleration of Inflation and Its Lessons for the Future,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1970, 1970 (1), 8–47. Spring.
Hall, Robert E., “Notes on the Current State of Empirical Macroeconomics,” June 1976.
available at stanford.edu/∼rehall.
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott, “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 1977, 85 (3), 473–491.

18

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., “Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis,” in Otto
Eckstein, ed., The Econometrics of Price Determination: Conference, October 30-31,
Washington, DC: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1972.
, “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1972, 4
(2), 103–124.
, “Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,” American Economic
Review, 1973, 63 (3), 326–334.
, “Econometric policy evaluation: A critique,” in “Carnegie-Rochester conference series
on public policy,” Vol. 1 Elsevier 1976, pp. 19–46.
Modigliani, Franco and Lucas Papademos, “Targets for Monetary Policy in the Coming
Year,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1975, 1975 (1), 141–165. Spring.
Muth, John F., “Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements,” Econometrica,
July 1961, 29 (3), 315–335.
Phelps, Edmund S., “Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal Unemployment
Over Time,” Economica, 1967, pp. 22–44.
Samuelson, Paul A. and Robert M. Solow, “Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy,”
American Economic Review, 1960, 50 (2), 177–194.
Sargent, Thomas J., “A Note on the ’Accelerationist’ Controversy,” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, 1971, 3 (3), 721–725.
, “The Ends of Four Big Inflations,” 1982. in Hall, Robert E., Editor, Inflation: Causes
and Effects, University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
, The Conquest of American Inflation, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University
Press, 1999.
Solow, Robert M., “Recent Controversies in the Theory of Inflation,” in Stephen Rousseas,
ed., Inflation: Its Causes, Consequences and Control, New York: New York University,
1968, pp. 2–17.

19

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, “Modeling Inflation after the Crisis,” Proceedings of
the Economic Policy Symposium, 2010, pp. 172—220. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City.
Tobin, James, “Discussion,” in Stephen Rousseaus, ed., Inflation: Its Causes, Consequences
and Control, New York: New York University, 1968, pp. 48–54.
Uhlig, Harald, “What are the effects of monetary policy on output? Results from an
agnostic identification procedure,” Journal of Monetary Economics, March 2005, 52
(2), 381–419.
Wald, Abraham, Sequential Analysis, New York: John Wiley, 1947.
Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press,
2003.

20

