NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON THE QUEST FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY
AND THE MONETARY POLICY REGIME
Michael D. Bordo
Working Paper 24154
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24154

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017

For excellent research assistance I thank Maria Sole Pagliari of Rutgers University. For helpful
comments and suggestions, I thank: Chris Meissner, Pierre Siklos, Harold James, Hugh Rockoff,
Eugene White, John Landon Lane, John Taylor, Myron Scholes, Gavin Wright, Paul David, Lars
E.O. Svennson, Aaron Tornell and David Wheelock. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Michael D. Bordo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

An Historical Perspective on the Quest for Financial Stability and the Monetary Policy Regime
Michael D. Bordo
NBER Working Paper No. 24154
December 2017
JEL No. E3,E42,G01,N1,N2
ABSTRACT
This paper surveys the co-evolution of monetary policy and financial stability for a number of
countries across four exchange rate regimes from 1880 to the present. I present historical
evidence on the incidence, costs and determinants of financial crises, combined with narratives on
some famous financial crises. I then focus on some empirical historical evidence on the
relationship between credit booms, asset price booms and serious financial crises. My exploration
suggests that financial crises have many causes, including credit driven asset price booms, which
have become more prevalent in recent decades, but that in general financial crises are very
heterogeneous and hard to categorize. Two key historical examples stand out in the record of
serious financial crises which were linked to credit driven asset price booms and busts: the 1920s
and 30s and the Global Financial Crisis of 2007-2008. The question that arises is whether these
two ‘perfect storms’ should be grounds for permanent changes in the monetary and financial
environment.

Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

A web appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24154

1. Introduction
Economic development and growth in the past two centuries have been facilitated by stabilizing
monetary and financial regimes. Good macroeconomic institutions encourages growth and
financial development directly through financial innovation ( King and Levine (1993), Rousseau
and Sylla (2006)) and indirectly by allowing private agents to make economic decisions in a stable
environment.
Macroeconomic stability comprises price level stability (today low inflation) ; limited volatility in
the real economy ( smoothing the business cycle) and financial stability. Traditionally financial
stability has meant preventing and managing financial crises (events which can lead to and
exacerbate recessions). More recently it has come to mean heading off systemic risk (imbalances)
and especially credit- driven asset price booms and busts which can trigger financial crises.
This paper examines the evolution of macroeconomic institutions focusing on the connection
between the monetary regime (defined both as the exchange rate regime and the monetary policy
regime) and financial stability in the past two centuries. This is primarily the story of central banks
developing their policy tools to provide both macroeconomic and financial stability.
Central banks have evolved since the founding of the Swedish Riksbank in 1667 and the Bank of
England in 1684. They were originally established to provide fiscal support to the governments of
emerging nation states to finance wars. Later in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries central
banks evolved to maintain the convertibility of their notes into specie (gold) and to manage the
gold standard. Because of their government charters and ample resources they became bankers
banks for the nascent banking industry and lenders of last resort and protectors of the payments
system. In the twentieth century they learned how to stabilize the business cycle and to provide

2

price stability. The central requirement of these tasks was the establishment of credibility. (Bordo
and Siklos 2017a).
The evolution of central banks occurred within the context of the international exchange rate
regimes which set the basic framework. These encompassed: the nineteenth century specie
standard (bimetallism and gold); the interwar gold exchange standard; the Bretton Woods
adjustable peg regime and the post Bretton Woods managed float fiat money regime.
In the international exchange rate regime, monetary authorities (central banks) adhere to a
monetary policy regime. By a monetary policy regime is meant the relationship between the tools
of monetary policy used and the goals or objectives of the policy maker. Historically monetary
policy tools have been the policy interest rate, a tool used since the nineteenth century – monetary
aggregates which were used in the twentieth century – and various qualitative and quantitative
controls. Policy objectives or goals have historically been: stable exchange rates (gold
convertibility pre – World War II), price level (inflation) stability; real output stability, low
unemployment and financial stability. 3 So for example under the classical gold standard monetary
policy regime, when faced with a large gold outflow which threatened its reserves and its
convertibility goal (mandate) the central bank would raise its policy rate (the discount rate).
The learning process to provide macroeconomic stability and to gain credibility was long and
difficult. It followed a pendulum process of going from relative success to deep failure and back

3

Another important distinction is between a monetary policy strategy and a monetary policy
regime. A monetary policy strategy is defined in terms of the goals of monetary policy (price
stability (low inflation), low unemployment and financial stability). By contrast a monetary
policy regime is characterized by the instruments used to achieve the strategy. For example, in
recent decades the monetary strategy of Federal Reserve Chairmen Volcker and Greenspan was
to attach greater importance to low inflation within the Fed’s dual mandate whereas chairpersons
Bernanke and Yellen attached more equal weight to inflation and unemployment in their
strategies.
3

to success between the late nineteenth century and the end of the twentieth century (Bordo and
Siklos 2014). The Great Moderation from the mid-1980s to the mid-2000s is often viewed as the
pinnacle of success for central banks in achieving their macroeconomic goals (Bernanke (2004),
Taylor 2010).
The learning process to provide financial stability has also been long and painful. Some central
banks learned how to be effective lenders of last resort by the third quarter of the nineteenth century
(Bordo and Siklos 2017b). For others it was well into the twentieth century. Until the 1930s,
banking crises were banking panics which required quick lender of last resort actions to prevent a
serious meltdown. After the invention of the financial safety net and deposit insurance banking
panics evolved into fiscally resolved crises which have become increasingly expensive to resolve
(Bordo and Meissner 2016). Along with crisis management, the regulatory and supervision regime
for the financial system went through a lengthy learning process) (Toniolo and White 2015).
Four key objectives emerged from the historical evolution of central banks before the Global
Financial Crisis of 2008 : a) the importance of maintaining price stability ( credibility for low
inflation); b) maintaining real macroeconomic stability; c) providing a credible rules based lender
of last resort; d) having a sound banking structure and effective supervision and regulation of the
banking system.
Since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008 central banks have become focused increasingly
on their financial stability mandate and especially the link between credit driven asset price booms
and busts (referred to as the financial cycle) which many view as the key cause of financial crises
(Borio 2014, Taylor 2012).
Stock market booms and busts and real estate booms and busts have always been present since
the early days of capitalism. Most have been linked to real economic fundamentals—productivity

4

advances and demographic shifts. The view before the GFC was that central banks would be best
advised not to prevent asset price booms and busts but to deal with their effects on the real economy
later (referred to as the Greenspan doctrine or cleaning (see Brunnermeier and Schnabel 2016).
Since the GFC many have argued that central banks should use their monetary policy tools to head
off such imbalances in advance (referred to as leaning against the wind policy (LAW)) (Stein
2013). In addition, many have advocated that central banks should use the tools of macro
prudential policy (e.g. liquidity ratios, capital ratios, loan to value ratios, margin requirements) to
prevent these imbalances from becoming serious (Borio 2014).
On the other hand, are those who argue that the central bank following such a strategy would
conflict with its main goals of price level and real macro stability and encroach upon central bank
credibility and even their independence (Goodfriend 2014, Svennson 2017). The relationship
between monetary policy and financial stability is thus at the forefront of policy debate (Bordo
2017b). The lessons from economic history can be most helpful in resolving this debate.
In what follows I briefly survey the co-evolution of monetary policy and financial stability and the
historical evidence on the incidence, costs and determinants of financial crises, combined with a
narrative on some famous financial crises. I then focus on some empirical historical evidence on
the relationships between credit booms, asset price booms and serious financial crises. My
exploration suggests that financial crises have many causes, including credit driven asset price
booms, which have become more prevalent in recent decades, but that in general financial crises
are very heterogeneous and hard to categorize.
Two key historical examples stand out in the record of serious financial crises which were linked
to credit driven asset price booms and busts: the 1920s and 30s and the GFC. The question that
arises is whether these two ‘perfect storms’ should be grounds for permanent changes in the

5

monetary and financial environment. The paper concludes with lessons, both for policy makers
and for future historians of the crucial subject of financial crises.

2.

The Historical Evolution of Monetary and Financial Stability Policy

Central banks have evolved for close to four centuries. Their evolution was slow and often hit by
setbacks. Central banks were initially established as private entities to meet the fiscal needs of
nation states to finance government expenditures in wars and to market government debt, as in the
case of the Riksbank in 1667 and the Bank of England in 1684. Later in the nineteenth centuries
central banks followed their key mandate to maintain the convertibility of their notes into specie
and to follow the ‘rules of the game”. Because of their government charters and large resources,
they evolved into bankers’ banks and then into lenders of last resort to manage financial crises that
boiled up in the first era of globalization.
During World War I they became subservient to governments and were turned into engines of
inflation. In the interwar period they began to develop the tools of countercyclical stabilization
policy and to insulate their economies from international shocks. In this period observance of the
flawed real bills doctrine (in the US) and adherence to the flawed gold exchange standard led to
serious policy errors and the Great Contraction of 1929-33. Central banks were blamed for the
contraction. They lost their independence to follow an inflationary low interest policy to Treasuries
and became an integral part of a regime of financial repression 4.
In World War II central banks again became engines of inflation. Beginning in the 1950s central
banks regained their independence and returned to using their policy tools to stem inflation and

4

See Reinhart and Sbrancia (2015) on financial repression. Central banks also became agents of
the government’s industrial policy. See Capie (2010) on the Bank of England and Meltzer (2003)
on the Federal Reserve.
6

stabilize the economy. In the 1960s central banks, strongly influenced by Keynesian ideas, began
following the Phillips Curve tradeoff favoring maintaining high employment at the expense of
increasing inflation (Meltzer 2010, Romer and Romer 2002). This led to the Great Inflation of the
1970s.
In the postwar era central banks also accepted their lender of last role after the debacle of the panics
of the 1930s. However, they no longer followed Bagehot’s strictures and began in 1974 to bail out
insolvent banks believed to be “too big to fail”.
The Great Inflation was ended in 1979 by the Volcker shock that brought the advanced countries
into the Great Moderation (from the mid-1980s to the early 2000s), a period of rapid and stable
growth and low inflation, Central banks had achieved the apex of their learning to follow credible
rule like behavior (Taylor (2006)).
That ended with the Global Financial Crisis 2007-2008. It was handled much better than the Great
Contraction by central bankers who had learned their lesson from the 1930s, but they and other
regulatory authorities were blamed for not heading off the imbalances that led to the crisis. This in
turn, like in the 1930s, has led to pressure for regime change to elevate the financial stability
mandate to paramount importance and to a possible return to financial repression.
Following this brief overview, we examine in more detail below the evolution of monetary policy
and financial stability regimes across historical exchange rate regimes.

2.1. The Classical Gold Standard
The specie standard evolved in the nineteenth century from bimetallism to the classical gold
standard, which prevailed from 1880 to 1914. The gold standard rule was a contingent rule where
temporary suspension and the issue of fiat money was permitted in well understood emergencies

7

such as wars and financial crises. Once the emergency ended the central bank was required to
restore convertibility to gold at the official parity. If it did this it would ensure its credibility (Bordo
and Kydland 1995). Credible adherence to the gold standard rule allowed central banks some
leeway to conduct stabilization policies (smooth shocks to the price level, real output and interest
rates) within the gold points (Bordo and Macdonald 2012).
In this era minimal attention was attached to smoothing the business cycle or reducing
unemployment. Wages and prices were relatively flexible and the unemployed could always go to
America and Australia.
The history of the pre-1914 gold standard shows how important countries, especially Britain,
France, Germany and the United States (as well as smaller European countries: the Netherlands,
Belgium, Switzerland and the Scandanavian countries) had credible regimes. Similar Western
European countries like Italy, Spain and Portugal tried to gain credibility but were less successful
as were all of the Latin American countries, reflecting their weaker institutional development
(Bordo and Schwartz 1994).
Credible adherence to the gold standard rule also allowed central banks to conduct lender of last
resort actions without engendering capital flight. During this era advanced countries learned
through the trial and error of repeated financial crises to follow Bagehot’s (1873) famous strictures
‘in the face of an internal drain (a banking panic) lend freely to solvent financial institutions on
the basis of sound collateral. In the face of an external drain (currency crisis) raise the policy rate.
In the face of both an internal and external drain, lend freely at a high rate’ (Bordo 1984, Flandreau
and Ugolini 2013).
The evolution of LLR policies differed across Europe. In the UK case, on several occasions the
Bank of England needed to invoke a Treasury letter permitting it to temporarily suspend gold

8

convertibility and increase its note issue. On the continent several central banks bailed out
insolvent banks because they were deemed too big/and or important to fail (Grossman 2010). In
France in 1889 and then England in 1890, the central banks developed lifeboat operations to save
important financial institutions (White 2016). In the U.S. with no central bank since the demise of
the Second Bank of the United States, part of the LLR role was filled by the advent of private
clearing houses issuing clearing house loan certificates as substitutes for bank reserves
(Timberlake (1984), Gorton and Tallman 2016).
Before 1914 financial crises were caused by internal and external shocks including political
upheaval, corporate malfeasance by important financial institutions and international lending
booms and busts. Crises were transmitted between countries by the adjustment mechanism of the
fixed exchange rate gold standard. Their incidence and severity were closely related to both the
presence and absence of a lender of last resort and institutional structure, especially bank structure
– the US with unit banking fared far worse than neighboring Canada which had nationwide branch
banking (Bordo, Redish and Rockoff 2015). Country differences in banking structure and
government responses to financial crises were clearly tied in with deep institutional and political
factors such as the nature/presence of property rights and rule of law and connection to the British
Empire 5 (Bordo and Meissner 2015, Calomiris and Haber 2014)

5

Indeed, the Federal Reserve System was founded in 1914 in response to banking crises.
However, the Federal Reserve Act did not reform the inherently unstable US banking system,
thereby putting more pressure on the lender of last resort when crises did occur (Bordo and
Wheelock 2011)
9

2.2. The Interwar and World War II
World War I ended the classical gold standard. At the outbreak of hostilities in the summer of 1914
most of the belligerents suspended convertibility and imposed exchange and capital controls
following a massive global financial crisis as they attempted to liquidate their vast foreign holdings
of securities 6 (Seabourne 1986, Silber 2005, Roberts 2013)). Every belligerent financed a
considerable portion of their wartime expenditures with the issue of paper currency leading to high
inflation. After the war many countries tried to rebuild the prewar gold standard system. Restoring
the prewar parity after massive wartime inflation and changes in the political economy of the
postwar order—the extension of the suffrage and the rise of organized labor, the decline of the
European powers relative to the United States (Eichengreen 1992) –delayed the restoration of the
gold standard, and the standard that was established –the fragile gold exchange standard had
considerably less credibility (Bordo and Siklos 2014).
Britain returned to gold at the prewar parity in 1925 but at a significantly overvalued parity which
continuously threatened its adherence (Bayoumi and Bordo 1998). France went through a period
of political instability leading to high inflation and its central bank lost much of its credibility in a
scandal before it restored convertibility in 1926 at a greatly undervalued parity (Bordo and
Hautcoeur 2007). Germany suffered a hyperinflation fueled by the Reichsbank. The U.S. never
left gold but the newly established Federal Reserve went through a lengthy learning period to
become a fully functioning member of the gold club (Meltzer 2003).
By 1926 the gold exchange standard was up and running and its short-lived success depended
upon the reputations of Benjamin Strong, Montagu Norman, Emile Moreau and Hjalmar Schacht

6

In the US the issuance of emergency currency prevented a banking panic. In the UK the Bank
of England engaged in a massive lender of last resort operation.
10

(Ahamed 2009, Bordo and Schenk 2016). Despite their efforts the system collapsed during the
Great Depression. It suffered from the fatal flaws of maladjustment, illiquidity and lack of
credibility. The key problem was adjustment as the UK had restored convertibility at an overvalued
parity and faced continuous deflationary pressure while France restored convertibility at a greatly
overvalued parity. Both France and the United States sterilized gold inflows aggravating the
deflationary pressure on sterling, a declining reserve currency (Eichengreen and Flandreau 2014).
During this period many central banks began following macro stabilization policies to offset
fluctuations in the price level and real output. To do so required sterilizing gold flows and
preventing the classical adjustment mechanism from working. This was different from the pre war gold standard. These sterilization policies led to the ultimate breakdown of the international
monetary system (Meltzer 2003).
Financial stability also suffered in the interwar as most European countries in the 1920s , in the
face of deflation and readjustment of competitiveness, suffered banking crises , most of which
were not resolved by effective LLR policies ( Feinstein, Temin and Toniolo (1997)) . A number
of countries resorted to fiscal bailouts of banks deemed ‘Too big to fail’ during this period (Toniolo
and White 2015).
The Great Contraction of 1929 to 1933 in large part reflected policies by central banks (Ahamed
2009) and most particularly the Federal Reserve which followed the flawed real bills doctrine
(Meltzer 2003, Wheelock 1992)) which led the Federal Reserve to tighten monetary policy in 1928
to prick the Wall Street stock market boom. The boom itself some argue may have been fueled by
loose monetary policy in 1926 to aid the UK in its struggles to stay on the gold standard 7 .

7

There is considerable debate over this issue. Adolph Miller, Chairman of the Federal Reserve
blamed the Wall Street Boom and Crash and the Great Depression on Benjamin Strong for his
11

Moreover, the gold exchange standard may have contributed to the lending boom that
accompanied the productivity driven stock market boom by allowing the money supply to be more
elastic than was the case under the classical gold standard (Eichengreen and Mitchener 2004).
The Fed’s policy actions were unsuccessful in deflating the boom but did lead to a serious recession
in the summer of 1929. An even more egregious error was the System’s failure to follow its lender
of last resort mandate and offset a series of ever worsening liquidity driven banking panics from
1930 to 1933 (Bordo and Wheelock 2011, Bordo and Landon-Lane 2010). This caused a collapse
by one third in the money supply and a similar collapse in real output and prices and a rise in
unemployment to 25%. (Friedman and Schwartz 1963).
The U.S. Great Contraction spread to the rest of the world through the fixed exchange rate gold
standard. Serious policy errors were also made by the German Reichsbank and fiscal authorities
(trapped by the fixed exchange rate gold standard imposed upon them by the international
authorities in the Dawes plan and the 1924 London Conference) by tightening monetary and fiscal
policy as the depression spread to Germany (James 1986). The loss of credibility in the interwar
in turn aggravated matters for most European countries who, faced with” golden fetters” were
unable to follow successful LLR policies to prevent banking panics and deflation (Eichengreen
1992, Bernanke and James 1991). They only escaped the depression by cutting the link with gold
and devaluing their currencies (Choudhri and Kochin (1980), Eichengreen and Sachs (1986)) .
The Great Contraction led country after country to raise tariffs, impose exchange and capital
controls in an effort to protect their economies from foreign competition Kindleberger(1973),
Irwin (2011). They also followed beggar thy neighbor competitive devaluations (currency wars)

actions to save sterling. Miller was supported by Carter Glass and Herbert Hoover. Friedman and
Schwartz (1963) and Meltzer (2003) were skeptical of this charge.
12

(Nurkse 1944). The outcome was by the eve of World War II the complete collapse of the global
trade and international financial system.
In the U.S. and other advanced countries, the Great Contraction was blamed on the central bank
and the commercial banks. This led to the subservience of the Fed to the U.S. Treasury from the
mid-1930s until 1951 when the Fed began following a low interest rate policy to accommodate the
Treasury’s fiscal policy (Meltzer 2003). During World War II the Fed became an engine of
inflation as had been the case in World War I. The story was similar in the UK, Canada and many
other countries. Central banks lost their independence, administered controls over the financial
system and became part of the general machinery of credit allocation and financial repression.

2.3. Bretton Woods 1944 to 1973
The Bretton Woods System (BWS) inaugurated at the Bretton Woods conference in 1944 created
an environment to restore both macroeconomic and financial stability (Bordo 1993, Bordo 2017a).
BWS was rule based, in a number of ways similar to the gold standard. Each member was required
to peg their currencies into dollars at $35 per ounce and the U.S. as key anchor currency was to
use its financial policies to maintain the dollar peg. It was an adjustable peg whereby member
countries could change their parities in the face of a ‘fundamental disequilibrium’ (a change in the
real exchange rate). In addition, capital controls were instituted. Unlike the gold standard, members
were expected to use their monetary and fiscal policies to maintain full employment. The IMF was
established to provide temporary relief for current account imbalances.
The Bretton Woods system became fully operational in late 1958 when the Western European
economies declared current account convertibility. The convertible Bretton Woods System was
associated with remarkable macroeonomic stability—rapid real growth and relatively low real

13

income variability and relatively stable and low inflation (Bordo 1993). But the BWS was shortlived and quickly evolved into the gold dollar standard which had the fatal flaws of the interwar
gold exchange standard.
The key problem was adjustment as in the 1920’s. The UK with an overvalued parity and slower
growth than its competitors and the inability to accept deflation had continuous balance of
payments deficits and currency crises and rescues by the G 10, the IMF and the U.S. On the other
hand, Germany with rapid productivity growth ran continuous surpluses but as in the interwar ,
was unwilling to let prices rise and sterilized the inflows. The U.S. as anchor country ran
continuous balance of payments deficits as the dollar was used as international reserves to finance
the growth of world trade. It did not have to adjust to its deficits. As outstanding dollar balances
increased relative to the US monetary gold stock the threat of a run on the bank ( Fort Knox)
loomed. In reaction the US authorities created an elaborate set of policies and controls (the most
important of which were the swap lines ) to preserve the monetary gold stock ( Bordo, Humpage
and Schwartz 2015). However as long as the US monetary authorities followed credible low
inflation policies the system would continue because the dollar had emerged as the key
international currency. The BWS only collapsed in 1971 after the US began following inflationary
monetary and fiscal policies in 1965 to finance the Vietnam war and LBJ’s Great Society.
Within this international background the Federal Reserve slowly regained its independence from
the Treasury. The interest rate pegs were kept after World War II and in the 1940s inflation became
endemic leading the Fed to try to regain its independence to raise its policy rates. This was achieved
after a considerable struggle with the Treasury and the administration in the Federal Reserve
Treasury Accord of 1951. Other countries took much longer to regain their independence, often
into the 1980s and early 1990s.

14

The Fed tightened policy in the early 1950s and restored price stability. Under Chairman Martin
the Fed followed a policy of low inflation and the economy ( as in the rest of the world) ,performed
well through much of the 1950s and early 1960s. The return to monetary orthodoxy rested on the
reputation of Chairman Martin. Two other central banks in this period , the Bundesbank and the
Swiss National Bank, also followed credible monetary policies.
The Bretton Woods era was also associated with financial stability. The controls on the financial
industry and the regime of financial repression continued into the 1950s and 1960s. In the US
regulation Q which imposed a ceiling on time deposit interest rates and prohibited the payment of
interest was administered by the Federal Reserve System. Another important regulations was the
Glass Steagall separation of commercial from investment banking. In the face of those regulations
and the extension of FDIC deposit insurance there were no financial crises in this era( other than
currency crises) –speculative attacks on pegged exchange rates). Similar policies and institutions
prevailed in the UK and virtually every other advanced country (Toniolo and White 2015).

2.4. The Managed Float Regime 1973 to 2006
The era of macro stability and financial stability was short-lived and began to unravel in the mid
1970s. In the 1960s central banks ( with the exceptions of the Bundesbank and the SNB) began
following Keynesian policies to maintain full employment at the expense of higher inflation. With
the collapse of Bretton Woods and the (indirect ) link to gold there were no constraints on monetary
policy. The subsequent Great Inflation destroyed credibility, as well as the reputations of central
bankers such as Arthur Burns (Bordo and Orphanides 2013, Bordo and Siklos 2015).
As inflation and inflationary pressures mounted in the 1970s several attempts by Chairman Arthur
Burns

and the FOMC to reduce inflation faltered when it led to recession and rising

15

unemployment, leading to a ratcheting up in inflation and inflation expectations. Accommodation
of two oil price shocks also contributed to the run up in inflation. By the late 1970s the Fed had
lost considerable credibility for low inflation culminating in a run on the dollar in 1978. President
Carter’s appointment of Paul Volcker as chairman of the Fed with a mandate to end inflation and
his adoption of monetarist style tight monetary policy broke the back of inflationary expectations
at the end of a deep recession (Bordo, Erceg , Levin Michaels 2017). Only a form of ‘shock
therapy’ could restore low long-run inflationary expectations. (Levin and Taylor 2013).
Similar strategies were followed in the UK, Japan, Canada and other countries so that by the mid
1980s, the Great Moderation restored price stability along with the reputations of central bankers.
During the Great Moderation period central banks developed new strategies which enhanced their
credibility (Bordo and Siklos 2014 and 2017b).Chief amongst these is inflation targeting ( IT)
developed in the late 1980s and early 1990s by New Zealand , Canada , Australia, the UK and
Sweden. It proved to be most successful in improving inflation performance in the countries that
adopted it.
As it was practiced it became flexible inflation targeting. Under flexible IT the policy interest rate
is used to hit the explicit inflation target (e.g. 2%). But since changes in the policy stance influence
inflation with long and variable lags there is usually a tolerance range around the mid- point of the
target. Flexible IT allows the central bank to influence its other main macroeconomic goal of
low unemployment (follow the dual mandate) as well as achieve their mandated inflation target
(King 1997 Svensson 2009). 8

8

Flexible IT has some resonance to the story of central banks under the classical gold standard
who could temporarily follow stabilization policy within the gold points yet maintain gold
convertibility (Bordo and MacDonald 2003).
16

The end of the Bretton Woods system also led to the breakdown of financial stability. A number
of forces were at work. One of the reasons that Bretton Woods failed was because it became
increasingly more difficult to maintain capital controls in the face of financial innovations (e.g.
Eurodollars) (Bordo 1993). Once capital controls fell by the wayside private capital flows, in
addition to contributing to a return to financial globalization, also increased the likelihood of both
currency crises and banking crises driven by lending booms and sudden stops (Bordo, Taylor and
Williamson 2003). A second reason is that the Great Inflation made it more difficult for the various
price controls in the financial sector in various countries to be maintained. In the U.S. high inflation
led to the ending of regulation Q and also contributed to the Savings and Loan crisis in the 1980s
as these institutions, which intermediated between low interest deposits and fixed rate mortgages,
eventually collapsed (Toniolo and White 2015). With inflation came increasing financial
innovation and competition between new institutions (designed to evade the controls) and the older
protected ones. Political pressure in the 1980s and 90s led to the complete liberalization of the
financial sector in the US by 1999 with the elimination of Glass Steagall and the end of the
prohibition on interstate branch banking in 1997. At the same time the supervision and regulation
regime failed to keep up with the rapid changes brought about by financial liberalization. The same
process unfolded across the world albeit under different institutional frameworks.
Banking crises which had virtually disappeared since the mid-1930s came back in the 1970s with
the opening up of finance. In the U.S. after the debacle of the Great Depression the Fed
acknowledged its lender of last resort role in the post war period. With the return of banking crises
in the 1970s the Fed began following activist crisis management policies (Bordo 2014, Carlson
and Wheelock 2015).

17

Banking crises in this period were very different from those in the 1930s and earlier. With the
advent of deposit insurance, old fashioned banking panics disappeared and were replaced by
expensive fiscal bailouts of insolvent firms. Also the Fed expanded its reach beyond the traditional
‘line in the sand ‘of only protecting the deposit taking institutions and the payments system, and
began to allay turmoil in the non- banking sector (e.g. Penn Central in 1970 and much later the
investment banks in 2008).
A key event was the bailout of Franklin National bank which had made risky bets in the foreign
exchange market. The justification for this violation of Bagehot’s strictures was to prevent
contagion to other banks. This was followed by the bailout (by the FDIC) in 1984 of the insolvent
Continental Illinois bank, the eighth largest commercial bank in the US on the grounds that it was
too big to fail. A subsequent event was the lifeboat operation arranged by the New York Fed of
LTCM, a hedge fund, which had made a disastrous bet on Russian sovereign debt.
In some ways the rescue resembled a life boat operation arranged by the Bank of England in 1890
to save Barings and prevent a banking panic (White 2016). LTCM was rescued on the grounds
that not to do so would lead to large losses to unknown counterparties.
The Fed in this period moved away from Bagehot’s dictum to not rescue insolvent banks. Bagehot
was criticized by Goodhart (1985), Solow (1982) and others on the grounds that it was not possible
to distinguish illiquidity from insolvency during a crisis and that the failure of a large bank would
disrupt financial intermediation and lead to contagion. This led to the Fed’s adoption of the “Too
Big to Fail” doctrine 9. In response to the concern over moral hazard, Corrigan (1990), Giannini
(1999) and others suggested that the Fed follow a strategy of “constructive ambiguity” by not
declaring in advance which banks would be deemed large enough to save.

9

Along with the FDIC and the Treasury.
18

Similar processes went on in the UK in this period (Capie 2010 and James 2017) as well as in
other countries. These developments set the stage for the return of serious financial instability in
advanced countries in the 2007-2008 subprime mortgage crisis.

2.5. The Global Financial Crisis
The Great Moderation of 1985 to 2005 was associated both with macroeconomic and financial
stability. The prevalent view at the time was that monetary/price stability fostered financial
stability because inflation volatility weakened bank balance sheets (Bordo 2000, Bordo, Dueker
and Wheelock 2002). The alternative view of the BIS was that extended periods of low inflation
and low interest rates created growing imbalances (Borio and Lowe 2002). That is, low interest
rates and low inflation were conducive to creating bank credit fueled asset price booms and busts.
These would occur because low interest rates created the seeds for credit financed asset price
booms in an environment of price stability. At the end of the Tech boom of the 1990s and the early
2000s BIS officials suggested conditions under which the Fed should raise its policy rates to defuse
an incipient bubble ( BIS 2000). Federal Reserve officials and some prominent economists (
Greenspan(2002), Bernanke and Gertler 1999) argued that the proper way to treat an asset price
boom was to leave it alone and if it burst to clean up the mess afterwards(“cleaning”, Brunnermeier
and Schnabel 2016). 10

10

Bordo and Jeanne (2002) posited that if there was perceived to be a high probability that an
asset boom would burst and lead to a serious recession that the central bank should use its policy
tools to head off the bust. They were agnostic on whether the central bank should use its policy
rate or other tools like margin requirements.
19

As it turned out when the Tech boom burst in 2000 it did little damage to the real economy
justifying the Fed’s view. The BIS proponents argued that it did not cause much real damage
because it was financed largely with equity and not by bank credit.
The 2007-2008 subprime mortgage crisis, by contrast, did have serious effects on the global
financial system reminiscent of 1931 and led to a very serious recession. The BIS argued that the
housing bust in the U.S. was exactly what it predicted because it was driven by an expansion of
bank credit in an environment of abnormally low interest rates (Borio 2014).
The debate over the causes of the 2007-2008 crisis continues. Many factors were at work including
regulatory policies in the U.S. housing sector ( Fanny Mae and Freddie Mac) that encouraged
risky mortgage borrowing (Rajan 2010, Poole 2016), the fact that the Fed (and other central
banks)kept its policy rate well below the Taylor Rule rate from 2002-2005 because of a fear of a
Japan style deflation(Taylor 2007, Lane 2016); financial innovation that created derivatives ;the
failure of US and other regulators from comprehending that their regulations of the global banking
system were being evaded by the creation of off balance sheet entities like SIVs and the shadow
banking system(Gorton 2010, Calomiris 2017); a global savings glut (Bernanke 2005) and greed
and malfeasance by many financial sector players.
The crisis was eventually managed and the macro economy was stabilized by the policy actions
by the Fed and other central banks and by international policy coordination. The central banks
pursued classic Bagehot liquidity policies but extended their discount window mandate to
encompass non- bank financial intermediaries (shadow banks) 11 . The monetary and fiscal
authorities also bailed out insolvent banks and investment banks deemed ‘too important to fail’

11

Some commentators (e.g. Orphanides 2016)) have emphasized that the central banks took on
too many responsibilities during the GFC and as a consequence have lost focus on their main
mandate which is the pursuit of price stability.
20

(SIFIs). Central banks independence was violated by the use of credit policy which is a form of
fiscal policy (Goodfriend 2014). Because they engaged in credit policy and bailed out insolvent
banks their future independence is threatened by legislative reaction in the U.S. and other
countries.
Indeed as in the 1930s, the GFC was blamed on the banks and the financial sector in general
leading to a considerable increase in financial regulation (Dodd Frank 2010) which many believe
has greatly restricted the scope of the financial sector. At the global level, the Financial Stability
Board began implementing new regulations under Basel III. In addition, the central banks have
been urged to use their policy tools to head off incipient systemic risk and especially credit booms.
They have also been entrusted with the new (many of which were used 60 years ago) policy tools
of macro prudential policy to deal with potential financial instability12. This increased emphasis
on financial stability has created a sense of déjà vu from the 1930s when the New Deal financial
actions (and similar initiatives abroad) led to a regime of financial repression which in subsequent
decades had serious unintended consequences.

3. Financial crises in Historical Perspective: Measurement
Interest in the incidence and history of financial crises has increased markedly since the GFC. To
clearly understand the link between the monetary policy and financial stability regimes, it is crucial
to understand the record of the most extreme form of financial instability—financial crises. In this
section we review the historical evidence on the incidence, determinants and costs of financial
crises. Our survey suggests that not only has the crisis problem returned with a vengeance in the

12

This raises the issue of who should implement these policies, the central bank or another
agency e.g. a Financial Stability Authority as in Canada or Australia. See Svensson 2015)
21

second era of globalization since 1973 to rival its presence in the first era of globalization before
World War I, but the output costs have been rising in recent years closer to what was seen during
the interwar period. These facts help to explain why the emphasis on financial stability has become
so prominent. We also consider the evidence on the determinants of financial crises. The current
consensus view is that financial crises are caused by credit driven asset price booms . Our overview
suggest that while this is an important cause of crises it is not the only one. Indeed, the historical
experience suggests that financial crises are very heterogeneous. Before we present this evidence
we briefly lay out some definitions of financial crises and closely related phenomena.

3.1. Definitions
The original definition of a financial crisis was a banking panic—a scramble by the public for
means of payment (Schwartz 1986). It occurred in two historical scenarios. The first was a
contagious banking panic, when the public fearful that their banks would not be able to convert
their deposits into currency attempted to do so en masse. The second was a stock market crash that
led to fears that loans from banks to brokers would be unavailable at any price . Without
intervention by the monetary authorities or lender of last resort—through open market operations
or liberal discount window lending—the real economy would be impacted by a decline in the
money supply, by impairment of the payments system , and by an interruption in bank lending.
In the post- World War II era, with the widespread adoption of government guarantees including
deposit insurance ( both explicit and implicit) and with the understanding of the role of a lender of
last resort, old fashioned banking panics have become quite rare events. Instead banking crises
largely involve the insolvency of the banking system or of systemically important financial
institutions ( SIFIs). They have occurred when asset prices have plunged, whether the prices of

22

equities, real estate or commodities; when the exchange value of a national currency experiences
substantial depreciation; when a large financial or non- financial firm faces bankruptcy, or a
sovereign debt default (Kindleberger 1978).
Unlike banking panics which are brief episodes resolved by the central bank, a banking crisis is a
prolonged disturbance that is resolved by government agencies ( the fiscal authorities) other than
the lender of last resort, although at some stage it may supply liquidity to the market through the
discount window or open market operations. Bordo and Meissner (2016) document how the
increasing use of government guarantees has increasingly linked banking crises with fiscal crises.
Other events referred to as financial crises can also impinge on banking crises; a) currency crises
which are speculative attacks on the exchange value of a currency under a pegged exchange rate.
Currency crises can occur along with banking crises referred to as twin crises. Such events are
always worse than single crises (Reinhart and Kaminsky 1999); b) sovereign debt crises which
arise when the fiscal authorities are unable to raise sufficient tax revenues in the present and the
future to service and amortize the debt. A debt crisis can thus become a financial crisis when it
impinges on the banking system and a currency crisis when it threatens the reserves of the central
bank. Banking crises can feed into debt crises when the fiscal authorities bail out insolvent banks
which then increase sovereign debt to the point where it becomes unsustainable , as was the case
in the Eurozone crisis 2010-2013.
Related non crisis phenomena can trigger or exacerbate financial crises. Credit driven asset price
booms can trigger banking crises because as these booms turn into busts they damage the balance
sheets of the private sector and the banking system often leading to bank insolvencies. In addition
when banks are hit by collapsing asset prices and tight monetary policy they can cut their lending
severely ( referred to as a credit crunch) precipitating a drop in real activity. Resulting private

23

sector insolvencies can feed back into the banking system leading to more financial institution
insolvencies and a crisis.
Moreover sudden stops can precipitate financial crises (Bordo, Cavallo and Meissner 2010).
Lenders can suddenly cut off capital flows to emerging country borrowers reflecting adverse news
about the borrower or shocks from the financial center (London). Sudden stops can precipitate
banking, currency and debt crises in borrowing countries.
The last phenomenon that can contribute heavily to severe financial crises is contagion. Bank runs
can spread between banks affected by the same bad fundamental. There can be pure contagion in
which depositors stage a run on otherwise solvent banks driven by a general rush to liquidity.
Contagion can spread between countries as well (Bordo and Murshid 2001).

3.2. The Incidence of Financial Crises
There has been considerable research on measuring the incidence since the nineteenth century of
financial crises. Bordo and Meissner (2016) surveyed this research by a number of scholars:
Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel and Martinez –Peria (2001); Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), Jordà,
Schularick and Taylor (2011) and Laeven and Valencia (2013).
Figure 1 shows the frequencies of banking crises for the different data bases. 13 Bordo and Meissner
(2016) discuss some of the measurement issues in comparing the different data bases that use
different definitions of crises and different samples of countries. Bordo et al (2001) cover 21
countries 1880-1997; Reinhart and Rogoff’s data base begins with the beginning of the nineteenth

13

Bordo and Meissner (2016) also present similar calculations for currency crises, debt crises,
twin crises and triple crises.
24

century for a few countries and then increases in size to 76 countries; Jorda et al (2011) cover 17
countries 1870 to 2011; and Laeven and Valencia (2013) cover 162 countries 1970 to 2012.
We calculate crisis frequencies as the ratio of years in which the set of countries in the sample is
in the first year of a banking crisis to the total number of years. We compare outcomes across four
different time periods: the classical gold standard 1880-1913; the interwar period 1919-1939;
Bretton Woods 1945 to 1972; the current period of managed floating 1973 to the present.
As can be seen , adjusting for the differences in the sample sizes for the different data bases the
incidence of banking crises was quite similar in the pre-1914 gold standard era ( which was also
the first era of globalization, Bordo, Taylor and Willliamson 2003) with the post 1973 period ( the
second era of globalization). Bordo et al (2001) referred to this phenomenon as ‘going back to the
future’. The incidence of banking crises is much higher in the unstable interwar period and is
almost nonexistent in the Bretton Woods era of financial repression.

3.3. Global Financial Crises
Over the close to two centuries of data a number of the financial crises are global. They occurred
in many countries across continents. Kindleberger (1978) was the first to identify this
phenomenon. Global financial crises occurred in the environment of globalization with free capital
mobility and the gold standard fixed exchange rate regime. Since the reemergence of financial
globalization in the 1970s (Obstfeld and Taylor 2007) international financial crises have
reappeared.
A global financial crisis occurs when shocks to the banking system in one country are transmitted
to another country or when stock market crashes are linked among countries leading to impairment
of the payments mechanism. Historically they were transmitted through the balance of trade

25

adjustment channel of the classical price specie flow mechanism, through capital flows, and other
channels including foreign deposits ( Huffman and Lothian 1984 , Eichengreen and Portes 1989).
Currency crises also can be global and they in turn can lead to or be caused by banking crises.
They can be transmitted through fundamentals (the effects of depreciating exchange rates on
competitors current accounts and the pursuit of similar macro policies). Another channel is through
contagion where transmission occurs independent of fundamentals.
Bordo and Landon-Lane (2010) defined a series of crisis events to be a global crisis and identify
global financial crises using the Bordo et al (2001) data base. 14 Figure 2 shows the weighted two
period moving sum of banking crises 1880-2009. They identified five global banking crises :
1890-91;1907-1908;1913-1914, 1931 -32 and 2007-2008. Table 1 shows the countries involved.
The historical events demarcated are very close to those identified by Kindleberger (1978). A
number of other events that others have discussed, like the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s,
did not satisfy our criteria.

3.4. Output Losses from Financial Crises
A key reason why financial crises are deemed so important is that they often lead to large output
losses. An extensive literature which was surveyed by Bordo and Meissner (2016) has been
devoted to measuring the output losses of financial crises. Issues of measurement, and endogeneity
dominated the debate. They calculated unconditional output losses in different periods using the
crisis dates from the various data sets that they surveyed. The metric used is the cumulative

14

They defined a period to be a global crisis : 1) if a period is a local peak of a two year moving
sum; 2) the local peak is an extreme value if a) the weighted sum of the total crisis is more than
three standard deviations from the mean, b) the crisis is considered large and if it is in the upper
tail of the distribution and has a combined weight that is greater than the output of the U.S. ; 3)
the countries involved come from more than one continent.
26

percentage deviation of GDP per capita from the pre-crisis trend level of per capita GDP. They
use a window from the year of the crisis to three years after it starts. Pre- crisis trends are based on
the average annual change of the log of per capita GDP up to 10 years prior to the crisis.
Figure 3 shows the output losses for banking crises for the four historical periods using all of the
data bases. Also shown are the losses up to 2012 consistent with the Bordo et al (2001) data which
ended in 1997 from the Laeven and Valencia (2013) study. In the pre-1914 era the losses ranged
from 3% to 6% of GDP. For the interwar period, driven by the Great Depression they are much
larger –-40%. In the post Bretton Woods period losses are smaller than the interwar but larger than
under the gold standard.
An interesting phenomenon is that output losses in the recent period since 1997 are much larger
than in the pre-1914 period despite today’s greater reliance on lender of last resort policies and
other policies designed to remedy the market failures associated with financial shocks. This may
be explained by the fact that in recent years banking crises in a regime of government guarantees
are associated with ever higher fiscal resolution costs (Bordo and Meissner 2016). The upshot of
the evidence is that the stakes associated with financial crises have been higher and hence the
imperative for monetary authorities to prevent them has increased. 15

3.5. The Determinants of Financial Crises
The evidence on the determinants of banking crises does not point to any one single factor as being
paramount. A meta study of the recent literature by Bordo and Meissner (2016) points to the

15

Bordo and Landon-Lane (2010) calculated the output losses associated with their five global
financial crises. The greatest losses for the averages of all the countries involved occurred in
1930-31 followed by 1913-1914 and then 1890-91. 1907-1908 and 2007-2008 were the lowest at
less than 5%.
27

conclusion that not all banking crises are driven by credit booms as is emphasized today (Borio
and Dreheman 2009, Jordà, Schularick and Taylor 2016b, Brunnermeier and Schnabel 2016).
Also, not all housing and equity booms end in busts contributing to crises as is also recently posited
(see Bordo and Landon-Lane 2013a and 2013b, and Mishkin and White 2014).
Many of the studies using various techniques to predict banking crises find that financial sector
liberalization in environments with weak regulatory capacity are important. Other studies
emphasize current account deficits and capital inflows which contribute to twin crises. Still others,
focusing primarily on the past three decades, emphasize the growth of the ratio of credit to GDP
(Jordà, Schularick and Taylor 2011). A number of studies of banking crises emphasize the absence
of a central bank, weak bank structure (unit versus branch banking), financial innovation, poor
regulation and supervision, weak property rights and failure to follow the rule of law and more
volatile emerging economies subject to shocks. Of key importance across time is the role of the
lender of last resort. Absent that function financial crises became much worse.
In sum the determinants of banking crises are varied. No one factor dominates across all countries
and time. The fact that some of the recent crises have been associated with credit driven asset
price booms does not necessarily imply that all future crises will be.

4. Financial Crises in Historical Perspective: Narratives
Financial crises have been with us since the dawn of capitalism. The circumstances in which they
have arisen varied considerably. Some of these crises were associated with credit driven asset price
booms as is emphasized today. Others were not. Some were twin crises and some were global
financial crises. The historical pattern of financial crises is very heterogeneous.

28

We present brief narratives on twelve very important and serious financial crises in the past two
centuries. 16 These 12 are only a subset of the crisis record in the existing data bases. We first
discuss some famous British crises , then crises from the US, and then other countries. 17 Table 2
summarizes the narratives and provides some salient characteristics for each episode on: the
severity of each crisis, whether it was part of a global crisis, the exchange rate regime in place ,
whether it was accompanied by a currency crisis , whether it was associated with a credit boom,
whether a central bank was in place, whether it was allayed by lender of last resort actions, whether
it was fiscally resolved and the type of banking structure in place. See Appendix I.
As can be seen from the narratives, the environment in which crises occurred evolved from the
classical gold standard to the interwar gold exchange standard to Bretton Woods and the postWorld War II Managed Float. The key causes involved both domestic and external shocks (sudden
stops) , weak banking structure and supervision and regulation, lending booms and busts, some
driven by bank credit, others by foreign bond and equity capital inflows and financial innovation.
Above all the key ingredient in how a crisis played out was the presence or absence or failure of
the monetary authorities provision of the lender of last resort. In the past two decades a key player
has been the fiscal authorities because with the advent of the financial sector safety net and
government guarantees banking panics have morphed into fiscal crises which have become very
costly.

16

My narratives are based on decades of studying financial crisis lore. I was strongly influenced
by my thesis advisor at the University of Chicago, Milton Friedman and later by collaborating
with Anna Schwartz for 40 years. Other classics like Juglar (1856), Mitchell (1913),
Kindleberger (1978), Sprague (1910) and Kemmerer (1912) were grist for the mill.
17
Other crises narratives are in Bordo and Eichengreen (1999) and Brunnermeier and Schnable
(2016)
29

Credit driven asset price booms , the cause of financial crises which has been emphasized since
the 2007-2008 crisis, were important in a few big crises before World War II but not the majority.
Since the collapse of Bretton Woods and the return of financial globalization and the liberalization
of the domestic financial sector in every country, financial instability has returned. Since the 1970s
major financial innovation has allowed banks to fund themselves in the financial markets and not
have to rely on their deposit bases (Schularick and Taylor 2012). This has allowed bank credit to
grow faster than the money supply , has increased leverage, and may have been a key factor
triggering asset price booms and possible financial crises since the 1980s.
In addition, financial innovation, made possible by the growth of financial theory and financial
innovation, has led to the growth of non- bank financial intermediaries ( shadow banks ) which are
outside the traditional supervisory and regulatory networks. These innovations both in the
traditional banking sector and the shadow banking sector have increased both leverage and
liquidity in the financial system. This has created a new source of systemic risk which can increase
financial instability.

5. Credit booms, Asset Price Booms and Financial Crises
The current consensus view among economists and policy makers is that credit driven asset price
booms are the key cause of serious financial crises. As my Appendix narrative has shown, there
were major credit booms that led to financial crises before World War II but that most crises were
not driven by them. They have become more important since the post Bretton Woods liberalization
of the domestic and global financial systems.
To provide some empirical perspective on the issue of the relationship between credit booms ,
asset price booms and financial crises associated with deep recessions I examined, using a business

30

cycle methodology, the evidence for a sample of 15 advanced countries from 1880 to the present.
Answers to several questions are of interest: 1) what is the incidence of credit booms associated
with banking crises? More specifically do they peak slightly before or are coincident with banking
crises? 2) what is the incidence of equity boom busts and housing price boom busts associated
with banking crises, more specifically do they occur shortly before or coincident with serious
banking crises? 3) what is the relationship between these types of events and banking crises
associated with severe recessions? These questions relate to a key motivation for why central banks
today are so keen on using financial stability policy to prevent these events before they happen.
The methodology used to identify credit cycles and asset price boom busts comes from the
business cycle dating literature and has been used before in several of my earlier articles with John
Landon-Lane. 18
To identify a credit boom we use the approach taken by Gorton and Ordoñez (2016). 19 They define
a good credit boom as one that is related to the growth of total productivity such as occurred with
the adoption of railroads in the nineteenth century, electricity in the early twentieth century and

18

The approach taken here to measuring the impact of credit differs from the local projections
technique used by Jordà et al in several papers (2011,2013,2016 a,b). Their work leads to the
conclusion that credit is the key determinant of financial crises over the long run. The approach I
use is simple and does not make any assumptions about homogeneity of cycles over time and
across countries. I take the raw data and find the turning points using an established data
algorithm (Bry and Boschan 1971) as used by Harding and Pagan (2002). The data is not
manipulated in any way by passing it through a smoother (e.g. Hodrick Prescott) or by imposing
any econometric model. Approaches such as Jordà et al make some assumptions. The panel
assumption they use assumes some homogeneity across countries. Their model is non- linear in
that the impulse response function is a non-linear function of the data. My conjecture is that a
few big outliers are driving their results. I find evidence similar to their conclusions for a small
number of countries and periods but not for the majority of periods and countries. Any panel
econometric analysis assumes that the model applies to all observations and all countries. Our
results suggest that the panel assumption may not be valid. It also casts doubt as to whether all
cycles are the same.
19
For a critique see Richter et al (2017).
31

the internet in the late twentieth century tech boom. A bad credit boom is one that ends in a banking
crisis and in which the underlying technical innovation did not pan out. 20
Two annual data bases for the ratio of credit to nominal GDP are used : a) total loans divided by
GDP for the period 1880 to 2010 for 15 advanced countries which comes from the Jordà,
Schularick and Taylor web data base (2017); b) the annual data used by Gorton and Ordonez ,
domestic credit to the private sector divided by GDP, which comes from the World Bank Macro
data set for the same group of countries. This variable is defined as the financial resources provided
to the private sector , such as loans, purchases of non-equity securities, trade credit and other
accounts receivables that establish a claim for repayment. The credit cycles calculated are in the
Web Appendix II.
Figure 4 compares the dates of banking crises (first year) from the Bordo and Meissner (2016)
chronology with the peak year of credit booms using the loans to GDP definition. Table 3 shows
the frequency of banking crises and credit booms. We distinguish between the number of credit
booms within one year of a banking crisis and the number of credit booms which peak one year
before or coincident with a crisis to get a rough idea about causality, since the former group
includes episodes where booms peaked after a crisis.
As can be seen the percentage of credit boom peaks within one year of a crisis is 22.6%, while the
percentage one year before or in the same year is only 7.5%. Pre-World War I credit booms are
associated with a crisis in Australia in 1893; in the interwar Norway in 1921 and in 1930 the US

20

The Gorton-Ordoñez identification rule is that a credit boom starts with three periods of
growth that averages more than 5% per year and that ends with two periods of negative growth. I
first identify expansions, then check to see if at any time during that expansion there is a threeyear span where growth is higher than 5% on average. Then I check if the subsequent period has
two periods of negative growth. Under this approach, expansions that are shorter than three
periods do not count and contractions that do not have credit declining for the first two periods
are ruled out.
32

and four other countries; in the post Bretton Woods period Japan, Sweden and Finland; and in the
GFC the UK, Italy and Denmark.
Figure 5 combines the loans to GDP data set with the credit to GDP data and does the same
comparison. The coincidence between credit booms and crises is slightly lower than in figure 4
with 13.2 % of credit booms within one year of a crisis ad 3.7% with credit booms peaking one
year before or coincident with a crisis. The credit data picks up a few more countries viz during
the GFC , the US, Sweden, Belgium and the Netherlands.
Finally, I compare credit booms to major financial crises defined as crises associated with a 5%
drop in real GDP. Figure 6 shows this comparison. From Table 4 we see that the percentage of
credit boom peaks associated with crises is much lower than in the previous figures at 3.7% and
the percentage of credit booms that precede or occur in the same year is even lower at 2.6%. 21
These results are quite dramatic. They suggest that credit boom induced big crises like the Great
Contraction or the GFC are very rare—about once in every 50 years. It raises the question whether
there should be a major financial stability policy regime change if these events are so rare?
I next compare asset price boom busts (house prices and equities) with all banking crises. My
measures of asset price boom busts comes from Bordo and Landon-Lane (2013a,b). They only
cover the period 1900 to 2010. See figure 7 for housing boom busts. From Table 5 it can be seen
that 26% of housing boom peaks occur within one year of a banking crisis and 26% of housing
boom peaks occur one year before or coincident with a banking crisis. Figure 8 compares stock
market booms with crises. Here the connection is much lower. Only 7% of stock market peaks

21

In addition a number of credit booms occur after serious banking crises. This may reflect the
fact that after a crisis with many bank failures that bank lending and the extension of credit
collapses.
33

occur within one year of a crisis and 7% of stock market booms peaks one year before a crisis or
coincident with it.
Figure 9 compares housing boom busts with major banking crises. From Table 4 it can be seen
that the coincidence is much lower than is the case with all banking crises. Only 11% of house
price busts occur within one year of a banking crisis. Also 11% of house price boom peaks occur
one year before or coincident with a crisis.
Figure 10 compares stock market boom busts with major banking crises. Only 3% of stock market
boom peaks occur within one year of a banking crisis. Also 3% of stock market peaks occur one
year before or coincident with a crisis. These findings are similar to those of many studies (e.g.
Reinhart and Rogoff 2009) which show housing busts tend to be more associated with major
financial crises than stock market boom busts.
Finally I compare asset price boom busts with credit booms. Figure 11 compares house price
boom busts with credit boom peaks . I do it for both the loan data and total credit. For loans 6.3%
of credit booms occur within one year of a housing price boom bust. For total credit it is 7.2%. I
find that no credit boom peaks occur one year before or coincident to a housing bust for loans. For
total credit it is 1.4%.
Figure 12 shows the connection between credit booms and stock price busts. Using the loan data
I find that 8.5% of credit booms occur within one year of a stock market crash . For total credit it
is 10.5%. 6.3% of credit booms occur within one year before or coincident with a stock market
crash using the loans measure while 7.2% occur using total credit.
In sum the results comparing credit booms with asset price booms suggest that credit booms only
have a very limited connection with asset price busts.

34

My evidence suggests that the coincidence between credit boom peaks and serious financial crises
is quite rare . It also suggests that credit booms are not very closely connected to asset price
booms. 22
Indeed a look at when most of the coincidence occurs as is discussed in Appendix I was in two
episodes ( which some refer to as perfect storms with multiple causes): the Great Contraction 192933 and the GFC. This leads to the question whether such rare events should lead to a sea change
in monetary policy and financial stability policy. After the Great Contraction the world’s monetary
authorities believed that it should , and repressed both the domestic and international financial
system for 40 years. That strategy led to unintended consequences driven by the dynamics of
financial innovation and may in turn have set the seeds for the GFC 80 years later. 23
The current obsession with financial stability ( and the increased use of the tools of macro
prudential policy and LAW) raises the risk of repeating the mistakes of the 1930s and creating a
new regime of financial repression which will most likely have unintended consequences 24. It will

22

These results have some resonance to a recent article by Goetzmann (2015) who shows that
equity booms followed by big crashes are quite rare.
23
Gordon (2014) argues that the Glass Steagall (1933) separation of commercial from
investment banking may have been a foundation for the 2007-2008 financial crisis because it led
to the rise of market based credit intermediation--firms that engaged in liquidity and maturity
transformation without the safeguards of prudential regulation, deposit insurance and LLR
facilities. Gordon (2017) following on Calomiris and White 1994) sees deposit insurance,
established in the US as a crisis preventer becoming a crisis enhancer. Regulation Q established
in 1933 also had unintended consequences in the 1970s and 1980s and was part of the
mechanism that led to increasing financial instability after the quiet period of Financial
Repression (Bordo and Haubrich 2010).
24
I do not mean to critique all of the New Deal policies. There is a vast literature on this topic.
The Banking Holiday of March 1933 ended the banking panics and leaving the gold standard,
devaluing the dollar etc also contributed greatly to the recovery ( Romer 1992, Edwards 2018,
Jalil and Gisela 2015, Eggertson 2008). There is a contentious debate on the New Deal Policies
and what their contribution to the recovery was (Cary Brown 1956, Hausman et al. 2017, Cole
and Ohanian 2004). Our point is that the financial repression policies on the financial system had
serious negative and long consequences. These included the inefficiencies associated with
artificial firewalls, the distortions associated with interest rate ceilings (regulation Q) on the
35

likely head off a few minor financial crises in the next few decades but much later in the future
precipitate an even bigger financial crisis than 2007-2008.
The analogy between policies designed to suppress natural disasters should be kept in mind.
Scholes (2009) gives the analogy of when “ fire fighters put out every small fire in Yellowstone
National Park…The underbrush grew , setting the stage for multiple lightning strikes to cause
fires to destroy much greater areas in the park than if fires initially had been left to burn of their
own accord.” ( page 105). He further argues that “ [f] inancial regulators do the same thing when
they dampen volatility: they put out small fires but encourage risk-taking and thus increase the
likelihood of a major conflagration”

25

Kim et al (2017) apply this analogy to attempts to smooth

recessions which they show are not serially correlated events. They argue from physics that
eventually power law dynamics will set in leading to a much worse depression.

6. Lessons from History
My survey of the record of the link between monetary regimes and financial stability in advanced
countries in the past two centuries shows a varying evolution between monetary stability and
financial stability. It involved a slow learning process by the advanced countries central banks.
Under the gold standard regime monetary stability meant that central banks followed the gold
standard convertibility rule and financial stability meant that if adherence was credible central
banks could act as lenders of last resort following Bagehot’s strictures to allay financial crises.
Financial crises occurred for many reasons including, but not solely, productivity or demography
driven asset price booms. The outcome for the real economy depended on the policy actions taken

transmission mechanism of monetary policy, rent seeking behavior by the protected industries
etc. See White 2000.
25
See Ip (2015).
36

and the institutional structure in place. Also, the fixed exchange rate gold standard combined with
free capital mobility meant that a number of financial crises became global crises. It also meant
that many crises were twin banking and currency crises which had high output costs.
In the interwar gold exchange standard regime monetary policy evolved into providing both real
macro stability and price stability along with convertibility. This created a strain on central bank
credibility and weakened the power to manage financial crises. In addition during this regime the
tight constraint between the monetary gold base and the money supply and bank credit weakened
which meant that more monetary fuel could be added to putative asset price booms. The decline
in credibility and the pursuit of the flawed real bills doctrine by the Federal Reserve in the 1920s
led to a series of policy mistakes that created the Great Contraction –- trying to kill the largely
productivity driven Wall Street stock market boom leading to a steep downturn in the real economy
in the summer of 1929; and then the failure to allay a series of banking panics from 1930 to 1933.
The US shocks were transmitted to the rest of the world by the gold standard fixed exchange rate
links and there were serious banking panics in many countries-- most notably Austria and Germany
(Bernanke and James 1991). Other countries, especially France, contributed to the collapse by its
pro gold sterilization policies. In addition the interwar gold exchange standard had the fatal flaws
of maladjustment, illiquidity and lack of confidence which led to its early demise and also helped
make the Great Depression a global event.
The Bretton Woods system designed to overcome the flaws of the interwar system was based on
capital controls which gave central banks the power to manage the business cycle. It also was
accompanied by a regime of domestic financial repression ( from the 1930s to the 1970s)
established in every country in reaction to the perception that the banks, central banks and financial
sector caused the Great Contraction. The financial controls in every country succeeded in

37

providing financial stability. There were no banking crises in this era in advanced countries. This
period was also characterized by exemplary macroeconomic performance. 26
However, the Bretton Woods system itself suffered from the same fatal flaws in adjustment,
liquidity and confidence as in the interwar gold exchange standard. In addition the Bretton Woods
system evolved into a gold dollar standard with the US dollar as the anchor currency of the system.
Until 1965 the US credibly followed the key rule of the regime to maintain price stability and
convertibility of the dollar into gold at the fixed parity of $35.000 per ounce. However beginning
in 1965, under pressure by the administration to accommodate the strong fiscal pressures of the
Vietnam war and LBJ’s Great Society , the Fed broke the rule for a key currency country and
began the inflationary process that became the Great Inflation. This doomed the system to collapse
by 1971 when President Nixon closed the gold window. The capital controls and financial controls
of that era also led to financial innovation (e.g. Eurodollars) devised to evade them further
undermining the system.
The subsequent fiat managed floating exchange rate system without the nominal anchor of gold
deteriorated into high inflation as most countries (with the exception of Germany and Switzerland)
used expansionary monetary policy to reduce unemployment at the expense of inflation. During
this period both capital controls and domestic financial controls ended. The domestic controls were

26

It may be argued that since the decades of the 1950s and 1960s were ones of rapid and stable
real growth and low and stable inflation, that the financial repression regime was responsible for
this good state of affairs.
But one could also argue that that much of the rapid real growth of that period (especially in
Europe and Japan) reflected the recovery from the devastation of World War II as well as a
grand bargain between capital and labor (Eichengreen 1995).
An extensive literature on the inefficiencies and rent seeking in the financial system Bordo and
Sylla 1995, White 2000) suggests that had the repression been absent that real growth may have
been faster and may not have collapsed as it did in the 1970s.
38

undermined by the run up in inflation. As a consequence, the financial crisis problem reappeared
in the 1970s.
The Volcker shock of 1979 restored price stability (at the expense of a serious recession) and led
to a 20-year period of low inflation and rapid and stable economic growth referred to as the Great
Moderation. Many argue that it was anchored by credibility for low inflation and the pursuit of
non-discretionary rule-like monetary policy (the Taylor Rule) 27.
In the post war the Federal Reserve and other central banks learned the lessons of the 1930s to act
as lenders of last resort. However, they began to stray from following Bagehot’s strictures and
bailing out insolvent banks deemed to be “too big to fail.” In addition, deposit insurance and the
financial sector safety net created guarantees of the financial system which converted banking
panics into fiscally resolved financial crises which became increasingly more expensive to resolve.
In this era of financial globalization along with domestic financial liberalization, credit driven
asset price booms reappeared in several European countries and Japan in the 1980s 28 . They were
exacerbated by loose discretionary monetary policy in an environment of financial innovation.
A key lesson from the historical record through the Great Moderation period is that if four key
principles are followed a stable monetary policy regime can be compatible with financial stability:
a) price stability (credibility for low inflation) ; b) real macro stability(via e.g flexible inflation
targeting); a credible rules based lender of last resort, and d) sound financial supervision and
regulation and banking structure.

27

See Taylor (2006), Molodtsova and Pappell (2013), Clarida (2012) and Levin (2014).
The IMF uses this experience to make the case for capital controls. The lessons from this
paper suggest that sound macro policies in each country with sound regulation may be a better
solution. It would prevent crises from happening in the first place and also limit the degree of
contagion when they happen. Canada which has followed this approach has never had a
financial crisis with or without capital controls.
28

39

Indeed one country that has avoided banking crises altogether is Canada which pretty closely
followed these principles. 29 A key difference between Canada and its southern neighbor has been
sound bank structure and prudent financial regulation ( Bordo, Redish and Rockoff 2015). The
Canadian experience may offer lessons to other countries.
The Global Financial Crisis of 2007-2008 began with the Subprime Mortgage crisis. It was caused
by US housing policy, aggravated by loose monetary policy in a departure from the rule like
behavior of the Great Moderation. Other forces were: the failure of the financial regulatory and
supervisory authorities to contain the growth of credit derivatives, leverage and the shadow
banking system ,and global imbalances.
The Global Financial Crisis and the Great Recession were contained by effective monetary and
fiscal policies and an unorthodox extension of the lender of last resort by the Fed and other
authorities who had learned the lessons of the 1930s. However, like the 1930s, the GFC was
blamed on the banks and the financial system and this has led to the creation of a new regime of
financial regulation and the elevation of the financial stability mandate to primary importance.
The current case for elevation of the financial stability mandate to paramount importance and
encouraging central banks to use their monetary policy tools (LAW policy) as well as new tools
of macro prudential policy to head off imbalances and especially credit driven asset price booms
is based on the assumption that serious financial crises are largely caused by credit driven asset
price booms and the failure of the monetary (and regulatory) authorities to head them off .
My empirical evidence casts doubt on this assumption. Financial crises are very heterogeneous.
Moreover, the record suggests that these events are very rare. Indeed the recent GFC may have

29

With the principal exception of the Great Inflation where Canada performed about as badly as
most advanced countries.
40

been a one off event, a perfect storm (with multiple causes) possibly like the Great Contraction of
1929 to 1933.
This raises the question whether such rare events should lead to a sea change in monetary policy
and financial stability policy as occurred after the Great Contraction. That strategy created an
environment of financial repression which did provide financial stability but which also set in place
forces which led to unforeseen and eventually serious threats to financial stability and may have
sown the seeds for the GFC 80 years later.
The current obsession with financial stability risks recreating some of the policies of the 1930s,
40s ,50s and 60s. In addition to financial repression, the adoption of many of the tools of macro
prudential regulation that have been proposed may recreate many of the problems with the use of
the tools in the past 30 . Many of these macro prudential policies were actually credit or fiscal
policies which greatly involved the monetary authorities in inefficiently picking winners and losers
and influencing the allocation of resources . 31 They also impinged on central bank independence
because these policies strayed from their mandates and opened them up to scrutiny and criticism
by the legislature. 32 (Goodfriend 2014), The pursuit of such an enhanced financial stability strategy
may head off a few minor crises in the next few decades but much later precipitate an even bigger
crisis than we saw a decade ago.
My survey of the historical record on the connection between the monetary regime and financial
stability teaches us that a knowledge of history matters. Basing important regime changing

30

One of the tools of macro prudential policy—raising capital requirements – many argue may
be the most effective and simple way to improve financial stability (See Admati and Hellweg
(2013), Calomiris 2017)
31
I also am not suggesting that there is not a strong role for micro prudential regulation policy.
32
This suggests that to the extent these tools are used at all, that they should be implemented by
an agency other than the central bank (but in full cooperation with the central bank) (see
Svensson 2015 and Bordo 2017).
41

decisions on the record of the last crisis ignores the heterogeneity of the crisis problem. History
teaches us the importance of relearning the details of the events of the past which often contain
important and long forgotten clues to aid in our understanding of the ‘crise du jour’.

42

References
Admati, Anat, and Martin Hellweg, 2013. The Bankers New Clothes: What’s Wrong with
Banking and What to do about it. Princeton: Princeton University Press
Ahamed, Liaquat, 2009. Lords of Finance: The Bankers Who Broke the World, Penguin
Books, New York.
Bagehot, Walter, 1873. Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market (1 ed.), New
York: Scribner, Armstong & Co
Ball, Laurence, 2016. “The Fed and Lehman Brothers,” Johns Hopkins University
Bank for International Settlement ( BIS), 2000. Annual Report. Basel. Switzerland
Batchelor, Roy A., 1986. “The Avoidance of Catastrophe: Two Nineteenth Century
Banking Crises,” in Forrest Capie and Geoffrey E. Wood, eds., Financial Crises and the
World Banking System (St. Martin’s Press, 1986), 41-73.
Bayoumi, Tamim and Michael D. Bordo, 1998. “Getting Pegged: Comparing the 1879 and
1925 Gold Resumptions”, Oxford Economic Papers, Oxford University Press, vol. 50(1),
pages 122-149, January.
Benmelech, Efraim and Michael D. Bordo, 2008. “The Financial Crisis of 1873 and 19th
Century Corporate Governance,” Harvard University (mimeo)
Bernanke, Ben S., 1983. “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation
of the Great Depression.” The American Economic Review, vol. 73, no. 3, 1983, 257–276.
Bernanke, Ben S., 2004. “The Great Moderation.” At the meetings of the Eastern Economic
Association, Washington, D.C., February 20.
Bernanke, Ben S., 2005. “The global saving glut and the U.S. current account deficit”, No
77, Speech, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).
Bernanke, Ben S., 2012. The Federal Reserve and the Financial Crisis. Princeton: Princeton
University Press
Bernanke, Ben S., and Harold James, 1991. “The gold standard, deflation, and financial
crisis in the Great Depression: An international comparison,” Financial markets and
financial crises. University of Chicago Press, 33-68.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler, 1999. “Monetary policy and asset price volatility,”
Proceedings - Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, pages 77-128.
Bordo, Michael D., 1984. “The Gold Standard: The Traditional Approach”, p. 23-120 in A
Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard, 1821-1931, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc.

43

Bordo, Michael D., 1993. "The Bretton Woods international monetary system: a historical
overview." A retrospective on the Bretton Woods system: Lessons for international
monetary reform. University of Chicago Press, 3-108.
Bordo, Michael D. Bordo, 1998. “The financial crisis of 1825 and the restructuring of the
British financial system - commentary,” Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, issue
May, 77-82.
Bordo, Michael D., 2000. “Sound Money and Sound Financial Policy,” Journal of
Financial Services Research, Springer; Western Finance Association, vol. 18(2), pages
129-155, December.
Bordo, Michael D., 2003. “Historical Perspectives on Booms, Busts and Recessions”,
Chapter III When Bubbles Burst, IMF World Economic Outlook. Washington D.C. April
pp 64-66.
Bordo, Michael D., 2014. “Rules for A Lender of Last Resort; an Historical Perspective”,
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control. 49 Issue c
Bordo, Michael D., 2017a. “The Operation and Demise of the Bretton Woods System;
1958 to 1971,” NBER Working Papers 23189, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
Bordo, Michael D., 2017b. “An Historical Perspective on Financial Stability and Monetary
Policy Regimes: A Case for Caution in Central Banks Current Obsession with Financial
Stability,” prepared for Twelfth Meeting of the FSB Regional Consultative Group for
Europe
Bordo, Michael D. and Alberto F. Cavallo, and Christopher M. Meissner, 2010. “Sudden
stops: Determinants and output effects in the first era of globalization, 1880-1913,” Journal
of Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 91(2), pages 227-241, March
Bordo, Michael D., Michael J. Dueker and David C. Wheelock, 2002. "Aggregate Price
Shocks And Financial Instability: A Historical Analysis," Economic Inquiry, 2002, v40 (4
Oct), 521-538
Bordo, Michael D. and Barry Eichengreen, 1999. “Is Our Current International Financial
Environment Unusually Crisis Prone?” in David Gruen and Luke Gower (eds), Capital
Flows and the International Financial System, Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, 18-74.
Bordo, Michael D., Barry Eichengreen, Daniel Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad Martinez‐
Peria, 2001. “Is the crisis problem growing more severe?”, Economic policy, 16(32), 5282.
Bordo, Michael D., Christopher Erceg, Andre Levin and Ryan Michaels, 2017. “Policy
credibility and alternative approaches to disinflation”, Research in Economics, 71, issue 3,
422-440,

44

Bordo, Michael D., and Joseph Haubrich, 2010. “Credit Crises, Money, and Contractions:
an Historical View,” Journal of Monetary Economics. Vol 57 (January), pp 1-120.
Bordo, Michael D. and Pierre-Cyrille Hautcoeur, 2007. “Why didn't France follow the
British stabilisation after World War I?”, European Review of Economic History,
Cambridge University Press, vol. 11(01), pages 3-37, April.
Bordo, Michael D., Owen F. Humpage, and Anna J. Schwartz, 2015. Strained Relations:
US Foreign-Exchange Operations and Monetary Policy in the Twentieth Century.
University of Chicago Press.
Bordo, Michael D. and Finn Kydland, 1995. “The Gold Standard as a Rule: An Essay in
Exploration”, Explorations in Economic History, 32, issue 4, p. 423-464.
Bordo, Michael D. and Richard Sylla ,1995. Anglo-American Financial Systems:
Institutions and Markets in the Twentieth Century. New York, Richard D. Irwin
Bordo, Michael D. and Olivier Jeanne, 2002. “Monetary Policy And Asset Prices: Does
'Benign Neglect' Make Sense?,” International Finance, 2002, v5(2,Summer), 139-164.
Bordo, Michael D., and John S. Landon-Lane, 2010. “The global financial crisis of 200708: Is it unprecedented?” No. w16589. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bordo, Michael D. and John S. Landon-Lane, 2013a. “Does Expansionary Monetary Policy
Cause Asset Price Booms: Some Historical and Empirical Evidence,” NBER Working
Papers 19585, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Bordo, Michael D. and John S. Landon-Lane, 2013b. “What Explains House Price Booms?
History and Empirical Evidence,” NBER Working Papers 19584, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc.
Bordo, Michael D. and Ronald MacDonald, 2003. “The inter-war gold exchange standard:
credibility and monetary independence,” Journal of International Money and Finance,
Elsevier, vol. 22(1), pages 1-32, February.
Bordo, Michael and Ronald MacDonald, 2012. “Credibility and the International Monetary
Regime”, Cambridge University Press.
Bordo, Michael D. and Christopher M. Meissner, 2012. “Does inequality lead to a financial
crisis?,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Elsevier, vol. 31(8), pages 21472161.
Bordo, Michael D. and Christopher M. Meissner, 2015. “Growing Up to Stability?
Financial Globalization, Financial Development and Financial Crises”, NBER Working
Papers 21287, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Bordo, Michael D. and Christopher M. Meissner, 2016. “Fiscal and Financial Crises,” in
North Holland Handbook of Macroeconomics, John Taylor and Harald Uhlig (eds.),
volume 2a New York, 355-412

45

Bordo, Michael D., and Antu Panini Murshid, 2001. “Are financial crises becoming more
contagious?: What is the historical evidence on contagion?.” International financial
contagion. Springer US, 2001. 367-403.
Bordo, Michael D. and Athanasios Orphanides, 2013, eds. The great inflation: The rebirth
of modern central banking. University of Chicago Press.
Bordo, Michael D., Angela Redish and Hugh Rockoff, 2015. “Why didn't Canada have a
banking crisis in 2008 (or in 1930, or 1907, or …)?”, The Economic History Review, 68:
218–243.
Bordo, Michael D. and Anna J. Schwartz, 1994. “The Specie Standard as a Contingent
Rule: Some Evidence for Core and Peripheral Countries, 1880-1990”, NBER Working
Papers 4860, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Bordo, Michael D. and Catherine R. Schenk, 2016."Monetary Policy Cooperation and
Coordination: An Historical Perspective on the Importance of Rules”, Economics Working
Papers 16112, Hoover Institution, Stanford University.
Bordo, Michael D. and Pierre Siklos, 2014. “Central Bank Credibility, Reputation and
Inflation Targeting in Historical Perspective”, NBER Working Papers 20693, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Bordo, Michael D., and Pierre L. Siklos, 2015. “Central bank credibility: An historical and
quantitative exploration”. No. w20824. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bordo, Michael D. and Pierre Siklos, 2017a. “Central Bank Credibility before and after the
Crisis”, Open Economies Review, 28, issue 1, p. 19-45.
Bordo, Michael D. and Pierre Siklos, 2017b. “Central Banks: Evolution and Innovation in
Historical Perspective”, Riksbank, March
Bordo, Michael D., Alan M. Taylor and Jeffrey G. Williamson (eds.), 2003. Globalization
in Historical Perspective. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003
Bordo, Michael D., and David C. Wheelock, 2011. “The promise and performance of the
Federal Reserve as lender of last resort 1914-1933,” NBER Working Papers 16763,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Borio, Claudio, 2014. “The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt?”
Journal of Banking & Finance, Elsevier, vol. 45(C), pages 182-198.
Borio, Claudio and Mathias Drehmann, 2009. “Assessing the risk of banking crises:
Revisited.” BIS Quarterly Review. March, 29-46.
Cary Brown, E., 1956. “Fiscal Policy in the 1930s: A Reappraisal”, American Economic
Review Vol 46. No.5 (December), pp 857-879.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Harold James, and Jean-Pierre Landau, 2016. The Euro and the
battle of ideas. Princeton University Press.
46

Brunnermeier, Markus K, and Isabel Schnabel, 2016. “Bubbles and Central Banks:
Historical Perspectives” In Central Banks at a Crossroads: What Can We Learn from
History? Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2016.
Bry, Gerhard and Charlotte Boschan, 1971. “Cyclical Analysis of Time Series: Selected
Procedures and Computer Programs”, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Calomiris, Charles and Eugene, N. White, 1994, “The Origins of Federal Deposit
Insurance” in Claudia Goldin and Gary Libecap (eds.) The Regulated Economy: A
Historical Approach to Political Economy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp 145188
Calomiris, Charles and Stephen H. Haber, 2014. Fragile by Design: The Political Origins
of Banking Crises and Scarce Credit, 1 ed., Princeton University Press.
Calomiris, Charles, 2017. Reforming Financial Regulation After Dodd-Frank. New York:
Manhattan Institute for Policy Research
Capie, Forrest, 2010. The Bank of England: 1950s to 1979. Cambridge University Press.
Carlson, Mark A., and David C. Wheelock, 2015. “The Lender of Last Resort: Lessons
from the Fed's First 100 Years,” in Owen F. Humpage (ed.) Current Federal Reserve Policy
Under the Lens of Economic History, Cambridge University Press, 2015, pp 49-101.
Choudhri, Ehsan U., and Levis A. Kochin, 1980. "The exchange rate and the international
transmission of business cycle disturbances: some evidence from the Great
Depression." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 12.4 (1980): 565-574.
Clarida, Richard H., 2012. “What Has—and Has Not—Been Learned about Monetary
Policy in a Low‐Inflation Environment? A Review of the 2000s,” Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking 44.s1 (2012): 123-140.
Cole, Harold L., and Lee Ohanian ,2004. “New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the
Great Depression; A General Equilibrium Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy. Vol
112 No.4 (August), pp 779-816.
Corrigan, Edward G., 1990. “Statement before the United States Senate Committee on
Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs”, Washington, DC, 3 May 1990
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Public Law 111–203—
July 21, 2010
Edwards, Sebastian, 2018. Broken Promises: When America Defaulted. Princeton:
Princeton University Press (in press)
Eichengreen, Barry, 1992. Golden Fetters. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eichengreen, Barry, 1995. The European Economy Since 1945. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

47

Eichengreen, Barry and Marc Flandreau ,2014. “A Century and a Half of Central Banks,
International Reserves and International Currencies”, paper presented at the conference
"Of the uses of central banks: Lessons from history", Norges Bank, Oslo, 5-6 June
Eichengreen, Barry, and Kris J. Mitchener, 2004. "The Great Depression as a credit boom
gone wrong." Research in economic history. Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2004.
183-237.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Richard Portes, 1989. "Dealing with Debt: The 1930s and the
1980s." NBER Working Paper No. 2867, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Jeffrey Sachs, 1986. "Competitive devaluation and the Great
Depression: a theoretical reassessment." Economics Letters 22.1 (1986): 67-71.
Eitrheim, Øyvind, Jan Tore Klovland, and Lars Fredrik Øksendal, 2016. A Monetary
History of Norway, 1816–2016. Cambridge University Press.
Eggertson, Gautti, 2008. “Great Expectations and the End of the Depression,” American
Economic Review. Vol 9894), September, pp 1476-1516.
Feinstein, Charles H., Peter Temin, and Gianni Toniolo, 1997. "The European economy
between the wars." London: Oxford University Press.
Flandreau, Marc and Stefano Ugolini, 2013. “Where it all began: lending of last resort at
the Bank of England during the Overend-Gurney panic of 1866”, in M. Bordo and W.
Roberds (eds.), The Origin, History and Future of the Federal Reserve: A Return to Jekyll
Island, Cambridge University Press, 133-61
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz, 1963. A Monetary History of the United States,
1867-1960.
Goetzmann, William N., 2015. “Bubble Investing: Learning from History,” NBER
Working Papers 21693, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Galbraith, John K., 1955. The Great Crash. Cambridge: Riverside Press.
Giannini, Curzio, 1999 “ Enemy of None but a Common Friend of All: An International
Perspective on the Lender of Last Resort Function” Essays in International Finance
No.214. International Finance Section. Princeton University
Glaeser, Edward L., 2013. “A Nation of Gamblers: Real Estate Speculation and American
History” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 103 (3) pp 1-42.
Goodfriend, Marvin, 2014. “Lessons from a century of FED policy: Why monetary and
credit policies need rules and boundaries,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
Volume 49, 2014, 112-120.
Goodhart, Charles A. E., 1985. The Evolution of Central Banks. London: London School
of Economics and Political Science.

48

Gordon, Jeffrey N., 2014, “The Empty Call for Benefit-Cost Analysis in Financial
Regulation” Journal of Legal Studies. Vol 43. No.52. pp S356-S378.
Gordon, Jeffrey N., 2017, “The Future of Global Finance: But First Some History”
Presentation at the Conference: The Future of Global Finance: Populism, Technology and
Regulations. Columbia University. October
Gorton, Gary B., 2010. "Questions and Answers about the Financial Crisis," NBER
Working Papers 15787, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick, 2013. "The Federal Reserve and Panic Prevention:
The Roles of Financial Regulation and Lender of Last Resort." Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 27(4): 45-64.
Gorton, Gary B. and Guillermo Ordoñez, 2016. “Good Booms, Bad Booms,” NBER
Working Papers 22008, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Gorton, Gary B. and Ellis W. Tallman, 2016. “How Did Pre-Fed Banking Panics End?”,
NBER Working Papers 22036, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Greenspan, Alan, 2002, “ Issues for Monetary Policy” Remarks at the Economic Club of
New York. Board of Governors Federal Reserve System
Grossman, Richard S. Unsettled Account: The Evolution of Banking in the Industrialized
World since 1800. Princeton University Press, 2010.
Hackley, Howard H, 1973. Lending functions of the Federal Reserve Banks: a history.
Publications Services, Division of Administrative Services, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, 1973.
Harding, Don and Adrian Pagan, 2002. “Dissecting the cycle: a methodological
investigation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, issue 2, p. 365-381.
Hausman Joshua, Paul Rhode and Johannes Wieland, 2017. “Recovery From the Great
Depression: the Farm Channel in Spring 1935,” NBER Working Papers 23172, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Hautcoeur, Pierre-Cyrille, Angelo Riva, and Eugene N. White, 2014. “Floating a `lifeboat’:
The Banque de France and the crisis of 1889.” Journal of Monetary Economics 65 (2014):
104-119.
Huffman, Wallace E. and James R. Lothian, 1984."The Gold Standard and the
Transmission of Business Cycles, 1833-1932," NBER Chapters, in A Retrospective on the
Classical Gold Standard, 1821-1931, 455-512, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
Ip, Greg, 2015. Foolproof: Why Safety Can Be Dangerous and How Danger Makes Us
Safe. New York: Little Brown

49

Irwin, Douglas , 2011, Peddling Protectionism: Smoot Hawley and the Great Depression.
Princeton: Princeton University Press
Ito, Takatoshi and Tokuo Iwaisako, 1996. “Explaining Asset Bubbles in Japan,” Monetary
and Economic Studies, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, vol.
14(1), pages 143-193, July
Jalil, Andrew and Rua Gisela, 2015. “Inflation Expectations and Recovery from the
Depression in 1935: Evidence from the Narrative Record,” Finance and Economics
Discussion Series. Division of Research and Statistics and Monetary Affairs. Federal
Reserve Board. Washington, DC
James, Harold, 1986. The German slump: Politics and economics, 1924-1936. Oxford
University Press, USA.
James, Harold ,2017. The Bank of England 1979-2003. Princeton University (mimeo)
Jonung, Lars, Jaakko Kiander, and Pentti Vartia, eds., 2009. The great financial crisis in
Finland and Sweden: the Nordic experience of financial liberalization. Edward Elgar
Publishing.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, 2011. “Financial crises, credit
booms, and external imbalances: 140 years of lessons”, IMF Economic Review 59.2: 340378.
Jorda, Òscar, Moritz Schularick and Alan M. Taylor, 2013, “When Credit Strikes Back”.
Vol 45 (December) pp 3-28.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, 2016a. "Sovereigns versus banks:
credit, crises, and consequences." Journal of the European Economic Association 14.1
(2016): 45-79.
Jorda, Òscar, Moritz Schularick and Alan M. Taylor, 2016b, “ The Great Mortgaging:
Housing Finance, Crises and Business Cycles. Economic Policy. Vol 31(85) pp 107-152.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2017. “Macrofinancial History and
the New Business Cycle Facts.” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016, volume 31,
edited by Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Juglar, Clement, 1856, Des Crises Commerciales et Leur Retour Periodique en France, en
Angleterre, et Aux Etas Unis. Paris: Guillaumin.
Kemmerer, Edwin, 1912. Seasonal Variation in the Relative Damand for Money and
Capital in the United States: A Statistical Study. GPO United States National Monetary
Commision. Washington. DC
Kim, Hyosong, William Newman, Keyyong Park, Aaron Tornell, 2017. “Economic
Recessions and Wildfires”, UCLA (mimeo)

50

Kindleberger, Charles P, 1973. The World in Depression, 1929-39, History of the World
Economy in the Twentieth Century, vol.4, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.
Kindleberger, Charles P., 1978. “Manias, Panics and Crashes”, A History of Financial
Crises, sixth edition, Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.
King, Mervyn, 1997. “Changes in UK monetary policy: Rules and discretion in
practice,” Journal of Monetary Economics 39.1 (1997): 81-97.
King, Robert G. and Ross Levine, 1993. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be
Right”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, issue 3, p. 717-737.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia, 2013. “Systemic banking crises database”, IMF
Economic Review 61.2 (2013): 225-270.
Lane, Timothy E., 2016. “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability – Looking For the Right
Tools”, Bank of Canada. February.
Levin, Andrew T. and John B. Taylor, 2013. “Falling Behind the Curve: A Positive
Analysis of Stop-Start Monetary Policies and the Great Inflation” in M.Bordo and A.
Orphanides (eds.), The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern Central Banking,
University of Chicago Press, 217-244, June 2013.
Levin, Andrew T., 2014. “The Design and Communication of Systematic Monetary Policy
Strategies” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control. Vol 49 (December) pp 52-69.
Lowe, Philip and Claudio Borio, 2002. "Asset prices, financial and monetary stability:
exploring the nexus," BIS Working Papers 114, Bank for International Settlements.
McGrattan, Ellen R. and Edward C. Prescott, 2003. “Average Debt and Equity Returns:
Puzzling?,” American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 93(2),
392-397, May.
Meltzer, Allan H, 2003. A History of the Federal Reserve, 1913–1951, Volume 1. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press
Meltzer, Allan H., 2010. A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 2, Book 1, 1951–1969.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Eugene N. White, 2014. “Unprecedented Actions: The Federal
Reserve’s Response to the Global Financial Crisis in Historical Perspective,” NBER
Working Papers 20737, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Mitchell, Wesley, 1913, Business Cycles. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Mody, Ashoka, 2018, EuroTragedy: A Drama in Nine Acts. New York: Oxford University
Press.

51

Molodtsova, Tanya and David H. Papell, 2013. “Taylor Rule Exchange Rate Forecasting
during the Financial Crisis,” NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics, University
of Chicago Press, vol. 9(1), pages 55-97.
Neal, Larry, 1998. “The financial crisis of 1825 and the restructuring of the British financial
system,” Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, issue May, 53-76.
Nikolsko-Rzhevsky Alex, David Papell and Ruxandra Prodan, 2014, “Deviations from
Rules Based Policy and Their Effects,” Journal of Dynamics and Control. Vol 49 (
December) pp 4-17
Nurske, Ragnar, 1944. International Currency Experience: Lessons of the Interwar Period.
Geneva: League of Nations.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor, 2007. "Globalization and capital markets." in
Globalization in historical perspective, Michael D. Bordo, Alan M. Taylor, and Jeffrey G.
Williamson (eds.), University of Chicago Press, 2007. 121-188.
Odell, Kerry A., and Marc D. Weidenmier, 2004. “Real Shock, Monetary Aftershock: The
1906 San Francisco Earthquake and the Panic of 1907.” The Journal of Economic History,
vol. 64, no. 4, 2004, 1002–1027.
Orphanides, Athanasios, 2016. “Fiscal Implications of Central Bank Balance Sheet
Policies”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP11383.
Poole, William, 2016. “The Man Who Knew: The Life and Times of Alan Greenspan by
Sebastian Mallaby: A Policy Wonk’s Extended Review,” Business Economics
Rajan, Raghuram, 2010. Fault Lines, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Graciela L. Kaminsky, 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of
Banking and Balance-of-Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, American
Economic Association, vol. 89(3), pages 473-500, June.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2009. This time is different: Eight centuries
of financial folly. Princeton University Press.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and M. Belen Sbrancia, 2015. “The liquidation of government debt,”
Economic Policy, CEPR;CES;MSH, vol. 30(82), pages 291-333.
Richter, Bjorn, Moritz Schularick and Paul Wachtel, 2017. “When to Lean against the
Wind,” Croatian National Bank, June
Roberts, Richard, 2013. Saving the City: The Great Financial Crisis of 2014. London:
Oxford University Press
Romer, Christina, 1992. “What Ended the Great Depression?” Journal of Economic
History, Vol 52. No.4 (December), 757-784.

52

Romer, Christina D., 1993. “The Nation in Depression,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
American Economic Association, vol. 7(2), 19-39, Spring.
Romer, Christina and David Romer, 2002. “The Evolution of Economic Understanding
and Postwar Stabilization Policy” in Rethinking Stabilization Policy . Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, 11-78.
Rousseau, Peter L. and Richard Sylla, 2006. “Financial Revolutions And Economic
Growth: Introducing This EEH Symposium”, Explorations in Economic History, 2006,
v43 (Jan), 1-12.
Scholes, Myron, 2009. “Market-Based Mechanisms to Reduce Systemic Risk” in The Road
Ahead for the Fed, John D. Ciorciari and John B. Taylor (eds.), Hoover Press, Stanford,
California.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor, 2012. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary
Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008.” American Economic
Review, 102(2): 1029-61.

Schwartz, Anna J., 1986. "General and Miscellaneous The Gold Standard in Theory and
History. Edited by Barry Eichengreen. New York: Methuen, 1985”. The Journal of
Economic History, Cambridge University Press, vol. 46(04), pages 1106-1107, December.
Schwartz, Anna J., 2009. “Origins of the Financial Market Crisis of 2008,” Cato Journal,
Cato Institute, vol. 29(1), pages 19-23, Winter.
Seabourne, Teresa, 1986. “The Summer of 1914,” in Financial Crises and the World
Banking System edited by Forest Capie and Geoffrey E. Wood, St. Martin’s Press, 1986,
pp. 77-116.
Silber, William L.,2005. “What Happened to Liquidity When World War I Shut the
NYSE?”, Journal of Financial Economics, 78, issue 3, 685-701
Solow, Robert M., 1982. “On the Lender of Last Resort.” In C. P. Kindleberger and J. P.
Laffargue (eds.), Financial Crises: Theory, History and Policy. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Sprague, Oliver M.W., 1910. History of crises under the national banking system. Vol.
538. US Government Printing Office.
Steigum, Erling, 2010. “The Norwegian Banking Crisis in the 1990s: Effects and Lessons,”
Working Paper, BI Norwegian School of Management, Department of Economics.
Stein, Jeremy C., 2013. “Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy
Responses,” Speech by Jeremy C. Stein, the Governor of the Federal Reserve System At
the “Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household

53

Balance Sheets Matter”, Research symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri.
Svensson, Lars O., 2009. “Evaluating monetary policy,” NBER Working Papers, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Svensson, Lars O., 2015. "Monetary policy and macroprudential policy: different and
separate." Canadian Journal of Economics.
Svensson, Lars O., 2017. “Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning Against the Wind,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 90 (2017) 193-213.
Tallman, Ellis W., and Eugene N. White, 2017. “Monetary Policy When One Size Does
Not Fit All: the Federal Reserve Banks and the Recession of 1920–1921,” presented at the
2017 Workshop on Monetary and Financial History Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and
Emory University
Taylor, Alan M., 2012. “The Great Leveraging.” In The Social Value of the Financial
Sector: Too Big to Fail or Just Too Big? edited by V. V. Acharya, T. Beck, D. D. Evanoff,
G. G. Kaufman, and R. Portes. World Scientific Studies in International Economics, vol.
29. Hackensack, N.J.: World Scientific Publishing, 2014.
Taylor, John B., 2006. “Lessons Learned from the Implementation of Inflation Targeting,”
in Stability and Economic Growth: The Role of the Central Bank, Banco de Mexico, 2006,
229-236.
Taylor, John B., 2007. "Housing and monetary policy," Proceedings - Economic Policy
Symposium - Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pages 463-476
Taylor, John B. 2010. “Macroeconomic Lessons from the Great Deviation,”
Macroeconomics Annual Vol 25. No.1. pp 387-395.
Taylor, John B. 2012, “Monetary Policy Rules Work and Discretion Doesn’t: A tale of
Two Eras,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking, Vol 44. No.6 (September), pp 10171032.
Timberlake, Richard, 1984. “The Central Banking Role of Clearinghouse
Associations”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 16, issue 1, p. 1-15.
Toniolo, Gianni and Eugene N. White, 2015. “The Evolution of the Financial Stability
Mandate: From Its Origins to the Present Day”, NBER Working Papers 20844, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Wheelock, David C., 1992. “Regulation and Bank Failures: New Evidence from the
Agricultural Collapse of the 1920s,” The Journal of Economic History, Cambridge
University Press, vol. 52(04), pages 806-825, December.
White, Eugene N, 1990. “The Stock Market Boom and Crash of 1929 Revisited,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, American Economic Association, vol. 4(2), 67-83, Spring.

54

White, Eugene N., 2000. “Banking and finance in the twentieth century.” The Cambridge
Economic History of the United States 3 (2000): 743-802.
White, Eugene N., 2014. "Lessons from the Great American Real Estate Boom and Bust
of the 1920s," NBER Chapters, in Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical
Perspective, 115-158
White, Eugene N., 2016. “How to Prevent a Banking Panic: The Barings Crisis of 1890
Revisited,” in Fed System Conference on Economic and Financial History, 2016, 10.
White, Eugene N. and Rappoport, Peter, 1993. “Was There a Bubble in the 1929 Stock
Market?,” The Journal of Economic History, Cambridge University Press, vol. 53(03),
pages 549-574, September.
White, Eugene N. and Peter Rappoport, 1994. “Was the Crash of 1929 Expected?”
American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 84(1), pages 271-281,
March.

55

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Countries involved in Global Crises.

Source: Bordo and Landon-Lane (2010

56

Table 2: Major Banking Crises 1825-2008
Crisis
year

Country

1825

UK

1847

UK

1866
1890
1893
1873
1893
1907
1929
19901992
1991
2007

Output
Serious
Currency Global ER
loss
(%ΔGDP)
crisis
crisis
Regime
(%)
Yes
NA
Yes
Yes
Gold
(na)

Yes
(-2.53)
Yes
UK
(-1.25)
No
UK
(-4.94)
Yes
Australia
(-20.5)
Yes
US
(-19.33)
Yes
US
(-11.11)
Yes
US
(-10.21)
Yes
US
(-30.76)
Yes
Nordics†
(-3.9)
Yes
Japan
(-0.025)
Yes
US
(-5.71)

Credit boom
Yes
(Latin
America)
Yes
(Railroad)

CB in
LLR
place

Crisis
Country
year

Fiscal
Banking
resolution structure

Yes

Ineffective 1825

UK

Treasury
letter

Unit

Yes

Ineffective 1847

UK

Treasury
letter

Unit

NA

No

No

Gold

NA

No

No

Gold

No

Yes

Ineffective 1866

UK

Treasury
letter

Branch

8.91

No

Yes

Gold

Yes
(Argentina)

Yes

Effective

1890

UK

Treasury
backstop

Branch

90.65

No

Maybe

Gold

Yes
(Land)

No

No

1893

Australia Yes

Branch

NA

No

Yes

Greenback
(paper)

Yes
(Railroad)

No

No*

1873

US

No

Unit

8.65

Yes

Maybe

Gold

No

No

No*

1893

US

No

Unit

55.65

No

Yes

Gold

No

No

No*

1907

US

No

Unit

101

Yes

Yes

Gold

Yes
(Wall Street)

Yes

No

1929

US

No**

Unit

45.65‡

Yes

No

Fixed

Yes
(Real Estate)

Yes

Effective

19901992

Nordics

Yes
(bailouts)

Universal

18.3

No

No

Floating

Yes

Ineffective 1991

Japan

26.2

No

Yes

Floating

Yes

Effective

US

Yes
(Real Estate)
Yes
(Real Estate)

2007

Yes
(bailouts)
Yes
(bailouts)

Notes: † Finland, Norway and Sweden; ‡ Finland and Sweden; * Clearing houses; ** Reconstruction Finance Corporation.
Sources: Bordo (2003); Bordo and Landon-Lane (2012); Bordo and Meissner (2016)

57

Universal
Universal

Table 3: Frequency of Credit Booms and Banking Crises

Variable

Number
Number
of
Credit
Banking
Booms
Crises

Number of
Credit Boom
of
Peaks within
1 year of
Banking
Crisis

Number of
Credit Boom
Peaks 1 year
before or on
a
Banking
Crisis

Loans
Loans + Domestic credit
Loans
(major banking crises)

69
69
29

53
75
53

12
12
7

4
5
2

Loans + Domestic credit
(major banking crises)

29

75

7

2

Table 4: Frequency of Major Banking Crises and Asset Price Booms/Busts

Variable

House prices
Stock prices

Number
of
Number
Asset Boom
of
Number
of
Peaks within
Major
Asset
Price
1 year of
Banking Booms
Banking
Crises
Crisis
25
27
3
25
101
3

Number
of
Credit Boom
Peaks 1 year
before or on a
Banking
Crisis
3
3

Table 5: Frequency of Credit Booms and Asset Price Booms/Busts

Variable

House prices (loans)
House prices (Domestic
Credit –Gorton data)
Stock prices (loans)
Stock prices (Domestic
Credit – Gorton data)

27
27

47
69

Number
of
Credit Boom
Peaks within
1 year of
Asset Price
Bust
3
5

101
101

47
69

4
7

Number
of Asset Number
of
Price
Credit Booms
Booms

Number
of
Credit Boom
Peaks 1 year
before or on
an Asset Price
Bust
0
1
3
5

58

Figure 1: Frequency of Banking Crises with different databases

Source: Bordo and Meissner (2016)
Figure 2: Weighted Two-Period Moving Sum of Banking Crises 1880-2009

Source: Bordo and Landon-Lane (2010)

59

Figure 3: Output Losses

Source: Bordo and Meissner (2016)
Figure 4: Banking Crises and Credit Booms (Loans)

United States (USA)
Sweden (SWE)
Norway (NOR)
Netherlands (NLD)
Japan (JPN)
Italy (ITA)
Great Britain (GBR)
France (FRA)
Finland (FIN)
Denmark (DNK)
Germany (DEU)
Switzerland (CHE)
Canada (CAN)
Belgium (BEL)
Australia (AUS)

1880

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Banking Crises (blue x's), Credit Boom Peaks (red circles)

60

Figure 5: Banking Crises and Credit Booms (Loans and Credit)

United States (USA)
Sweden (SWE)
Norway (NOR)
Netherlands (NLD)
Japan (JPN)
Italy (ITA)
Great Britain (GBR)
France (FRA)
Finland (FIN)
Denmark (DNK)
Germany (DEU)
Switzerland (CHE)
Canada (CAN)
Belgium (BEL)
Australia (AUS)

1880

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2010

2020

Banking Crises (blue x's), Credit Boom Peaks (Loan) (red circles), Credit Boom Peaks (Gorton) (green squares)

Figure 6: Major Banking Crises and Credit Booms (Loans and Credit)

United States (USA)
Sweden (SWE)
Norway (NOR)
Netherlands (NLD)
Japan (JPN)
Italy (ITA)
Great Britain (GBR)
France (FRA)
Finland (FIN)
Denmark (DNK)
Germany (DEU)
Switzerland (CHE)
Canada (CAN)
Belgium (BEL)
Australia (AUS)

1880

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Major Banking Crises (blue x's), Credit Boom Peaks (Loans) (red circles), Credit Boom Peaks (Gorton) (green squares)

61

Figure 7: Banking Crises and House Price Booms

United States (USA)
Sweden (SWE)
Norway (NOR)
Netherlands (NLD)
Japan (JPN)
Italy (ITA)
Great Britain (GBR)
France (FRA)
Finland (FIN)
Denmark (DNK)
Germany (DEU)
Switzerland (CHE)
Canada (CAN)
Belgium (BEL)
Australia (AUS)

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Banking Crises (blue x's), Housing Price Boom Peaks (red circles)

Figure 8: Banking Crises and Stock Price Booms

United States (USA)
Sweden (SWE)
Norway (NOR)
Netherlands (NLD)
Japan (JPN)
Italy (ITA)
Great Britain (GBR)
France (FRA)
Finland (FIN)
Denmark (DNK)
Germany (DEU)
Switzerland (CHE)
Canada (CAN)
Belgium (BEL)
Australia (AUS)

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

Banking Crises (blue x's), Stock Market Boom Peaks (red circles)

62

Figure 9: Major Banking Crises and House Price Booms

United States (USA)
Sweden (SWE)
Norway (NOR)
Netherlands (NLD)
Japan (JPN)
Italy (ITA)
Great Britain (GBR)
France (FRA)
Finland (FIN)
Denmark (DNK)
Germany (DEU)
Switzerland (CHE)
Canada (CAN)
Belgium (BEL)
Australia (AUS)

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

1990

2000

2010

2020

Major Banking Crises (blue x's), Housing Price Boom Peaks (red circles)

Figure 10: Major Banking Crises and Stock Price Booms

United States (USA)
Sweden (SWE)
Norway (NOR)
Netherlands (NLD)
Japan (JPN)
Italy (ITA)
Great Britain (GBR)
France (FRA)
Finland (FIN)
Denmark (DNK)
Germany (DEU)
Switzerland (CHE)
Canada (CAN)
Belgium (BEL)
Australia (AUS)

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

Major Banking Crises (blue x's), Stock Price Boom Peaks (red circles)

63

Figure 11: House Price Booms and Credit Booms (Loans and Credit)

United States (USA)
Sweden (SWE)
Norway (NOR)
Netherlands (NLD)
Japan (JPN)
Italy (ITA)
Great Britain (GBR)
France (FRA)
Finland (FIN)
Denmark (DNK)
Germany (DEU)
Switzerland (CHE)
Canada (CAN)
Belgium (BEL)
Australia (AUS)

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2010

2020

House Price Peaks (blue x's), Credit Peaks (Loans) (red circles), Credit Peaks (Gorton) (green squares)

Figure 12: Stock Price Booms and Credit Booms (Loans and Credit)

United States (USA)
Sweden (SWE)
Norway (NOR)
Netherlands (NLD)
Japan (JPN)
Italy (ITA)
Great Britain (GBR)
France (FRA)
Finland (FIN)
Denmark (DNK)
Germany (DEU)
Switzerland (CHE)
Canada (CAN)
Belgium (BEL)
Australia (AUS)

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Stock Price Peaks (blue x's), Credit Peaks (Loans) (red circles), Credit Peaks (Gorton) (green squares)

64

Appendix I. Twelve Banking Crises Narratives
A.1 The UK 1825 to 1890
1825. The first global financial crisis occurred in London in 1825. It involved many of the
elements of a classic crisis—a stock market boom bust , a banking panic , a sudden stop of capital
flows to Latin America and a series of debt defaults there ( Bordo 1998, Neal 1998 Brunnermeier
and Schnabel 2016). After the Napoleonic wars and the successful resumption of the gold standard
in 1821, the British economy enjoyed a period of rapid expansion, stimulated by an export boom
to the newly independent states of Latin America and investment in infra structure projects ( e.g.
gas lighting, canals and railroads). The sale of stocks to finance those ventures, in addition to gold
and silver mines ( some real and fictitious) in Latin America propelled a stock market boom and
expansion of country bank notes. Prices rose by 78% in the boom. Indications are that the April
1825 collapse in stock prices was related to the prior tightening of the Bank of England’s monetary
policy stance in response to a decline in its gold reserves. The collapse, in which stock prices fell
by 34% triggered bank failures, which, once they reached important City of London banks
precipitated a full-fledged panic in early December. Only then did the Bank of England begin to
act as a lender of last resort but it was too late to prevent massive bank failures, contraction of
loans , and a serious recession. Thus the key element of the crisis was a bank credit and equity
financed stock market boom and an ineffective lender of last resort to allay the resulting banking
panic.

1847. the 1840s railroad mania in the UK was a precedent for the dot.com boom( Bordo 2003).
After the first successful railroad was established in 1830, optimistic expectations about potential
profits that later turned out to be over optimistic led to massive investment in rails and rolling

65

stock financed by bank credit, acceptances , foreign investment and domestic savings (
Brunnermeier and Schnabel 2016) which extended the network across the country. The boom was
accommodated by expansionary monetary policy in response to gold inflows. The end of the
railroad boom was associated with the banking panic of 1847—one of the worst in British history.
The crash , in which stock prices fell by 30% and the panic, as in earlier episodes , may have been
triggered by tightening of the Bank of England’s policy stance , reflecting its concern over
declining gold reserves in the face of a harvest failure. The panic led to many bank failures and a
serious recession. The panic like 1825 had elements of a credit driven asset price boom combined
with a failure by the Bank of England to be a lender of last resort.

1866. The Overend Gurney Crisis
The Overend Gurney Crisis in 1866 was the last banking panic in the UK ( before Northern Rock
in 2007). According to Schwartz( 1986) it was the last time that the Bank of England failed to act
as a lender of last resort.
Overend Gurney was a discount house which had taken on risky investments in the 1860s. It was
the largest discount house and according to Batchelor ( 1986) , the Directors of the Bank of
England viewed it as a rival so that when it became insolvent in 1866 the Bank refused to rescue
it. Its failure then led to the failure of a number of country banks associated with it and the English
Joint Stock bank. This was followed by a run on London banks and finance houses by the country
banks . This in turn led to a classic banking panic as the public tried to convert their deposits into
Bank of England notes. The run spread to the Bank of England itself. The Bank hesitated in
requesting a Treasury Letter releasing it from the convertibility constraint of the 1844 Bank
Charter act until the Chancellor of the Exchequer suspended the Act. This action ended the panic.

66

Walter Bagehot ( 1873) criticized the bank for hesitating in providing liquidity to allay the panic
“ To lend a great deal, and yet not give the public confidence that you will lend sufficiently and
effectually , is the worst of all policies, but it is the policy now pursued.’”
Thus the Overend Gurney panic began with bad business decisions by its directors and became a
panic when the Bank of England failed to act as a lender of last resort.
1890 the Baring Crisis
The 1890 crisis in London also resulted from unwise investment decisions by its directors
investing in securities financing a land boom in Argentina which turned to bust in the face of
financial instability. Like Overend Gurney in 1866 when insolvency loomed the Barings directors
turned to the Bank of England for a rescue. The Bank complied and arranged what became known
as a lifeboat rescue. According to Batchelor ( 1986) the Bank was willing to rescue the insolvent
Barings bank but not Overend Gurney because the Bank’s directors were better connected to
Barings directors. The Bank arranged a lifeboat rescue of Barings by a syndicate of banks , led by
the Bank of England itself to share in any losses from Barings liquidation. The Bank then split the
old firm into a good bank which was recapitalized and a bad bank which held the toxic securities—
a technique used a century later by Sweden ( White 2016).The syndicate and the bad bank which
held the toxic securities in turn was guaranteed from loss by the British Treasury. Announcement
of the lifeboat allayed the markets and a panic was avoided. In addition gold loans to the Bank by
the Banque de France and the Russian Government ( central bank cooperation) also helped
backstop the Bank of England ( Bordo and Schenk 2016) According to Hautcoeur, Riva and White
(2014) the model for the lifeboat came from a rescue the year before of a major financial institution
, the Comptoir d’Escompte by the Banque de France. Unlike the other events that we discuss, this
is one of the few potentially serious crises which was avoided by wise lender of last resort actions.

67

A.2 Australia 1893
Australia experienced a massive land boom in the 1870s and 1880s in the face of rapid immigration
and British demand for wool. Capital flows from London channeled through the trading banks
financed the building of cities and the extension of pastoral land. The trading banks funded the
non –bank intermediaries ( pastoral companies) that financed mortgages, so that de facto they
violated the real bills doctrine that governed colonial banking and they were exposed to a maturity
mismatch. While real estate lending had long been banned or discouraged the colony of Victoria
removed this restriction in 1888 ( Bordo and Meissner 2015).
The trading companies ( Australian banks with offices in London ) actively solicited deposits in
England and Scotland , offering a higher rate of interest than the British domestic banks. In a sense
they fooled the British ( mainly Scottish ) savers into believing that the Australian banks were
similar to Scottish banks.
The “ Law of Gravity’ kicked in in the late 1880s when the terms of trade turned against Australian
wool. The commodity boom of the 1880s ( which was worldwide) led to the failures of many
pastoral companies and mortgage companies in 1891-92.
The crisis spread to the trading banks in 1892-93( the Mercantile Bank of Australia, the Federal
bank of Australia and the Commercial Bank of Australia) leading to a full- fledged banking panic.
Although the Associated Banks were supposed to pool the assets of the Melbourne banks to save
banks from liquidity problems, they failed to do so for the Federal Bank. The government of
Victoria tried to collaborate with the Associated Banks in Melbourne to save the Commercial bank.
While the forum reiterated its intentions, the Commercial Bank was soon allowed to fail. In New
South Wales, bank notes were given legal tender status to ease access to means of payment, and
the government declared a 5 day banking holiday ( Bordo and Eichengreen 1999). Depositors were

68

forced to exchange their demand and savings deposits for long-term deposits and debentures and
hence lost liquidity.
British depositors also were caught by the crisis and pulled their funds from the Australian banks.
In consequence , Australia was hit by a classic sudden stop of international capital and Australia
suffered a serious depression for much of the 1890s. This was aggravated by a serious drought.
In reaction to the crisis , unlike what happened in the US and Canada, the banks were not regulated
by the government. The surviving banks retrenched heavily; raised their capital and liquidity ratios
and gave up mortgage lending. The colonial governments set up their own mortgage banks and
thereby funded agricultural expansion and urban lending.
A.3 United States
The United States had the largest number of banking crises compared to any other advanced
country. Much of the sorry record can be explained by the political economy of the federal system
that came out of the Constitution of 1787. The Constitution gave control over the currency to
Congress but not control over banking. Consequently the U.S. banking system was based on State
chartered unit banks with often only one office. Two attempts to establish a central bank—the First
and Second Banks of the United States—had their charters torpedoed after 20 years by the forces
of populism and States rights.
In the pre- civil war period several banking panics occurred often brought about by a combination
of speculation in infrastructure stocks, malfeasance, political shocks and sudden stops in capital
flows from England ( 1792, 1817, 1837, 1839 1857, 1861) in an environment without a lender of
last resort. Frequent bank failures as well as panics created an unstable and inefficient payments
system.

69

During the Civil War, the National Banking System was established to provide a safe and uniform
currency—national bank notes—to be issued by Federal government chartered national banks. The
national banking system was successful in creating a uniform and safe currency but it was still hit
by a series of major banking crises. The continued high incidence of banking panics reflected two
major flaws in the system: the inverted pyramid of credit which led to a connection between stock
market crashes and banking panics; and the absence of a lender of last resort. The private sector
substitute of clearing house loan certificates did succeed in preventing two minor crises ( 1884 and
1890) but did not prevent major panics in 1873, 1893 and 1907. The big panics of the national
banking era were not largely driven by credit fueled asset price booms with the possible exception
of 1873.
1873. One of the classic lending boom busts leading to a banking panic was the railroad boom in
the 1870s which opened up the American west. The post –civil war era experienced one of the
most rapid growth rates in U.S. history. Much of the financing of railroad investment came from
British capital inflows which in turn accompanied by gold inflows permitted monetary expansion.
The boom was also accompanied by corporate malfeasance and corruption ( Benmelech and Bordo
2008). The boom ended with a sudden stop of foreign capital and a stock market crash followed
by a banking panic and a recession which only ended in 1879. The panic was allayed by a
suspension of convertibility of deposits into currency after an unsuccessful rescue by the New
York Clearing house.
1893. The 1890s were characterized by deflation and sluggish growth. Two key phenomenon
behind the slowdown was a decline in world gold prices to which the U.S. had to adjust and the
peak of the soft money silver agitation. Fears by foreign and domestic investors that the issue of
silver certificates under the Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890 would force the U.S. off the gold

70

standard led to heavy capital outflows ( Friedman and Schwartz 1963). This produced a drain on
the Treasury’s gold reserves and a drain on the reserves of the money center banks in the east. At
the same time the deflation was reducing the value of bank assets. A stock market crash starting
in May 1893 led to a surge of bank runs as the public (mainly in the interior ) sought to convert
their deposits into currency. The external drain was aggravated by an internal drain. Western
banks tried to draw down their reserves from their correspondents in New York City,.
The Panic of 1893 was characterized by two waves of bank runs and failures in May-June and in
July. The latter involved runs on the New York banks. J.P. Morgan and the New York Clearing
House attempted to end the panic in New York by the issue of clearing house loan certificates.,
but it was not successful ( Gorton and Tallman 2016). The panic ended with a suspension of specie
payments by the banks in July which lasted until September. ( Friedman and Schwartz 1963).
Thus the panic was driven by political uncertainty and the absence of a lender of last resort.
1907. The 1907-08 banking panic is considered the most important financial crisis in the U.S.
before the Great Depression. It led to the successful movement towards monetary reform that
created the Federal Reserve System (Bordo and Wheelock 2011).
Gold had been flowing into the U.S. preceding 1906 . The San Francisco earthquake of 1906 led
to major remittances to the U.S. by British insurance companies. The Bank of England became
alarmed by the capital flows to the U.S. and gold drains from its reserves. Consequently it raised
its Bank rate and also rationed credit to the merchant banks engaged in US trade finance. In a sense
it was a sudden stop (Odell and Wiedenmeier 2004) . In the fall of 1906 European investors
reduced their holdings of U.S. securities leading to a large gold outflow. This disinvestment was
associated with a sharp drop in U.S. stock prices March to August 1907 and a recession beginning
in May. The crisis began on October 14, when 5 banks that were members of the New York

71

Clearinghouse and 3 others requested assistance from other clearing house banks. “ These 8 banks
were controlled through stock ownership on margin by a few men of no great financial stability ,
who used the banks to further speculation in the stock of copper mining companies” ( Schwartz
1986) . A decline in the price of these stocks alarmed depositors who started runs. Order was
restored by the requests being granted.
However on October 21 , a run was started on Knickerbocker Trust Company , the third largest
trust company in New York, because its President had had dealings with one of the affected banks.
It was not aided because it was not a member of the Clearing House. It suspended payments the
next day, whereupon a run started on the second largest Trust company on October 23 and another
big trust company the next day.
The New York Clearing House granted assistance to the trust companies but not fast enough to
avoid precipitating a general alarm outside New York City . Pressure on the New York banks
reserves from other cities was initially allayed by the Treasury depositing $25 million in key New
York banks on October 24 as well as by a pool of funds extended to the banks by a syndicate
headed by JP Morgan. The New York Clearing House began issuing loan certificates on October
26 but faced with increasing demands from interior banks on their reserves, The New York banks
restricted convertibility of their deposits into currency, quickly followed by the rest of the country
which ended the panic. Like 1893 the 1907 crisis resulted from a sudden stop in an environment
without an effective lender of last resort.
1929-33. World War I greatly disrupted the global order and its aftermath was associated with
considerable financial instability. Disinflation and deflation led to banking crises in many

72

European economies in 1920-21. 33 Most of the European crises were dealt with by fiscal rescues.(
Feinstein, Temin and Toniolo 1997).
The main event of the 1920s was the Wall Street stock market boom from 1926 to 1929 and the
crash in October 1929.Many other countries had booming stock markets in this period . The U.S.
experienced a housing boom from 1922 to 1925 but it did not lead to a serious bust or a financial
crisis ( White 2014). Eichengreen and Mitchener ( 2004) following the BIS approach argue that
the Great Depression could be viewed as a credit boom gone wrong i.e. as a credit boom
accommodated by expansionary monetary policy. They present evidence for their interpretation
based on their measurement of a credit boom ( deviations from trend of the ratio of broad money
to GDP, the investment ratio, and real stock prices) for a panel of 9 countries.
During the boom stock prices rose by over 200%, the collapse from 1929 to 1932 had prices decline
by 66%. The boom was associated with massive investment that brought the major inventions of
the late nineteenth century, eg electricity and the automobile, to fruition. In addition, major
innovations also profoundly changed industrial organization and the financial sector, including the
increased use of equity as a financial instrument. The economy of the 1920s ( following the sharp
recession of 1920-21) was characterized by rapid real growth, rapid productivity advance and
slightly declining prices, punctuated by two minor recessions. Irving Fisher and other
contemporaries believed that the stock market boom reflected the fundamentals of future profits
from the high growth industries that were coming on stream and that it was not a bubble.

33

The U.S. did not have a banking panic in 1920, as had occurred in the National Banking Era.
Gorton and Metrick(2013) argue that this was because the Federal reserve was in place to
provide liquidity to the New York money market. Also see Tallman and White(2017) who argue
that several of the Reserve banks followed LLR policies.
73

McGrattan and Prescott (2003) concurs with this view although many others regard it as a bubble
(Galbraith 1955, White and Rappoport 1993,1994).
Debate continues over the role of expansionary Federal Reserve monetary policy in fueling the
boom. In 1932 Adolph Miller , a member of the Federal Reserve Board blamed the New York
Fed and its President Benjamin Strong for pursuing expansionary open market purchases to help
Great Britain restore the pound to its pre- war parity in 1924 and then again in 1927 to protect
sterling from speculative attack. In both cases the U.S. economy was in recession justifying
expansionary policy ( Friedman and Schwartz 1963). Miller indicted Strong ( who died in 1928)
for fueling the stock market boom and the resultant crash. His views were instrumental in
legislation in 1933 which prohibited Reserve banks from engaging in international monetary
policy actions ( Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz 2015).
Regardless of the outcome of this debate , the market crashed in October 1929 and the crash is
usually blamed on tight Federal Reserve policy. The Fed, following its adherence to the “real bills”
doctrine was increasingly concerned over stock market speculation beginning in 1927. After policy
was tightened through 1928 and early 1929, a recession began in July 1929. This , according to
White (1990) led to a revision of the prevailing optimism and the crash in equities.
The consensus view by economists is that the 1929 crash was not the pivot of the Great
Contraction ( Friedman and Schwartz 1963 and Romer 1993) but that it had a major effect on the
first year of the recession. It reduced output via wealth effects on consumption, reduced
investment, and reduced velocity. The consensus view is that the recession became a “ Great
Depression” beginning in 1930 after the Fed failed to act as a lender of last resort according to its
mandate to prevent a series of ( liquidity driven)banking panics which erupted in the next three
years ( Bordo and Landon-Lane 2010).The banking panics in turn impacted the real economy

74

through the collapse in money supply, which produced massive deflation( Friedman and Schwartz
1960 and financial disintermediation( Bernanke 1983). The depression spread abroad through the
fixed exchange rates of the gold standard.

A.4 Post World War II
As discussed above the reaction to the financial instability in the 1930s led to a regime of financial
repression from the mid 1930s to the mid 1970s across the world. With liberalization of both the
domestic and international financial systems came financial instability. Two key events in the
1970s were the failure in 1974 of Franklin National bank in the US and Herstatt bank in Germany,
both had made risky bets in the foreign exchange market which had expanded greatly after the
collapse of the Bretton Woods system. In the US case , Franklin National was bailed out on the
grounds that it would prevent contagion to other banks. In Germany , Herstatt was allowed to fail.
The failure of Continental Illinois bank in 1984 led to a
bail out by the US monetary authorities on the grounds that Continental Illinois, the eighth largest
bank in the country was “ too big to fail”. This led to the Fed’s adoption of the Too Big to Fail
(TBTF) doctrine and, to head off the risk of moral hazard, the adoption of the strategy of ‘creative
ambiguity—that declaring in advance which banks would be deemed large enough to be bailed
out.
In other advanced countries in the 1980s, with liberalization of their financial systems and
financial globalization a series of major financial crises occurred.

75

A.5 The Japanese Financial Crisis
Japan experienced a boom bust cycle in the mid 1980s with a run up of real estate prices fueled by
an increase in bank lending and easy monetary policy. The Bank of Japan began following a looser
monetary policy after the Plaza Accord of 1985, to attempt to devalue the yen and ease upward
pressure on the dollar. The property price boom in turn led to a stock market boom as the increased
value of property owned by firms raised future profits and hence stock prices (Ito and Iwaisako
1996). Both rising prices and stock prices in turn increased firms collateral encouraging further
bank loans and more fuel for the boom. The bust was triggered by the Bank of Japan’s pursuit of
a tight monetary policy in 1989 to stem the asset market boom.
The subsequent asset price collapse in the next five years led to a collapse in bank lending with
a decline in the collateral backing corporate loans. The decline in asset prices further impinged on
the banking system’s capital, making many banks insolvent. The banking crisis of 1990 occurred
because the collapse in asset prices reduced the value of their capital. Lender of last resort policy
prevented a classic banking panic but regulatory forbearance propped up insolvent banks. It took
over a decade to resolve the banking crisis and Japan is only now resuming moderate growth.

A.6 Financial Crises in the Nordic Countries
The Nordic countries; Norway , Sweden and Finland all experienced serious banking crises in the
early 1990s preceded by major asset booms and busts in the 1980s. In each country the run up in
asset prices followed liberalization of their financial sectors after five decades of extensive controls
on lending rates and government control over the sectoral allocation of bank lending. Asset booms
were accommodated by expansionary monetary policy as each country adhered to pegged
exchange rates which tended to make monetary policy pro-cyclical.

76

In the case of Norway, quantitative restrictions on bank lending were lifted in 1984 without
allowing interest rates to rise. Real interest rates were low and sometimes negative. Banks used
their newborn freedom to expand lending on a large scale , all of them with a firm desire to
increase their market shares. This stimulated a massive real estate boom until 1986. The legacy of
the real estate boom and buildup in bad assets in the commercial bank was a banking crisis in 1991.
It was resolved with a fiscal bailout and ample central bank liquidity ( Steigum 2010,
Øyvind, Klovland, and Øksendal 2016).
Similar stories occurred in Finland and Sweden ( Jonung at al 2009). Their crises and recessions
were much worse than in Norway largely because their currencies were pegged to the DM in the
EMS System and they were hard hit by tight German monetary policy in reaction to the high fiscal
costs of German reunification. Sweden was hard hit by the EMS crisis in 1991. To defend the
krona the Riksbank raised the discount rate to 500%. The policy was unsuccessful and Sweden
was forced off the EMS and forced to float in 1993. The currency and banking crises of 1991
rocked the Swedish economy. The banking crisis was resolved using the good bank bad bank
model mentioned above in the discussion of the Baring and Compte d’ Escompte crises in the
nineteenth century. The final resolution costs were quite modest.

A.7 The US Subprime Mortgage Crisis and the Global Financial Crisis of 2007-2008
The U.S subprime mortgage crisis and the Global Financial Crisis that followed has been viewed
as the worst financial crisis since the 1930s. It affected the U.S. and several European countries
and Japan and led to a global recession.

77

The subprime mortgage crisis in the U.S. of 2007-2008 had its origins in a massive nationwide
house price boom that began in the 1990s. 34 The US has had a long history of house price boom
busts but all of them were local or regional (Glaeser 2013).
The causes of the recent crisis include: government policy to encourage housing for a broad swath
of the population, loose monetary policy after the tech boom of 2001 to prevent the U.S. from
slipping into Japan style deflation, and global imbalances as the newly emerging countries of Asia
invested their growing international reserves in safe U.S. Treasury securities. The push to
encourage housing in the US and other countries goes back to the Great Depression of the 1930s
when the Roosevelt administration set up the Federal Housing Authority (FHA) and the GSEs –
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac—to encourage the development of the mortgage market and to
provide housing for much of the population. In subsequent decades and especially in the 1990s ,
as argued by Rajan ( 2010), successive government administrations and Congress, as an attempt
to reduce rising inequality and income stagnation, pushed for affordable housing for low income
families using the GSEs and allowed them to reduce their capital requirements. This led the
agencies to take on more risk. Lending was encouraged and rising prices raised the GSEs profits
leading them to take on more risk ( Poole 2016). The FHA in the 1990s also took on riskier
mortgages , reduced the minimum down payments to 3% and increased the size of mortgages that
would be guaranteed.
The housing boom came to fruition in the George W. Bush administration which urged the GSEs
to increase their holding of mortgages to low income households (Rajan 2010 , page 37). Between
1999 and 2007 national house prices doubled according to the Standard and Poor’s Case-Shilller
repeat sales index.

34

See Bordo and Meissner 2012
78

The private sector also contributed heavily to the boom in an environment of loose regulation and
oversight as they recognized that the GSEs would backstop their lending. During this period
lending standards were relaxed and practices like NINJA and NODOC loans were condoned.
These developments led to the growth of the subprime and Alt A mortgages which were securitized
and bundled into mortgage backed securities and then given triple A ratings. Mortgage backed
securities ( MBSs) were further repackaged into collateralized debt obligations ( CDOs) Credit
Default Swaps ( CDSs) provided insurance on many of these new products. Financial firms
ramped up leverage and avoided regulatory oversight and statutory capital requirements with
special purpose vehicles ( SPVs) and Special Investment Vehicles ( SIVs). Many of these entities
were not part of traditional commercial banks under the supervisory umbrella of the Fed or the
FDIC. They were referred to as shadow banks.
These factors encouraged a lending boom and house price boom which peaked in 2006. The boom
was fueled by expansionary monetary policy by the Federal Reserve after the tech boom bust of
2001 . Low policy rates were kept in place until 2005 to prevent the economy from slipping into
Japan style deflation ( Taylor 2007). Also, the low interest rate environment of the Great
Moderation encouraged risky investment. An additional expansionary impulse may have come
from the Asian savings glut ( Bernanke 2005). As China and other countries pegged their
currencies at undervalued rates relative to the dollar to encourage export driven growth, they
accumulated huge international reserves which were invested in safe US Treasury securities. This
imbalance allowed the US to run a persistent current account deficit which provided fuel for the

79

boom 35.The house price boom turned into a bust in 2006 following the Fed’s return to a tighter
monetary policy stance.
The crisis erupted in the summer of 2007 in shadow banking entities (SIVs) that had been heavily
exposed to mortgage backed securities , and then spread to the off balance sheet vehicles of
commercial banks both in the U.S. and Western Europe. This led to a drying up of interbank
lending precipitated by uncertainty about which institutions were exposed to derivatives containing
risky mortgages on their balance sheets ( Schwartz 2009).
The challenges the Fed faced in managing the crisis was to overcome the long standing stigma
problem which went back to the 1920s and made commercial banks reluctant to go to the Discount
window ( Gorton and Metrick 2013)

36

. The Fed initially dealt with the liquidity crisis in the

interbank market by easing the terms of access to the discount window, but as the crisis deepened
and there were few responses, it established the Term Auction Facility ( TAF) in December 2007
under which the Fed auctioned credit to depository institutions for up to three months to
circumvent the ongoing stigma of turning to the discount window.
The crisis worsened in March 2008 with the rescue of the investment bank Bear Stearns, by JP
Morgan , backstopped by funds from the Federal Reserve. The rescue was justified on the same
grounds as earlier bailouts, that Bear Sterns exposure to counterparties was so extensive that a
worse crisis would follow if it were not bailed out.
The March crisis led to the creation of a number of new discount window facilities which
broadened the collateral available for discounting such as the Term Security Lending Facility (

35

The U.S. current account deficit did expand in the early 2000s ,indicating that more foreign
capital entered the U.S. on balance during these years, but a capital inflow was bot the driving
force. If it was the dollar would have appreciated , but the dollar depreciated between mid 2001
and March 2007.
36
See Bordo 2014.
80

TSLF) under which Treasury Securities were loaned to primary dealers against eligible collateral.
These facilities were created under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve act established after the
Great Contraction. It was the first use of section 13(3) since 1936 ( Hackley 1973). It was followed
by the Prime Dealer Credit Facility ( PDCF) also justified under Section 13(3) , to provide cash to
investment banks and other primary dealers on terms close to those available in depository
institutions ( The Federal Crisis Inquiry Report, 2010 page 294).
Events took a turn for the worse when the Treasury and the Fed allowed the investment bank ,
Lehman brothers, to fail to discourage the belief that all insolvent institutions would be saved in
an attempt to prevent moral hazard ( See FOMC Transcript September 16, 2008 pages 36, 48, 49,
51). It was argued that Lehman was in worse shape than Bear Stearns and hence was a weaker
candidate to be rescued and moreover that it was less exposed to counterparty risk than Bear
Stearns and hence posed less of a systemic risk threat. After the crisis, Bernanke (2012) argued
that Lehman was allowed to fail because it was deemed insolvent and because the Fed lacked the
legal authority to rescue it. 37
The next day the Federal Reserve (using section13(3) to justify an $85 billion loan) and the
Treasury bailed out ( for a total package of $182 billion) and effectively nationalized the insurance
giant AIG fearing the systemic consequences for collateralized default swaps if it were allowed to
fail. The fallout from the Lehman bankruptcy then turned the liquidity crisis into a fully -fledged
global credit crunch and stock market crash as interbank lending and the whole elaborate network
of funding for the shadow banking system effectively seized up on the fear that no institutions

37

Ball ( 2016) presents convincing evidence from his forensic accounting exercise that indeed
Lehman’s was solvent and could have been saved. There is an historical parallel here between
the Overend Gurney Crisis of 1866 and the Baring Crisis of 1890. The balance sheets of the two
banks were not dissimilar yet one was saved and a panic averted and the other was not leading to
a huge panic.
81

were safe. The financial crisis then contributed to a massive global recession—the Great
Recession.
To stem the post Lehman financial market panic the Fed invoked Section 13(3) of the Federal
Reserve Act to extend the discount window to non- bank financial institution and financial markets
such as in the Term Asset Securities Loan Facility ( TALF). The Fed created special liquidity
facilities to provide funding to the money market mutual funds which were hard hit by the collapse
of Lehman ( the Money Market Investor Funding Facility, MMIFF) and then to the commercial
paper market that was funded by the MMMFs( the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, CPFA) .
Facilities for broker dealers, asset backed securities and many other institutions and markets were
created. The Fed also cut its policy rate close to zero. 38
The crisis ended in the late fall of 2008 and early spring of 2009 when TARP funds from the
Treasury were used to recapitalize the major banks after a series of stress tests administered by the
Fed. The international crisis eased after the Fed in October 2008 set up extensive inter central bank
swap lines to keep international liquidity flowing.

A.8 The Eurozone Crisis
The Eurozone Crisis of 2010-2014 was a sequel to the Global Financial Crisis of 2007-2009. It
involved strong connections between banking and fiscal crises. 39
In the aftermath of the subprime mortgage crisis, several European countries that had been
connected to the US crisis or which had bank credit driven house price booms engaged in

38

Bernanke ( 2012) justified the extension of access to the discount window as perfectly
consistent with Walter Bagehot’s strictures because they were backed by collateral( although not
made at a penalty rate). These policies he argued prevented the collapse of the global financial
system.
39
See Bordo and Meissner 2016.
82

expensive bond financed bank bailouts. These bailouts and economic collapse increased the fiscal
deficit leading to debt surges. To fight the recession that accompanied the crisis, many countries
engaged in automatic fiscal policy which also increased the deficits.
Against a background of weakening fiscal positions across the Eurozone, the announcement in
2009 that the Greek government had falsified its fiscal books set the stage for the Eurozone debt
crisis which first involved the threat of a Greek default and then contagion to other members via
their banks which had significant holdings of Greek and other peripheral countries sovereign debt.
The threatened sovereign default by Greece fed into a banking crisis because banks in Greece and
the other financially integrated Eurozone countries held large amounts of Greek and other
peripheral Eurozone sovereign debt. In the case of Ireland, a blanket guarantee of the Irish
financial sector followed the collapse of a property price boom. This collapse made the Irish banks
insolvent, and led to a fiscal crisis because markets expected that the Irish government would not
be able to service the large run up in its debt that followed. An 85 billion euro international rescue
by the IMF , the EU and others followed in 2010. Later some private sector actors were bailed in.
In Spain , where another housing boom turned to bust, the crisis also led to fiscal problems. Spain
introduced several costly bailout packages with enhanced guarantees, and took on a European
bailout package. Throughout , international pressure—both political and market based – was harsh
leading to higher risk premia. From 2010, Spain adopted a series of ‘austerity’ plans consistent
with these bailouts. In addition, Spanish banks increased demand for Spanish sovereign debt in
order to take advantage of liquidity funding from the European Central bank, threatening an
outcome whereby fiscal problems could be transmitted to the banks. Bond spreads in Portugal and
Italy spiked after 2010, but countries such as France and Belgium also faced significant bond
market pressure.

83

The debt crisis spread to all of the Eurozone peripheral countries in 2011-2013. The Troika (ECB,
Eurozone government and IMF) rescues bailed out Greece, Spain, Portugal and Cyprus although
the private sector was also bailed in in varying degrees in each country.
European countries displayed vulnerabilities in the run-up to the crisis, but the collapse of
confidence in international bond markets for many European countries reflected the constraints of
nations in a monetary union and (at least initially ) hesitant monetary policy from the ECB. 40 The
crisis was finally resolved by the actions of the Troika and by Mario Draghi’s speech in 2012
where he said that the ECB would do whatever it takes to calm the markets.

40

See Brunnermeier, James and Landau (2016), and Mody (2018)
84

