                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           INCREASING COMMUNITY COLLEGE COMPLETION RATES
                      AMONG LOW-INCOME STUDENTS:
       EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIAL EVALUATION
                  OF A CASE MANAGEMENT INTERVENTION

                                    William N. Evans
                                    Melissa S. Kearney
                                    Brendan C. Perry
                                    James X. Sullivan

                                    Working Paper 24150
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w24150


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2017



We are indebted to Erin Byrne and Luke Horvath for their project and research support and we
gratefully acknowledge the research assistance of Sreeraahul Kancherla, Fernando Saltiel, and
Tim Seida. The paper has benefitted from comments from Susan Dynarski, Josh Goodman,
Jonathon Guryan, Judy Hellerstein, Brad Hershbein, Isaac McFarlin, Lesley Turner, Marci
Ybarra, and seminar participants at the University of Wisconsin, IRP Summer Workshop,
University of Notre Dame, the NBER's Education Program, the IFS/CEP Joint Conference :
Wages, Labour Market Policy and the Safety Net, the DC Economics of Education working
group, and at the APPAM Fall Research Conference. We are grateful to our research partners at
Catholic Charities Fort Worth and Tarrant County College. This study was registered in the
American Economic Association’s RCT Registry under ID AEARCTR-0000223. This research
was financially supported by funding from the Wilson Sheehan Lab for Economic Opportunities
at Notre Dame, the Fischer Family Foundation, the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab, and
NIH Grant #1R21HD081399-01A1. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by William N. Evans, Melissa S. Kearney, Brendan C. Perry, and James X. Sullivan. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Increasing Community College Completion Rates among Low-Income Students: Evidence
from a Randomized Controlled Trial Evaluation of a Case Management Intervention
William N. Evans, Melissa S. Kearney, Brendan C. Perry, and James X. Sullivan
NBER Working Paper No. 24150
December 2017
JEL No. I23,I3

                                         ABSTRACT

Community colleges are an important part of the higher education landscape in the United States,
but completion rates are extremely low, especially among low-income students. Much of the
existing policy and research attention to this issue has focused on addressing academic and
financial challenges. However, there is ample reason to think that non-academic obstacles might
be key drivers of dropout rates for students living with the burden of poverty. This study
examines the impact of a comprehensive case management intervention that is designed
specifically to help low-income students overcome the multitude of barriers to college
completion. We evaluate the impact of this intervention through a randomized controlled trial
evaluation (RCT) conducted between 2013 and 2016 in Fort Worth, Texas. Eligible students were
randomly assigned to a treatment group that was offered comprehensive case management,
including emergency financial assistance (EFA), a separate treatment group offered only EFA, or
a control group. Data from school administrative records indicate that the comprehensive case
management program significantly increases persistence and degree completion, especially for
women. Estimates for the full sample are imprecise, but the estimates for women imply that the
case management intervention tripled associate degree receipt (31 percentage point increase).We
find no difference in outcomes between the EFA-only treatment arm and the control group. A
back-of-the-envelope calculation using average earnings gains associated with community
college completion implies that program benefits exceed program costs ($5,640 per student for
three year program) after only 4.25 years in the workforce post schooling.

William N. Evans                               Brendan C. Perry
Keough-Hesburgh Professor of Economics         Wilson Sheehan Lab for Economic Opportunities
Department of Economics                        3104 Jenkins Nanovic Halls
University of Notre Dame                       University of Notre Dame
3111 Jenkins Nanovic Halls                     Notre Dame, IN 45630
Notre Dame, IN 46556-7000                      bperry3@nd.edu
and NBER
wevans1@nd.edu                                 James X. Sullivan
                                               Department of Economics
Melissa S. Kearney                             3108 Jenkins Nanovic Halls
Department of Economics                        University of Notre Dame
University of Maryland                         Notre Dame, IN 46556
3105 Tydings Hall                              James.X.Sullivan.197@nd.edu
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu
I.      INTRODUCTION

        Community college is a crucial component of the United States’ education system, offering

millions of students the opportunity to earn a low-cost, two-year associate’s degree, gain career and

technical credentials, or embark on a path to a four-year institution. Low tuition rates and open-access

policies at community colleges make them accessible to students who might face significant barriers to

attending four-year selective schools. Federal grants and loans mean that many low-income students

are paying little if any out-of-pocket for a community college education.1 Nearly half of all

undergraduate students in the U.S. in 2014-15 were enrolled in a two-year institution (U.S. Department

of Education, 2016) and half of all bachelor’s recipients were at one point enrolled at a community

college before transferring to a four-year institution (National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) Research

Center, 2017). Many studies find employment and earnings benefits associated with community college

degree completion and credits earned (e.g., Kane and Rouse, 1995; Marcotte et al., 2005; Jepsen et al.,

2014; Stevens et al., 2015). A recent estimate suggests that for the cohort of students who attended

college in the mid-2000s, an associate’s degree yields an earnings premium of about 30 percent over a

high school degree (Marcotte, 2016).

        Despite low tuition costs and the expected economic returns, a large fraction of community

college students drop out before earning a credential or degree. The National Student Clearinghouse

(2017) notes that among students who first enrolled full-time at a two-year public institution in 2010,

nearly 42 percent had not received any degree or were no longer enrolled in school six-years later. Many

observers argue that there is a “completion crisis” at all type of colleges. The NSC estimates that of

students that started at four-year public and private institutions in 2010, only 59 and 72 percent have

bachelor’s degrees after six years. The President of Arizona State University recently noted that “…the


1 Data from the 2011/12 National Postsecondary Student Aid Study indicates that 38 percent of community college
students have zero out of pocket expenses for tuition and fees.
https://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2015/02/17/how-many-already-attend-community-college-for-free

                                                           1
discussion of a debt crisis often fails to address what I would argue is the greater crisis: the fact that

more than half of those who start college fail to finish.”2 Likewise, Deming (2017) argues that the key

policy issue is college completion rather than college attendance. Not completing can be financially

crippling for a community college student as they incur debt but do not obtain a degree. Although only

40 percent of community college students acquire education-related debt,3 90 percent of community

college students who have defaulted on debt left college with no degree or certificate.4

         The completion crisis is occurring at a time when a greater share of students are going to

college.5 The high dropout numbers might be driven in part by the fact that less prepared, lower

income students are now more likely to attend college, and these students tend to drop out at much

higher rates (Baum and Scott-Clayton, 2013). A likely culprit, especially for low-income community

college students, is that many of these students face a wide range of challenges, beyond academic

preparation issues, that they are not necessarily able to overcome. Given that community college

students tend to be financially independent and older, financial and family issues frequently arise and

pose challenges to staying in school.6 These problems include balancing work and school, finding

appropriate and affordable day care, and dealing with shocks that occur during the school year. In

addition, many students report having trouble navigating the complex community college system,

particularly first generation college students and new immigrants who may have limited knowledge

about how colleges function (Bailey, Jenkins, and Leinbach, 2005; Scott-Clayton, 2011). Students might

also lack the necessary commitment and/or planning and time management skills necessary to set out a


2 https://president.asu.edu/node/2241
3 https://trends.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/trends-in-community-colleges-research-brief.pdf
4 https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2015/09/28/four-surprising-findings-debt-and-default-among-community-

college-students
5 Using data from the 1 Percent Census PUMS from 1980 through 2000 and the 2010 and 2015 American Communities

Survey, the fraction of those aged 25-29 who have ever attended college or is currently attending college is the following
(year, percent); 1980, 50.1 percent; 1990, 55.1 percent; 2000, 60.3 percent; 2010, 64.3 percent; 2015, 67.3 percent.
6 Survey evidence from Johnson et al. (2011) suggests that the leading self-reported reason why students drop out of college

is a need to work full time (71 percent). Another common reason reported was not having enough time to spend with family
(41 percent.) The reason that ranked the lowest was “some classes were too difficult” (10 percent reported this as a primary
reason and an additional 24 percent noted it as a secondary reason.) The survey is based on telephone interviews conducted
in 2009 with 614 young adults aged 22 to 30 years old who have experience with some post-secondary education.
                                                             2
path to graduation and stay committed to that plan. Students who lack clear goals and a genuine

understanding of why college is important often become derailed by relatively minor challenges and

setbacks (Grubb, 2006).

        Postsecondary institutions are unfortunately not always set up to handle this collection of

problems.7 Deming (2017) puts it succinctly: “less-selective public institutions often have large classes

and provide little in the way of academic counseling, mentoring, and other student supports (page 6.)”

Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner (2010) find that shifts in the types of institutions students attend

toward lower-ranked, public schools along with declines in institutional resources per student are more

important than shifts in student characteristics in explaining the decline in college completion rates

between the 1970s and 1990s. Deming and Walters (2017) compare the impact of changes in tuition

and changes in spending on enrollment and degree completion in US public postsecondary institutions

between 1990 and 2013. Their analysis finds that spending increases are more effective per-dollar than

price cuts in terms of increasing completion rates. This finding is consistent with a view that

institutional resources are a critical component to driving student completion rates. It is also the case

that over recent decades, colleges and universities have experienced declining state appropriations

alongside rising enrollment, leading to fewer resources per student.

        In this paper, we report the results from a randomized controlled trial (RCT) investigation of a

comprehensive case management intervention that was designed to help low-income students

overcome the myriad obstacles that might threaten their persistence in community college. The

program, Stay the Course (STC), offers case management services provided by a social service agency that

are substantially more intensive than what community college academic counselors tend to provide.

Each STC student is paired with a trained social worker, called a navigator, who offers students



7In their book “Making College Work,” Holzer and Baum (2017) outline a number of institutional weaknesses that might
hinder the success of disadvantaged students attending public universities and community colleges and they discuss a
number of possible policy and programmatic remedies.
                                                          3
coaching, mentoring, and referral services. Navigators work with students to help them overcome their

individual barriers to college completion such as finding affordable child care, selecting courses that

keep them on track towards graduation, making decisions about transferring to four-year colleges, and

locating social services in the community. In addition, students in the STC program have access to

limited emergency financial assistance (EFA) that can be used for non-academic expenses that could

negatively impact their persistence in college.

        The RCT demonstration was rolled out in the fall of 2013 at the Trinity River Campus of

Tarrant County College (TCC) in Fort Worth, Texas. Eligible students were randomly assigned to one

of two treatment groups or a control group. Treatment group 1 was offered the full STC

comprehensive case management treatment including referrals, mentoring, coaching, and access to

EFA; treatment group 2 was offered access to EFA only; and the control group received no special

services. We use administrative records to track academic outcomes for study participants for three

years post random assignment. We find no difference in outcomes between the EFA-only treatment

group and the control group.

        The results indicate that the full STC comprehensive case management program significantly

increased persistence and degree completion through six semesters, especially for female students.

Estimated effects are imprecise for the full sample, but intention-to-treat estimates for females show a

7.4 percentage point (3.3 percentage point standard error) increase in the likelihood of earning an

associate’s degree off a control group mean of 15.7 percent. This translates into a treatment-on-the-

treated effect of 31.5 percentage points (14.1 percentage point standard error). Based on the estimated

earnings premium for individuals with community college credentials, we estimate that the earnings

gains associated with the program (for the full sample) exceed program costs in just over four years.

        The completion crisis has led to a number of interventions designed to increase college

persistence and completion rates and this paper contributes to this literature. One group of studies

include interventions designed to address the issue of academic under-preparation among community
                                                     4
college students,8 generally with disappointing results (Long, 2014; Martorell and McFarlin, 2011). An

evaluation of the Bottom Line intervention, a long-term college advising program offered to low-

income students beginning in high school, found positive effects on early college persistence. While

Bottom Line provides some social supports, such as helping students acclimate to college, the

intervention focuses on advising students, the bulk of whom attend 4-year college, through the college

and financial aid application process and offering some academic advising while in college (Barr &

Castleman, 2017). More closely related to our paper, there are a number of well-designed studies

investigating whether enhanced student support services and/or mentoring can lead to improved

educational outcomes for college students. The evidence is mixed. Two of the sites that were part of

MDRC’s “Opening Doors” demonstration project focused on enhanced student services. Students

were given two semesters of access to counselors with much smaller caseloads than the traditional

caseload of 1000 students per counselor. The evaluation found no improvements in ultimate academic

outcomes (Scrivener and Weiss, 2009). Angrist, Lang, and Oreopoulos (2009) found that first-year

female students (but not males) at a large 4-year public school in Canada demonstrated improved

academic outcomes in terms of GPA and credits earned when they had access to peer advising and

organized study groups as part of the Project STAR intervention, but only when those services were

combined with merit-based financial incentives. Bettinger and Baker (2014) found that college students

randomly assigned to student coaches with the InsideTrack program have higher persistence and

completion rates, but this program did not focus on low-income students or a community college

setting.

           The most promising results to date have been found for the comprehensive Accelerated Study

in Associates Program (ASAP) at the City University of New York, which offered tuition waivers,



8About 60 percent of students entering community college are referred to at least one remedial education class (Bailey,
2009; Attewell et al., 2006). Community colleges devote upwards of $2 billion annually towards these developmental
education programs (Strong American Schools, 2008).
                                                             5
enhanced student services, and special course offerings, among other innovations. The evaluation

found that this three-year program nearly doubled graduation rates (Scrivener et al., 2015). It should be

noted that this program is multi-faceted and extremely expensive, which raises questions about how

readily such a program might be replicated in other settings. Our study complements this existing work

by investigating whether a comprehensive case management program delivered by a social service

provider, as opposed to a school counselor, can lead to increased completion rates for very low income

students in a community college.

         As a policy matter, the federal government spends billions of dollars a year subsidizing

community college attendance. In 2015, the Pell Grant program provided $30 billion in aid for low-

income individuals to attend college. More than a third of Pell recipients attend community college

(Baime and Mullin, 2011). States and local governments often provide financial aid and need-based

scholarships as well. Identifying successful ways to better realize the potential of the community college

investment, both for the students themselves and for society more generally, is of paramount research

and policy importance.9

II. THE “STAY THE COURSE” INTERVENTION

         Stay the Course is a comprehensive case management intervention that was designed by Catholic

Charities Fort Worth (CCFW) to help low-income community college students address personal

obstacles so they can persist in school and complete their intended degree. CCFW is a large nonprofit

social service provider with a mission to improve outcomes for low-income families and individuals.

They provide services to over 100,000 unduplicated clients each year.




9Improving persistence in community college was an explicit priority of the Obama administration, which launched the
American Graduation Initiative with a goal of producing 5 million more community college graduates by 2020.
http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/Investing-in-Education-The-American-Graduation-Initiative.
                                                           6
A. Features of the intervention

         Upon enrollment in STC, a student is assigned to a trained social worker called a “navigator”

who serves as their case manager. The navigator meets with the student initially to conduct a client

assessment that identifies the client’s long-term goals, likely barriers to these goals, and their strengths

and weaknesses. The student and navigator then collaboratively develop and implement a

comprehensive service plan that sets out the steps necessary for the student to accomplish their

educational goals. The service plan is tailored to devise intermediate goals for the student to accomplish

along the way, discuss the action steps necessary to accomplish these goals within established

timeframes, and address potential barriers through a range of available services. Action steps are

developed for each specified goal in the service plan. For example, if a participant has a goal of earning

a grade of at least a “B” in a specific course, the action steps for that goal might include attending all

classes for the course or meeting once a week with a tutor. The service plan is reviewed and updated

every 90 days. The construction of the service plan is a time-consuming but important process in that

it helps build trust between the navigator and the client. The service provider’s view is that for case

management to work students must feel comfortable coming to the navigator to help solve intimate

and personal problems, e.g., domestic violence, substance abuse, mental illness, etc.

         Participation in the program involves comprehensive case management services for the student

on an ongoing basis. There are four main components to these services: referrals, mentoring, coaching,

and emergency financial assistance. The navigators refer STC participants to a variety of resources

within the TCC system such as access to tutors, financial aid, etc., as well as to external resources

outside the college such as employment and child-care services, health services, government programs

and benefits such as SNAP, and other social services (Ybarra, 2016).10 Mentoring involves the process


10As part of the RCT evaluation, we collaborated with an independent, qualitative researcher to conduct an implementation
study of Stay the Course at the Trinity River Campus, which is available as Ybarra (2016). This study drew from interviews of
STC staff in the spring of 2015 and 60 hours of observations of all aspects of STC staff work in the fall of 2015, about two
years after the launch of the evaluation.
                                                              7
of navigators developing a personal relationship of trust with each of their student clients. This sort of

personal relationship is likely different from the typical relationship that academic advisors at

community colleges have with their students, as college advisors tend to have caseloads that are in the

hundreds or thousands of students (as compared to 34 for STC navigators) and have a different

professional orientation toward educational and academic counseling, as opposed to social work. To

establish this mentoring relationship, navigators encourage open communication and build trust so that

students are engaged in the program and they continue to seek the navigator’s advice on educational

and personal issues that affect their progress in school.

         In the coaching component of comprehensive case management, the navigator and student

have ongoing meetings to work on resolving unforeseen problems that might threaten the ability of the

student to complete their degree. Students might encounter situations along many dimensions that

could derail their education, such as problems with housing, child-care arrangements, transportation, or

work schedules. Students are encouraged from the outset to meet with their navigator for help

addressing such circumstances. The thought behind the implementing agency’s approach is that the

stronger is the trust between the navigator and the student, the more likely it is that the student will

come to the navigator to discuss personal issues that might inhibit success in school. Another feature of

the coaching component is helping students navigate the community college system. Navigators remind

students to register for the necessary and appropriate classes. Depending on student need, navigators

may also assist students in finding campus-provided tutors and help students avail themselves of

campus-provided services.

         The implementing agency emphasizes that personal interactions, as opposed to emails or phone

calls, are at the heart of their approach to comprehensive case management. Program guidelines

recommend that navigators and students meet in person at least once per month.11 However, case notes


11At the launch of the study in fall 2013 there were no explicit benchmarks in place requiring navigators to meet with
students a certain number of times per week or month. The frequency of meetings was at the discretion of the navigator and
                                                            8
data reveal that the frequency of in-person interactions varied widely. Table 1 reports summary statistics

of all navigator/student interactions as reported in the navigator case notes. On average, navigators

interacted with their clients about 34 times each semester. About half of these interactions were via text

or email and about a third were over the phone. There were an average of 4.1 in-person meetings per

semester, with a typical duration of 41 minutes. The frequency and type of navigator-student

interactions did not differ noticeably by gender.

         Figure 1 shows the frequency of discussion topics covered during navigator-student interactions

based on these electronic case notes. We include as navigator-student interactions in-person meetings,

phone calls, or individualized emails/texts, but not mass communication such as group emails or

administrative reminders. Academic discussion topics such as class registration and gaining access to

tutors were the most popular; they were discussed in over a third of the interactions between navigators

and students. Ten of the next 11 most frequent topics have little to do with academics but rather, are

aspects about the student’s life outside of school, such as work, transportation, health, child care, etc.

Work/employment issues were discussed in nearly a quarter of all interactions, which is consistent with

the evidence that this issue is one that often leads low-income students to drop out of community

college (Johnson et al., 2011). Students discussed referrals to other specialized service programs in

almost 17 percent of their interactions with their navigators. Housing, finances, and transportation were

each mentioned in at least 12 percent of interactions. The one other academic issue included among the

12 most frequent topics is transferring to a four-year college, which was discussed in 11 percent of

interactions.

         The fourth component of comprehensive case management is access to emergency financial

assistance (EFA). Students in the STC program are eligible to apply for EFA for non-academic



student. In the spring of 2015, the program supervisor set explicit benchmarks for navigator-student interactions to ensure
fidelity of program implementation. These benchmarks included reciprocal contact (email, text, phone) at least once per
week, in-person meetings every two weeks, and completion of a service planning goal once every three weeks (Ybarra 2016).
                                                             9
expenses or income shortfalls that could negatively impact a student’s persistence in college. EFA is not

meant to constitute an academic grant or scholarship, but rather, to provide the buffer resources that a

low-income student might need to address personal issues and stay in school. The motivation for this

assistance is that for many low-income community college students, small negative shocks like a family

emergency, higher than expected child-care costs, a necessary vehicle repair, or not having a security

deposit for a new apartment, can sometimes have lasting impacts on academic outcomes. It is widely

recognized in other contexts many low-income families live perpetually on the brink of crisis and deep

hardship (Barr and Blank 2009; Shipler 2008). Bertrand et al., (2004) describe this aspect of poverty in

terms of some families having “narrow margins for error.” The EFA is designed to reduce the

vulnerability to negative shocks that many low-income families experience.

        To receive EFA, students must successfully demonstrate both that they have an imminent

financial need and that not meeting this need would be detrimental to their academic progress.

Additional factors that determine whether the event would qualify for assistance include the extent to

which the event is foreseeable, controllable, and temporary. Examples of qualified costs include a car

repair, rent and utilities, a bus pass, or emergency medical care. Eligibility for EFA is restricted to those

students with a cumulative GPA of a 2.0 or higher at TCC (unless they are in their first semester) and

those enrolled in at least 9 credits the semester in which they apply. An individual student could apply

to receive up to $500 per semester, capped at $1,500 total over a three-year period. A program Funds

Coordinator makes determinations for all EFA applications, subject to a supervisor’s review.

Navigators may assist clients in completing the financial assistance application, but they do not attend

the student’s meeting with the Funds Coordinator nor do they intercede with the Funds Coordinator

on behalf of the student. This separation is designed to keep navigators from having to deny financial

assistance from their own clients.

        Based on Funds Coordinator records, over a three-year period, students enrolled into the STC

treatment group (N = 94) submitted 126 requests for EFA, of which 82 percent were approved, with
                                                     10
an average payout of $276. As shown in Figure 2, 29 percent of the requests granted were for

transportation needs, 23 percent for housing, 33 percent for utilities, and 15 percent for other (school

supplies, child care, etc.). About half of the students in the program never applied for any funds, and

less than 10 percent of students collected more than $1,001 over the three-year period. After six

semesters, only one STC student had collected the max amount of $1,500.

B. Comparisons to similar interventions

         STC differs from existing interventions designed to increase college completion. The STC

intervention differs from these other programs in several important ways. Table 2 facilitates a

comparison of features across programs by highlighting the key aspects of four other interventions

evaluated with RCTs alongside STC. We highlight a few unique characteristics of the STC case

management approach here. First, STC comprehensive case management services are more involved

and intensive than those typically available at community colleges, as well as those that have been

offered in previous demonstration projects.12 The services extend beyond academic counseling as

navigators work with each student to develop a personal relationship of trust and help them address

their unique social, financial, academic, and personal impediments to college success. Second, the case

management services provided by STC are provided by trained social workers working for a non-profit

agency outside the community college system. Third, the caseloads for STC navigators are much lower

than those of the typical community college guidance counselor, and are even considerably smaller than

those found in the other highlighted demonstration projects. Fourth, the STC case management

services also include access to emergency financial assistance for non-tuition financial impediments.13

         By way of contrast, the coaching provided as part of the InsideTrack program is limited to

telephone-based coaching. Though coaches also work to help students overcome non-academic “real


12 A study conducted by the American College Counseling Association found that over half of community colleges have

counselor to student ratios between 1:1500 and 1:3500 (Gallagher, 2010).
13 Ultimately, our results suggest that providing EFA alone does not improve academic outcomes. However, this evidence

does not imply that EFA, offered as part of case management services, is ineffective.
                                                           11
life” barriers, it is unlikely that they develop the type of personal mentoring relationships that the STC

navigators work to build. The enhanced student counseling services implemented as part of the “Open

Doors” demonstration were short-term, limited to two semesters, and delivered by college counselors

who did not necessarily have the expertise in dealing with the non-academic issues that trained social

workers help clients address. The enhanced student services in the ASAP program were provided by

community college counselors, who may or may not have offered as much dedicated attention to life

barriers and outside referrals as the STC case managers, but more importantly, in the ASAP program,

those services are embedded in a much larger set of intervention features, including tuition waivers,

blocked classes, and special courses and registration access on campus.



III.    THE RANDOMIZED CONTROL TRIAL

A. The Research Design

        To determine the impact of this comprehensive case management program on persistence and

degree completion, we implemented a randomized controlled trial (RCT) evaluation at Tarrant County

College (TCC), a large community college in Fort Worth, Texas enrolling more than 50,000 students in

associate degree and technical programs across five campuses. TCC students typically come from

disadvantaged backgrounds and have very high dropout rates. Among first-time, degree-seeking

students who entered in fall 2011, only 14.8 percent earned a degree in four years and only 2.6 percent

graduated in two years. The leadership at TCC is aware of this challenge and readily agreed to partner

with the research team and service provider on this intervention and evaluation. TCC provided

dedicated space for the navigators to meet privately with students and provided us with the necessary

administrative data to evaluate the program and to perform the randomization.




                                                    12
         The universe for the sample consisted of the 8,849 students currently enrolled at the Trinity

River campus of TCC in the fall semester of 2013.14 The research demonstration project took place at a

single campus because it was more feasible for CCFW to implement this new intervention on a single

campus. RCT eligibility was limited to students who met the following criteria: 1) enrolled in at least 9

credit hours at TCC; 2) degree seeking; 3) age 18 years or older; 4) satisfied at least 1 Texas Success

Initiative (TSI) standard;15 5) newly enrolled or have earned a Cumulative GPA of at least 2.0 at TCC to

date; 6) accumulated less than 30 credit hours at TCC to date; and 7) Pell eligible or fall below 200% of

the poverty line (based on reported income on the FASFA). Eligibility criteria (1) through (5) are

intended to target students who may feasibly complete a degree in three years. The credit cap in

eligibility criteria (6) is meant to target students who might be at risk of dropping out; a student with

more than 30 credits is perceived to be successfully on a path to graduation. The final eligibility rule is

to target the sample to low-income students. Imposing these eligibility criteria left us with a final study

sample of 1,168 students.

         Table 3 reports summary statistics on all community college students at the national and state

level, all TCC Trinity River Campus students, and finally, STC study participants. Overall, TCC

students are similar to other community college students around the nation, with the exception of TCC

enrolling considerably more Hispanic and part-time students. STC participants differ from typical TCC

students and the average community college student in a few important ways. STC students are more

likely to be female, and are on average more than two years younger than other TCC students. Students

in the study are much more likely to be full time when compared to the rest of the TCC campus and




14 The Trinity River campus, located in downtown Fort Worth, Texas, enrolls nearly 9,000 students each year. It offers

primarily Associate of Arts (AA) degrees, which requires 60 credit hours to complete. Some of the larger programs housed
at the Trinity River campus include Nursing, Surgical Technology, Physical Health Information Technology, Sign Language,
and Service Learning.
15 TCC students are given placement examines (TSIs) in three subjects: math, reading and writing. Failure to pass the TSI

in a subject means that a student starts their community college career in a remedial version of that subject.
                                                           13
much more likely to receive Pell grants when compared to the national average, differences driven by

the eligibility criteria described above.

         At the close of the academic enrollment period on August 20, 2013, the Office of Institutional

Intelligence and Research (OIIR) at TCC extracted data necessary to identify the eligible sample (N =

1,168).16 The research team used these data to randomly assign eligible students into one of three

groups. The randomization procedure is displayed in Figure 3. 430 students were offered the STC

treatment, which included case management and EFA. Another 299 students were assigned to an

EFA-only treatment, while 439 students were assigned to a control group. Students in this final group

received no additional services, but still had full access to any existing college or community services,

just as they would in the absence of this intervention. The study includes two treatment arms to help

determine how much of the effectiveness of the fully implemented program could be achieved with

only the financial assistance feature.17 The EFA treatment group is smaller because the provider had

limited resources to provide this separate treatment arm.

         After randomly assigning each eligible student to one of the three groups, the research team

notified TCC of the results and the college sent specific emails and letters by regular mail, signed by the

president of the college, to each student selected for the different treatment groups.18 These emails and

letters introduced the program and explained that the student had been randomly selected to

participate. TCC also sent a data file to CCFW containing student IDs, names and contact information.

In these communications, selected students were directed to a web page to electronically sign a consent


16 We have continued to enroll and randomize additional students into STC in more recent semesters, but this paper will
focus on the fall 2013 cohort, as this is the only group for which we currently have outcome data six semesters after
enrollment.
17 The EF-only treatment is most comparable to the “Dreamkeepers” program created by Scholarship America

(https://scholarshipamerica.org/dreamkeepers/). That program provides monetary assistance to students who face short-
term financial emergencies. A descriptive review conducted by MDRC examined the outcomes of recipients of
Dreamkeepers funds from 11 different schools in the 2004-2006 period and found that recipients have “disproportionate
need” and were “more academically challenged” than the average student, but their reenrollment rates were roughly
comparable to other students (Geckeler et al., 2008). Though the findings of that report are consistent with the notion that
limited financial assistance can promote persistence, the MDRC study was not an RCT, and the comparisons reported
should not be interpreted as indicative of a causal effect of the program.
18 Copies of these emails and letters are included in the appendix to the paper.

                                                             14
form for services and enroll in the program (http://www.staythecourse-cc.org/). Of the 430 students

offered the STC treatment, 94 students completed the intake process to enroll in STC a take-up rate of

22 percent. The EFA treatment group had 126 students enroll, reflecting a take-up rate of 42 percent.

            The low take up rate of the program appears to have been a feature of the way the RCT was

rolled out. We randomly assigned a treatment/control group status to all eligible students and then

invited them via mailed letters and emails to visit a website and enroll.19 In the second phase of the

program, we reversed the order and invited all eligible students to visit a website and enroll, and then

after enrolling in the demonstration project, students were randomly assigned to a treatment or control

group. This reversed procedure led to a take-up rate of 87.3 percent. We thus do not view the low take-

up rate in phase 1 to suggest that the program itself does not hold appeal to students. That said, it is

likely the case that a new program that is not familiar to students will have a lower take-up rate in early

years as compared to an established program with a reputation on campus as a legitimate source of

support. Importantly, these issues do not threaten the internal validity of the study in any way, but they

are relevant to considerations of how to most effectively roll out such a program and reach the

intended population of students.

            Table 4 provides descriptive information about the students in the study for both treatment

groups and the control group for the fall of 2013. As shown by the p-values in columns 4 and 5, in all

cases the data fail to reject the hypothesis that the mean characteristics are the same, when comparing

either of the treatment groups to the control group, indicating that the randomization procedure

generated appropriate balance across groups.

B. Data and Methods

            Our empirical analysis relies on student-level administrative school records provided to us from

TCC. A few months after the end of each semester, OIIR at TCC sent the research team a file



19   The college would not allow us to text students on mobile devices.
                                                               15
containing the student baseline characteristics that were used to determine eligibility, additional

characteristics used in the analyses, and academic outcomes. Through TCC we were able to link these

records to data from the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC), which allows us to observe whether a

student transfers to a two- or four-year college and completes a degree at another post-secondary

institution.20

     The outcomes we consider include:

        Enrolled in College: An indicator for whether a student was enrolled in classes at TCC or any

         other NSC reporting institution at the start of the relevant semester, which is defined as spring

         2016 in six-semester results, spring 2015 in four-semester results, and spring 2014 in two-

         semester results. For the two- and four-semester results, we will also look at enrollment at TCC

         as a separate outcome as fewer students have transferred to a different college by that point.

        Total Credits Earned: The cumulative number of college credits that a student has earned by

         the end of the relevant semester. Because we only observe credits earned for students while

         they are enrolled at TCC, we impute credits for students who are enrolled elsewhere using the

         average credits earned by students in the study who are still enrolled at TCC in the current

         semester.

        Cumulative GPA: Cumulative TCC GPA by the end of the relevant semester.

        Earned any Degree: An indicator for whether a student earned a degree (certificate,

         associate’s, or bachelor’s) at TCC or any other NSC reporting institution by the end of the

         relevant semester.




20The National Student Clearinghouse is a nonprofit organization that works with more than 3,600 post-secondary
institutions to provide data on student enrollment and degree completion. The NSC participating colleges enroll 98% of all
post-secondary students in the U.S. (http://www.studentclearinghouse.org/about/).
                                                            16
        Earned an Associate’s Degree: An indicator for whether a student earned an associate’s

         degree at TCC or any other NSC reporting institution by the end of the relevant semester.21



         Because we are utilizing random assignment, we measure the impact of STC by comparing

outcomes for students in the treatment and control groups. We estimate the differences in outcomes

using a standard intent-to-treat (ITT) model:

         yi =β0 + Tiβ1 + Xiβ2 + εi                                                                             (1)

where yi is an indicator for one of our outcome measures for student i in the semester of interest, T

equals 1 if the respondent is in the relevant treatment group and zero otherwise, and i is an individual-

level error term that is assumed to be i.i.d. The vector Xi includes a set of person-level characteristics:

age, age squared, gender, whether a student is Black, Asian or a different race, whether the student is

Hispanic, the number of basics skills assessments the student has passed at entry, family income, and

family income squared from the student’s FASFA form. When measuring the effect of the full STC

intervention, the estimation sample includes the STC treatment group and the control group; it

excludes students in the EFA treatment group. When measuring the effect of EFA, the estimation

sample includes the EFA treatment group and the control group; it excludes students in STC treatment

group.

         Our main results focus on outcome measures six semesters after enrollment in the study, but to

examine how any impact of the intervention changes over time, we also report some shorter-term

results. Because many students assigned to the treatment groups do not participate in services (the take-

up rate was 22 percent for the STC treatment group and 42 percent for the EFA treatment group), we




21While we also have data on whether a student has completed a certificate or a bachelor’s degree, we do not report these
outcomes separately because they occur infrequently—after 6 semesters less than 3 percent of the sample had obtained a
certificate, and just over 1 percent had obtained a BA degree.
                                                            17
also estimate the effect of the intervention for those who participate, or the treatment-on-the-treated

(TOT) effect. Specifically, we estimate:

         yi =γ0 + Piγ1 + Xiγ2 + ηi                                                                            (2)

where Pi is an indicator for participation in the program. We estimate these effects via an instrumental

variable (IV) model, using assignment to treatment (Ti) as an instrument for participation in the

program (Pi). Program participation (or take-up) is defined as attending the intake meeting and

completing an intake form.



IV.      SIX SEMESTER RESULTS

         Table 5 reports the six-semester results associated with the STC intervention. We report results

for the full sample, as well as separately by gender. For each outcome, we report both ITT and TOT

effects. As a benchmark for the magnitude of these effects, we report the mean of each outcome for

the control group in the ITT columns and the control complier mean (CCM) in the TOT columns. The

CCM is calculated as the mean of the outcome for the compliers (those who take-up the treatment) in

the treatment group less the IV estimate.22

         STC has a large effect on persistence in school after six semesters, but the estimate is only

significant at the 10 percent level. The point estimate indicates that students in the treatment group are

5.6 percentage points more likely to be enrolled in school after six semesters. The TOT estimate

indicates that those who participate in STC are 25.1 percentage points more likely to persist, more than

double the CCM. For the full sample, all the other estimates are positive, indicating improved outcomes

for the treatment group, but none of these estimates are statistically significant.



22 For binary outcomes, sampling variation can produce negative estimates of the CCM. For these cases we report the CCM

as zero, following (Kling, Liebman, and Katz, 2007). To determine the nature of selection into take-up based on observable
characteristics, we examine the mean characteristics of treatment compliers and non-compliers respectively (Appendix Table
1). Students who take up the program tend to be slightly older, but overall the mean characteristics of compliers and non-
compliers are very similar. We observe that those who take up the program have a slightly lower propensity score of earning
a degree ex ante, though the difference is not statistically significant.
                                                            18
        The positive effect of STC is driven by females. Females assigned to the STC treatment group

are 8.4 percentage points more likely to still be enrolled in college after six semesters than females in

the control group, and this difference is statistically significant. The TOT estimate (35.8 percentage

points) indicates that female program participants were nearly four times more likely to persist in

college relative to the CCM. Through six semesters, we also see that females in the treatment group

have accumulated more total credits, although this effect is only marginally significant.

        There is a large and statistically significant effect on completing an associate’s degree for

females. Three years after enrollment in the study, females in the treatment group are 7.4 percentage

points more likely to have completed an associate’s degree than females in the control group,

corresponding to a TOT effect of 31.5 percentage points. There is little evidence of a positive effect of

STC participation for male students, and at the 10% level, we can reject the hypothesis that the effect is

the same for females and males.

        We also investigate whether there are heterogeneous treatment effects by other key student

characteristics. Table 6a reports results separately for white and non-white students and separately for

those with family income above and below the STC sample median ($18,500). Those in the STC

treatment group with family income greater than the median family income of the study sample are 8.3

percentage points (standard error 4.8) more likely to stay enrolled in classes anywhere through their

sixth semester (Table 6a, column 3), which implies a TOT effect of 44.1 percentage points. The ITT

estimate on this same outcome for students with lower levels of family income implies a much smaller,

2.4 percentage point increase (standard error 4.7). Given the standard errors, we cannot reject similar

effects across income groups.

        The estimated effects for non-white students are generally similar to what we report for the full

sample in Table 5, which is not surprising given that about 70 percent of the sample is non-white. The

estimated TOT effect for non-white students implies a 31.8 percentage point increase in the likelihood

of being enrolled anywhere after six semesters (standard error 18.1). When we limit the sample to
                                                     19
whites, the estimated TOT estimate is very small (2.3 percentage points) but with a standard error ten

times that size. Given the large standard error associated with that estimate, we cannot reject the null

that there are similar effects by race.

        In the first four columns of Table 6b, we report estimates based on whether students had more

or fewer initial credit hours than the median at enrollment (10 credit hours). Our motivation for

looking separately by credit hours was to observe whether students who were further along the

education process had a different treatment effect. Perhaps students with more credits when enrolled

may not need as much help because they were further along. Alternatively, these same students might

be more likely to be on the margin of completing a degree, and comprehensive case management

provides the critical support needed to graduate. Point estimates indicate large TOT effects for both

groups but neither are statistically significant. Overall, the data do not indicate any persistent

differences across students based on this simple cut of the data.

        In the second half of the table, we consider whether results vary based on “outcome

propensity,” or the estimated probability to achieve a particular outcome of interest (i.e. earning a

degree) based on baseline characteristics. We implement the repeated split sampling (RSS) method

proposed by Abadie et al. (2013).23 Under RSS, the control group is randomly divided in half and one

half of the group is used to generate the prediction equation. These estimates are applied to the

treatment group and the other half of the control group. This split sample is repeated multiple times.

The estimated treatment effect is the simple average across these iterations. Standard errors are

calculated by bootstrap subsamples of the split samples. In Abadie et al. (2013), the first-stage equation

is estimated by OLS for the outcome regardless of whether the outcome is continuous or dichotomous.

This equation is called the prognosis score. In our work, we use a logit model when the outcome of


23 This method builds on the practice of testing for heterogeneous treatment effects by propensity score, where

the propensity score for the full sample is constructed based on estimated betas from an initial comparison
group. Abadie et al. (2013) demonstrate that this approach is systematically biased in favor of finding the largest
effects for the lowest probability group.
                                                         20
interest is dichotomous and generate a propensity score, and use the prognosis score when the outcome

is continuous. We use 1000 split samples to calculate means and a 100 bootstrap iterations for each

split sample to calculate standard errors.

        Results for the subsamples indicate that STC is particularly effective for students with higher

baseline propensity scores of success. Among those in the top tercile of propensities to be enrolled in

school, students assigned to the STC treatment group are 11.8 percentage points more likely to still be

enrolled in college after six semesters (TOT estimate 65.7 with a standard error of 29.9). For those in

the top tercile, STC also appears to increase total accumulated credits and the likelihood of earning a

degree, but these estimates are only statistically significant at the 10 percent level. In general, the results

for those in the lower and middle thirds indicate that STC had little effect on academic outcomes for

these groups (Table 6b, column 5-8). However, given the large standard errors on the estimated

treatment effects these subgroups, we cannot reject the hypotheses that the effects of STC is the same

across terciles.

        All of the analysis discussed up to this point has focused on the differences in outcomes

between the STC treatment group, which was offered comprehensive case management and access to

emergency financial assistance, and the control group. Our research design also allows us to directly

estimate the effect of providing only emergency financial assistance, by comparing the EFA treatment

group to the control group. We report these results in Table 7 for the same outcomes reported above.

After six semesters, those who had access to emergency financial assistance earned degrees and

remained enrolled in classes at remarkably similar rates to the control group. We find no statistically

significant differences in outcomes in the overall sample or for the male and female subsamples. In

nearly all cases, the point estimates are small, and in many cases they are negative. However, given the

standard errors we are unable to reject the hypothesis of small positive effects.

        Although this evidence suggests that EFA itself does not have a sizeable impact on persistence

and degree completion in community college, this does not mean that EFA is not an effective
                                                      21
component of comprehensive case management. We have not tested case management with EFA

against case management without EFA, which is what would be needed to draw such a conclusion.



V.     TWO- AND FOUR-SEMESTER RESULTS

       Because we have received outcome data from TCC each semester, we are able to examine how

the impact of STC evolves over time. Comparing short- and medium-term outcomes helps us

understand whether the intervention has an immediate impact or whether effects appear more

gradually. Many community college students drop out after just one or two semesters, so an

intervention like STC has the potential to affect outcomes nearly immediately. In our study sample,

about 20 percent of students drop out by the end of the second semester.

       Table 8 reports two semester results for the same five outcomes as reported after six semesters

in Table 5, plus the additional outcome of whether the student is enrolled at TCC. We do not report

this outcome with the six-semester results because by six semesters after enrollment in the study many

students have transferred to a different school. After just two semesters, however, less than 1.5% of the

study sample is enrolled at a post-secondary institution other than TCC, so enrollment at TCC captures

college enrollment status for most of the students.

       The data indicate that after two semesters not enough time has passed for students to obtain a

degree—only 0.7 percent of the control group has completed a degree by this point. It is not surprising

that we find no effect on degree completion for the full sample or for the female and male subsamples.

However, the data indicate that two semesters is enough time to observe an effect on intermediate

outcomes. The TOT estimate for enrolled in classes at TCC indicates that STC participation leads to a

28.9 percentage point increase (standard error 12.1). In terms of gender comparisons, the data already

start to show some indication that the effect is stronger for females. When looking at whether the

student is enrolled anywhere, however, we do not see a noticeable difference between the treatment

and control groups after two-semesters. It appears that after only two semesters, STC is effective at
                                                      22
keeping kids from transferring from TCC, but not necessarily at increasing overall persistence in

community college. We also find that the treatment group has accumulated more credits. STC

participants have nearly 5 more credit hours (the equivalent of 1.66 additional classes), but this

difference is marginally significant.

        Table 9 reports four-semester results, which includes the summer between years one and two, a

time during which many community college students drop out. This is evident in our four-semester

results, by which point more than half the sample is no longer at TCC, and only about three-fifths of

the sample is still enrolled in school. After four semesters, we still see the positive effect on credit hours

that was evident after two semesters. However, we still see no effect of STC on degree completion or

enrollment at any college, and we no longer see an effect of STC on enrollment at TCC.

        Together, our results after two, four, and six semesters indicate that the intervention did not

have a meaningful impact on enrollment in college or degree completion until after six semesters. This

suggests that the STC intervention is more effective at keeping students in school after they have been

enrolled for several semesters than it is at preventing dropouts in the short-run. Perhaps this is because

it takes time for the navigators and students to develop the relationship that allows comprehensive

coaching and mentoring to have a substantive impact on persistence and completion, so the impact of

these efforts on success in school is not evident until after a few years.

        Another possible explanation is related to the implementation of the program. Throughout the

course of this intervention, the provider has been monitoring what services the navigators provide and

the form of the interactions in an effort to ensure fidelity of implementation. In the Spring 2015

semester, the provider re-emphasized to the navigators the importance of regular, direct interaction

with their students, and case notes indicate a rise in student-navigator interactions after this point. This

increased engagement may have contributed to the impact of the program after six semesters.




                                                     23
VI.         DISCUSSION

A. Estimated benefit-to-cost ratio

            Because STC is a “heavy touch” intervention with relatively high per-student costs, it is

important to consider the positive effects of the program alongside the costs. The total cost per student

for three years of STC case management (including access to EFA) is $5,640, or $1,880 per year.24

This cost includes STC staff salary (manager, navigators, and an EFA coordinator), fringe benefits,

training, and EFA payouts. To measure program benefits, we plan to follow the students in this RCT

demonstration project for additional years and link their student records to administrative earnings

records. We will then compare the causal impact estimates on earnings to the program costs. However,

until enough time has elapsed, we cannot calculate a benefit-to-cost ratio based on realized earnings.

Instead, we conduct a back-of-the-envelope calculation using average earnings differences observed in

national survey data.

            The TOT estimate for the full sample from Table 5 indicates that STC increased the probability

an enrolled client received an associate’s degrees by 16 percentage points. Data from the 2015 five-year

American Communities Survey (ACS) for individuals age 25-39 indicate that those with an associate’s

degree earn about $7,050/year more than people with less than a year of college education.25 In

addition, the TOT estimate suggests that STC participation increases enrollment in school after six

semesters by 25 percentage points. Some of this increase is the result of students who persist in order

to obtain a degree, so we net out the additional persistence that comes from degree completion (i.e.

0.25 – 0.16 = 0.09), and assume greater persistence means enrolling in college beyond one year. This

implies that for each additional treated student who does not earn an associate’s degree, 0.09 more

students persist in school beyond one year. The same ACS data used above show that individuals with




24   This cost estimate assumes that each navigator has a caseload of 34.
25   We use the IPUMS.org version of the ACS (Ruggles et al., 2015).
                                                               24
at least a year of college (without an associate’s degree) earn about $2,200 more than people with less

than a full year of college.

        Combining these estimated returns to community college with our estimates from the full

sample indicates that treating an additional student increases annual earnings by 0.16*$7,050 +

0.09*$2,200 = $1,326. Comparing this benefit to the total three-year program cost of $5,640, indicates

that program costs are offset by increased earnings in about 4.25 years. This estimate overstates the

pay-back period as it does not allow for the possibility that those with an associate’s degree eventually

earn a bachelor’s degree. Nor does it consider benefits to a degree beyond earnings. On the other hand,

this simple calculation only accounts for direct program costs, and does not attempt to consider the

opportunity cost of any foregone wages while attending schools. Making such adjustments will lead to a

pay-back period that is larger or smaller, but the main takeaway will remain, which is that the costs of

this program are fairly small as compared to a reasonable assumption about lifetime earnings increases

associated with higher educational attainment.

B. Additional interpretation issues

        The results for STC raise three critical questions. First, why is there strong evidence of a

positive effect for females, but not for males? Second, why did the EFA program not yield any

discernible benefits? Third, are these results replicable? We offer some speculative observations here.

        The finding of sizable positive effects of this intervention for females but no statistically

significant effects for males is consistent with findings from other similar types of interventions.

Angrist et al. (2009) found a larger positive effect of the Project STAR intervention for females. Carroll

and Sacerdote (2017) implemented a college-going mentoring programs for high school students,

focusing on helping more students enroll in college, and found that the program leads to large increases

in college enrollment rates among female students, but much smaller effects for males. Like those

authors, we can only speculate as to what might be driving the difference. One obvious issue in the

STC evaluation is that all case managers in the program were female. This was not by design, but rather
                                                     25
a consequence of the social work profession, from which STC navigators are drawn, being

overwhelmingly dominated by females. Perhaps a program that so heavily relies on personal connection

is more effective when the mentor/mentee pair is of the same gender.26

         We conjectured that perhaps females would be more likely to meet with their case managers,

both because they would be more comfortable talking with a female and because they would have been

more likely to have participated in safety net programs and interacted with a case manager previously.

Females are slightly more likely than males to take-up the offer of participating in STC (23.3% versus

19.3%), but case notes on student/navigator interactions reveal little difference in these interactions by

gender. Male students appear no less likely to have met with their navigator than female students. Still,

perhaps females were more likely to take navigator’s advice to heart, even if they received advice in

roughly equal measure. Future implementations of the program would benefit from the recruitment of

male caseworkers to the navigator role so that this hypothesis could be explored. However, all this

should be considered with the caveat that the results for males are statistically imprecise. There may, in

fact, have been a positive effect for some males. A large sample size of treated male students would

likely yield better insight into whether this type of a program tends to be effective for male students.

         The finding of no discernible benefit associated with access to EFA without associated case

management raises the possibility that such an intervention is only effective if it is offered in

conjunction with additional services. These results suggest that giving very low income students access

to cash aid without the requirement or benefit of having a case manager to help address the causes of

the underlying financial distress is not sufficient. Perhaps with a less disadvantaged population, a one-

time infusion of cash could help, but for students in our low-income sample, we found no evidence

that having access to up to $1,500 to cover non-tuition financial shocks increased either enrollment


26 Interestingly, the ASAP program yielded similar benefits for men and women. But as described above, that program is not

just a case management program, but also includes tuition benefits and academic and classroom features. The contrast
between the gender similarity in the ASAP program and the gender differences in the mentoring programs suggests that the
greater effect for females is specific for mentoring programs.
                                                           26
persistence or degree attainment. We also stress that our study is not able to shed light on whether EFA

is a critical aspect of case management. There might be important interactions between the coaching

and mentoring aspects of STC and the ability of case managers to offer limited financial help. This is

something future work should investigate.

        Replicability is a key concern with any successful but small scale RCT. STC was designed with

the goal of subsequent replication. The research team has worked closely with our implementing

partners over the past three years to document the key aspects of the program such as how to train

navigators and how much to expect to pay in the way of EFA so the program can be replicated. We

are collaborating with the implementing agency partner, CCFW, to roll out the program in an RCT

context on other college campuses in Fort Worth. In addition, we are in the process of working with

other social service agencies outside of Fort Worth to implement the program with an RCT research

design on other campuses. It will be instructive to investigate whether the results are reproduced with a

different implementing agency, with a different student population, and in a different community

college setting.

        A related replication question is whether it is fundamental to the effectiveness of the

intervention that the program is implemented by a third-party non-profit rather than community

college counselors. We offer the observation that the implementing agency, CCFW, considers

individualized case management to be their comparative advantage. To the best of our understanding,

this tends not to be the particular focus or training of community college counselors. Perhaps that

dedicated focus is what makes this application of the program so effective. If individuals without a

background in social work, or with a different background in social work, were to serve as navigators,

the results might be different. Again, this points to a need for replication to learn under what contexts

specifically such a program can be expected to generate beneficial effects for students.




                                                    27
VII.    CONCLUSION

        This paper has investigated whether a case-management intervention could increase the rates of

enrollment persistence and degree completion among low-income community college students. To

study this question, we conducted an RCT evaluation of the STC intervention. The main elements of

this program are comprehensive case management – including mentoring, coaching, referrals, and

limited access to emergency financial assistance – conducted by a trained social worker with a caseload

of no more than 34 students at a time. The paper has described an RCT evaluation of this program

implemented by the research team in partnership with a local social service agency at a community

college campus in Fort Worth, Texas.

        The results indicate sizable increases in school persistence and degree completion through six

semesters, driven by female students. Intention-to-treat estimates based on regression-adjusted

differences between females randomly assigned to case management services and those randomly

assigned to a control group show a 7.4 percentage point increase in the likelihood of earning an

associate’s degree (standard error of 3.3), off a control group mean of 15.7 percent. This translates into

a treatment-on-the-treated effect of 31.5 percentage points (standard error of 14.1).

        Point estimates for the full sample of females and males combined are positive, but not

statistically significant. We report a back-of-the-envelope calculation that takes as program benefits the

point estimates for the full sample combined with projected earnings increases. This simple calculation

suggests that the benefits of the program, as captured by increased earnings, exceeds the per-student

costs ($5,640 total for three years of enrollment) after only 4.25 years in the workforce post schooling.

There is no evidence of a positive effect of a limited version of the program that only offered access to

emergency financial assistance (EFA) without associated case management services. We offer

speculative explanations above for why the program was particularly effective for females and why the

EFA-only treatment did not lead to positive outcomes.


                                                    28
       This paper contributes to multiple literatures. First, it contributes to the literature on college

completion, in particular, the sets of studies focusing on ways to increase college completion rates

among low-income students. As noted in the introduction, income gaps in college completion have

widened despite expansions to the Pell Grant program that have made financial aid more generous for

low-income families. Research and policy attention to this challenge has tended to focus on

interventions run through community colleges themselves, in particular, academic programs and

enhanced school counseling. The research demonstration project studied in this paper is novel in that it

is an comprehensive case-management program run by a third party non-profit with a particular

expertise in case management.

       The paper contributes more generally to the literature on anti-poverty strategies and ways to

effectively help individuals achieve economic self-sufficiency. This paper has demonstrated that case

management can be a cost-effective way to increase rates of educational persistence and degree

completion among poor and near poor students. Future work will follow these same students to

investigate longer term effects on earnings. A supplementary project being conducted by a subset of the

research team is investigating the effectiveness of case management in improving a wide variety of

economic outcomes for a non-student population in the same community. Together, this body of

research will contribute to our collective knowledge about the types of barriers facing low-income

individuals and the most cost-effective ways of helping them achieve economic security.




                                                    29
References

Abadie, Alberto, Matthew M. Chingos, and Martin R. West. Endogenous stratification in randomized
       experiments. No. w19742. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2013.
Angrist, Joshua, Daniel Lang, and Phil Oreopoulos. 2009. “Incentives and Services for College
        Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
        1(1): 136-163.
Attewell, P., Lavin, D., Domina, T., & Levey, T. (2006). New evidence on college remediation. The
       Journal of Higher Education, 77(5), 886-924.
Bailey, Thomas, Davis Jenkins, and Timothy Leinbach. 2005. "What We Know About Community
        College Low-Income and Minority Student Outcomes: Descriptive Statistics from National
        Surveys." Columbia University, Teachers College, Community College Research Center.
Bailey, Thomas. 2009. "Challenge and Opportunity: Rethinking the Role and Function of
        Developmental Education in Community College." New Directions for Community Colleges
        2009(145): 11-30.
Barr, Andrew, and Benjamin Castleman. 2017. "The Bottom Line on College Counseling." Working
       Paper.
Barr, Michael and Rebecca Blank. 2009. Insufficient Funds: Savings, Assets, Credit, and Banking
       Among Low-Income Households. New Rork: Russell Sage Foundation.
Baime, D. S., & Mullin, C. M. (2011). Promoting educational opportunity: The Pell Grant program at
       community colleges. Washington, DC: AACC Policy Brief.
Baum, Sandy, and Judith Scott-Clayton. 2013. "Redesigning the Pell Grant Program for the Twenty-
       First Century." The Hamilton Project, Discussion Paper 2013-04.
Bertrand, Marianne, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Eldar Shafir. 2004. "A Behavioral-Economics View of
       Poverty." American Economic Review 94(2): 419-423.
Bettinger, Eric P., and Rachel B. Baker. 2014. “The Effects of Student Coaching: An Evaluation of a
       Randomized Experiment in Student Advising.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 36(1): 3-
       19.
Bound, John, Michael Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner. 2010. “Why Have College Completion Rates
       Declined? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate Resources,” American
       Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2: 129-157.
Carrell, Scott and Bruce Sacerdote. 2017. “Why do college-going interventions work?” American
         Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9(3): 124-151.
Deming, David. 2017. “Increasing College Completion with a Federal Higher Education Matching
      Grant.” The Hamilton Project.
Deming, David and Christopher Walters. 2017. “The Impact of Price Caps and Spending Cuts on U.S.
      Postsecondary Attainment,” NBER working paper 23736.
"Diploma to Nowhere." Strong American Schools. (2008).
Gallagher, Robert. 2010. “National Survey of Counseling Center Directors 2010.” The International
       Association of Counseling Services, Inc.


                                                   30
Geckeler, Christian, Carrie Beach, Michael Pih, and Leo Yan. 2008. "Helping Community College
       Students Cope with Financial Emergencies: Lessons from the Dreamkeepers and Angel Fund
       Emergency Financial Aid Programs." DMRC.
Grubb, W. Norton. 2006. “’Like, what do I do now?’: The Dilemmas of Guidance Counseling.” In T.
       Bailey and V. Morest (Eds.), Defending the Community College Equity Agenda. Baltimore,
       MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 195-222.
Hiler, Tamara, and Lanae Erickson Hatalsky. 2016. “What Free Won’t Fix: Too Many Public Colleges
        are Dropout Factories.” Third Way.
Holzer, Harry and Sandy Baum. 2017. “Making College Work: Pathways to Success for Disadvantaged
       Students.” Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Jepsen, Christopher, Troske, Kenneth and Coomes, Paul. 2014. “The Labor-Market Returns to
        Community College Degrees, Diplomas, and Certificates.” Journal of Labor Economics, 32, issue 1,
        p. 95 - 121.
Johnson, Jean, Jon Rochkind, Amber Ott, and Samantha DuPont. 2011. "With Their Whole Lives
       Ahead of Them: Myths and Realities About Why So Many Students Fail to Finish College."
       Public Agenda. http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED507432.pdf
Kane, Thomas, and Cecilia Rouse. 1995. "Labor-Market Returns to Two and Four-Year College."
       American Economic Review 1983(3): 11-30.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. "Experimental Analysis of
        Neighborhood Effects." Econometrica 75(1): 83-119.
Long, Bridget Terry. 2014. “Addressing the Academic Barriers to Higher Education,” in Policies to
       Address Poverty in America, ed. Melissa S. Kearney and Benjamin H. Harris. Brookings Institution,
       The Hamilton Project.
Marcotte, Dave E., Thomas Bailey, Carey Borkoski, and Greg S. Kienzl. 2005. “The Returns of a
       Community College Education: Evidence from the National Education Longitudinal Survey.”
       Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, v 27, n.2, pp 157-176.
Marcotte, Dave. 2016. "The Returns to Education at Community Colleges: New Evidence from the
       Education Longitudinal Survey." IZA Discussion Papers 10202, Institute for the Study of Labor
       (IZA).
Martorell, Paco and Isaac McFarlin Jr. 2011. “Help or Hindrance? The Effects of College Remediation
       on Academic and Labor Market Outcomes,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93:2, 436-454.
National Student Clearinghouse. 2017. Web site: www.studentclearinghouse.com.
Richburg-Hayes, Lashawn, et al. "Rewarding persistence: Effects of a performance-based scholarship
       program for low-income parents." (2009).
Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek. Integrated Public
       Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2015.
       http://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V6.0.
Scott-Clayton, Judith. 2011. "The Shapeless River: Does a Lack of Structure Inhibit Students' Progress
       at Community Colleges." Columbia University, Teachers College, Community College Research
       Center Working Paper No. 25.



                                                   31
Scrivener, Susan, Michael J. Weiss, Alyssa Ratledge, Timothy Rudd, Colleen Sommo and Hannah
       Freaques. 2015. "Doubling graduation rates: Three-year effects of CUNY's Accelerated Study in
       Associate Programs (ASAP) for Developmental Education Students."
Scrivener, Susan, and Michael J. Weiss. 2009. "More Guidance, Better Results?: Three-Year Effects of
       an Enhanced Student Services Program at Two Community Colleges." New York: MDRC.
Shipler, David K. The working poor: Invisible in America. Vintage, 2008.Stevens, Ann H., Michael
        Kurlaender, and Michel Grosz. 2015. “Career Technical Education and Labor Market
        Outcomes: Evidence from California Community Colleges.” NBER Working Paper 21137.
U.S. Department of Education. 2016. National Center for Education Statistics, NCES-2016-112rev.
       “Postsecondary Institutions and Cost of Attendance in 2015-16; Degrees and Other Awards
       Conferred, 2014-15; and 12-Month Enrollment”:
       https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2016/2016112rev.pdf.
U.S. Department of Education. 2013. National Center for Education Statistics, NCES-2013-037. “The
       Condition of Education 2013.” https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2013/2013037.pdf.
U.S. Department of Education. 2010. National Center for Education Statistics, NCES-2011-151:
       “Persistence and Attainment of 2003-04 Beginning Postsecondary Students: After 6 Years”:
       https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2011/2011151.pdf.
van der Steeg, Marc, Roel van Elk, Dinand Webbink. 2015. “Does Intensive Coaching Reduce School
       Dropout? Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.” Economics of Education Review
       48(October): 184-197.
Ybarra, Marci. 2016. “An Implementation Study of Stay the Course, 2013-2015.” University of Chicago
        Working Paper.




                                                 32
Appendix: Correspondence used to enroll study participants into treatment

The following letters and emails were sent to eligible students who were assigned to one of the two
treatment arms. The letters were printed on Trinity River letterhead and mailed in TCC marked
envelopes. The emails were sent via the college’s mass communication system and therefore appeared
to the students as emails from TCC. The initial letters and emails are below. Similar emails reminding
eligible students about the opportunity to participate were sent periodically throughout the enrollment
window.

Solicitation Emails

Email 1 (Sent to the students assigned to the full Stay the Course treatment):

       Dear Student,

       You have been selected to participate in an exciting new opportunity at Trinity River Campus
       called Stay the Course. Designed to help students persist in school and attain their degrees, this
       program is being offered at no cost to you through a partnership with Catholic Charities Fort
       Worth, a major non-profit in the Fort Worth community. Stay the Course is part of a research
       project, and due to limited funding, only a small number of Trinity River students have been
       selected to participate. Through a lottery, you were chosen to participate. Eligibility for this
       program cannot be transferred to another student.

       As a participant in Stay the Course, you will have the opportunity to work with a Navigator on
       campus to assist you in dealing with the many obstacles that students often face as they
       progress through college. The Navigator will also work with you to develop a personalized Path
       to Graduation.

       Another tremendous benefit of Stay the Course is access to financial assistance to assist you in
       overcoming unexpected financial hardships that threaten your ability to stay enrolled in school.
       If you enroll in the program, you will be eligible for up to $500 of assistance per semester, with
       a cap of $1500 that you can receive over the next three years of enrollment at TCC.

       To sign up, please visit the Stay the Course website at staythecourse-cc.org. Your unique login
       information for the site is as follows:

                       USERNAME: Student ID #
                       PASSWORD: […]

       To participate in Stay the Course, you must sign up by September 9, 2013. If you would like to
       remove yourself from our contact list, you can opt-out of the program at any time by logging
       into the Stay the Course website and selecting “opt out.”

       To learn more, please attend one of the Stay the Course information sessions in the Speed Room
       (TRTR 4207, 4th Floor) on the Trinity River Campus on August 28th at 9am or August 29th at
       4pm. Light refreshments will be served. Stay the Course staff will be there to explain how the


                                                    33
       program works and to help you enroll. In the meantime, if you have any questions about the
       program, please contact the Stay the Course staff at [#].

       We at Trinity River Campus are excited to be the first TCC campus participating in this
       program and encourage you to take full advantage of this unique opportunity.

       Sincerely,

       [College President]

Email 2 (Sent to the students assigned to the Emergency Financial Assistance only treatment):

       Dear Student,

       You have been selected to participate in an exciting new opportunity at Trinity River Campus
       called Stay the Course Fund. The program is designed to assist students in overcoming unexpected
       financial hardships that threaten their ability to stay enrolled in school. It is being offered at no
       cost to you through a partnership with Catholic Charities Fort Worth, a major non-profit in the
       Fort Worth community. Stay the Course Fund is part of a research project, and due to limited
       funding, only a small number of Trinity River students have been selected to participate.
       Through a lottery, you were chosen to participate. Eligibility for this program cannot be
       transferred to another student.

       As a participant in Stay the Course Fund, you will have access to financial assistance to help you
       overcome unexpected financial hardships that threaten your ability to stay enrolled in school. If
       you enroll in the program, you will be eligible for up to $500 of assistance per semester, with a
       cap of $1500 that you can receive over the next three years of enrollment at TCC. If you would
       like to be eligible for this $1500 of financial assistance, you must enroll in Stay the Course Fund by
       September 9, 2013.

       To sign up, first visit the Stay the Course Fund website at staythecourse-cc.org. Your unique login
       information for the site is as follows:

                       USERNAME: Student ID #
                       PASSWORD: […]

       To complete the enrollment process, you must pick up a Stay the Course Fund welcome packet.
       These packets are available on the Trinity River Campus in room TREF 6402 during normal
       business hours. If you would like to remove yourself from our contact list, you can opt-out of
       the program at any time by logging into Stay the Course Fund website and selecting “opt out.”

       To learn more, please attend one of the Stay the Course Fund information sessions in the Speed
       Room (TRTR 4207, 4th floor) on the Trinity River Campus on August 28th at 4pm or August
       29th at 9am. Light refreshments will be served. Stay the Course Fund staff will be there to explain
       how the program works and to help you enroll. You may also pick up your welcome packet at
       this event. In the meantime, if you have any questions about the program, please contact the
       Stay the Course Fund staff at [#].


                                                    34
       We at Trinity River Campus are excited to be the first TCC campus participating in this
       program and encourage you to take full advantage of this unique opportunity.


       Sincerely,

       [College President]

Solicitation Letters

Letter 1 (Sent to the students assigned to the full Stay the Course treatment):

       Dear Student,

       This letter is to follow up on an email you recently received regarding your eligibility to
       participate in an exciting new opportunity at Trinity River Campus called Stay the Course. This
       program is designed to help students persist in school and attain their degrees. It is being
       offered at no cost to you through a partnership with Catholic Charities Fort Worth, a major
       non-profit in the Fort Worth community. Stay the Course is part of a research project, and due
       to limited funding, only a small number of Trinity River students were selected to participate.
       Through a lottery, you were chosen to participate. Eligibility for this program cannot be
       transferred to another student.

       As a participant in Stay the Course, you will have the opportunity to work with a Navigator who
       is here to assist you in dealing with the many obstacles that students often face as they progress
       through college. The Navigator will also work with you to develop a personalized Path to
       Graduation.

       Another tremendous benefit of Stay the Course is access to financial assistance to help you
       overcome unexpected financial hardships that threaten your ability to stay enrolled in school. If
       you enroll in the program, you will be eligible for up to $500 of assistance per semester, with a
       cap of $1500 that you can receive over the next three years of enrollment at TCC.

       To enroll, please visit the Stay the Course website at staythecourse-cc.org. Your unique login
       information for the site is as follows:

       USERNAME: Student ID #
       PASSWORD: […]

       To participate in Stay the Course, you must enroll by September 9, 2013. If you would like to
       remove yourself from our contact list, you can opt-out of the program at any time by logging
       into the Stay the Course website and selecting “opt out.”



                                                    35
       To learn more, please attend one of the Stay the Course information sessions in the Speed Room
       (TRTR 4207, 4th Floor) on the Trinity River Campus on August 28th at 9am or August 29th at
       4pm. Light refreshments will be served. Stay the Course staff will be there to explain how the
       program works and to help you enroll. In the meantime, if you have any questions about the
       program, please contact the Stay the Course staff at [#].

       We at Trinity River Campus are excited to be the first TCC campus participating in this
       program and encourage you to take full advantage of this unique opportunity.

       Sincerely,

       [TCC President]


Letter 2 (Sent to the students assigned to the Emergency Financial Assistance only treatment):

       Dear Student,

       This letter is to follow up on an email you recently received regarding your eligibility to
       participate in an exciting new opportunity at Trinity River Campus called Stay the Course Fund.
       This program is designed to assist students overcome financial hardships they may face during
       their college careers. It is being offered at no cost to you through a partnership with Catholic
       Charities Fort Worth, a major non-profit in the Fort Worth community. Stay the Course Fund is
       part of a research project, and due to limited funding, only a small number of Trinity River
       students have been selected to participate. Through a lottery, you were chosen to participate.
       Eligibility for this program cannot be transferred to another student.

       As a participant in Stay the Course Fund, you will have access to financial assistance to help you
       overcome unexpected financial hardships that threaten your ability to stay enrolled in school. If
       you enroll in the program, you will be eligible for up to $500 of assistance per semester, with a
       cap of $1500 that you can receive over the next three years of enrollment at TCC. If you would
       like to be eligible for this $1500 of financial assistance, you must enroll in Stay the Course Fund by
       September 9, 2013.

       To enroll, first visit the Stay the Course Fund website at staythecourse-cc.org. Your unique login
       information for the site is as follows:

                       USERNAME: Student ID #
                       PASSWORD: enrollme

       Further, you must pick up a Stay the Course Fund welcome packet. These packets are available on
       the Trinity River campus in room TREF 6402 during normal business hours. If you would like
       to remove yourself from our contact list, you can opt-out of the program at any time by logging
       into the Stay the Course Fund website and selecting “opt out.”



                                                    36
To learn more, please attend one of the Stay the Course Fund information sessions in the Speed
Room (TRTR 4207, 4th floor) on the Trinity River Campus on August 28th at 4pm or August
29th at 9am. Light refreshments will be served. Stay the Course Fund staff will be there to explain
how the program works and to help you enroll. You may also pick up your welcome packet at
this event. In the meantime, if you have any questions about the program, please contact the
Stay the Course Fund staff at        [#].

We at Trinity River Campus are excited to be the first TCC campus participating in this
program and encourage you to take full advantage of this unique opportunity.


Sincerely,

[College President]




                                            37
                                             Table 1
                   Summary of Navigator-Student Interactions for the STC Program
                                                                 Mean per Student

Variable                                                       Overall             Females               Males
Total Interactions per Semester                                 33.81                33.61               34.17
                                                               (16.39)              (16.04)             (17.11)

In-Person Meetings per Semester                                  4.13                3.75                4.85
                                                                (3.65)              (3.18)              (4.33)

Duration of In-Person Meeting (Minutes)                         41.25                43.19               38.44
                                                               (25.96)              (25.90)             (25.43)

Text/Email Interactions per Semester                            17.08                17.81              15.71
                                                                (9.99)              (10.15)             (9.56)

Phone Interactions per Semester                                 9.70                 9.23                10.59
                                                               (11.64)              (11.49)             (11.91)

Duration of Phone Meeting (Minutes)                             12.35                11.57               13.76
                                                               (20.35)              (19.79)             (21.27)

Number of Students                                                94                  63                  31
Notes: Calculations were made using CCFW case note data from Fall 2013 through Spring 2016 for the 94 treatment
compliers in semesters where they were still active in the program, so these means are conditional on students meeting
in-person with a Navigator at least once in the semester. Standard deviations are in parentheses.




                                                         38
                                                                 Table 2
                        Characteristics of Select RCT Interventions Promoting College Persistence or Completion
                        Stay the Course            Inside Track           Opening Doors -        Opening Doors -              ASAP                 Project STAR
                                                                                Ohio                 Louisiana
Reference                        -                Bettinger & Baker,     Scrivener & Weiss,      Richburg-Hayes et     Scrivener et al., 2015      Angrist, Lang,
                                                         2014                   2009                  al., 2009                                  Oreopoulis, 2009.
RCT Demonstration     Fort Worth, TX.           Multiple anonymous      Multiple sites.         New Orleans, LA.       New York, NY.            Canada.
                      2013 -2016                locations. 2003-2004,    2003-2006 (N =         2004-2005              2010-2013                2005-2006
                      (N = 869)                 2007-2008 (N =          2,139)                  (N= 1,019)             (N=896)                  (N= 1,656)
                                                13,555)


Type of Institution   Community college         Private, public, two-   Community college       Community college      Community college        Public 4-year
                      (one campus)              year, and four-year     (two campuses)          (two campuses)         (three campuses)         university (one
                                                                                                                                                campus)
Cost per Student      $5,640 total for three    $500 per semester       Cost analysis not       Cost analysis not      $16,284 in additional    $739 for one year
                      years of enrollment                               included                included               services above           program
                                                                                                                       control group
                                                                                                                       ($42,065 total) for
                                                                                                                       three year program
Primary Finding        31.5 pp increase in      Coached students 3      No sig. increase in     6.5 pp increase in     18 pp increase in        GPA improvement
                      associate’s degree        to 4 pp more likely     credits ended or over   persistence thru 4     degree completion,       & increase in credits
                      completion among          to persist after 18     the 3-year follow-up    semesters post         nearly 2 times the       earned for first-year
                      enrolled women,           mos, 24 mos; 4 pp       period                  random assignment      graduation rate of       female students (but
                      nearly 3 times the        more likely to                                                         students in the          not males) in the full
                      graduation rate of        graduate                                                               control group            SFSP program
                      females in the
                      control group
Eligible student      -Pell eligible or         None                    -Below 250% FPL         -Parents of at least   -Pell eligible or        - No income
population            below 200% FPL                                    -Full-time or part-     one dependent child    below 200% FPL.          restrictions
                      -Must be enrolled in                              time                    under 19 with          -Restricted to all       - Full-time only
                      at least 9 credit hours                           - 12 or fewer           household income       majors except: allied    - Entering first-year
                      at baseline                                       accumulated credits     below 200% FPL.        Health Sciences, Pre-
                      - 30 or fewer                                     at baseline             - Full-time or part-   Clinical Nursing,
                      accumulated credits                                                       time                   Forensic Science,
                      at baseline                                                               - No students with     and Engineering
                                                                                                degrees or             Science
                                                                                                occupational           - Full-time only




                                                                               39
                                                                                               certificate from        - 12 or fewer
                                                                                               accredited college or   accumulated credits
                                                                                               university              at baseline

Case management
Coaching,               Intensive case           Coaching by phone     Counselor assists       Coaching and            -Comprehensive           -Peer mentoring
Mentoring,              management,              to help student       with personal and       referral services       coaching from an         from upper-class
Referrals               involving, coaching,     develop time          academic issues.        available but           ASAP-dedicated           students in the same
                        mentoring, and           management, self-     Counselor refers        underutilized           adviser.                 field of study at the
                        referrals for all        advocacy, and study   students to services                            -Career information      University.
                        aspects of the           skills                on and off campus                               from an ASAP-            -Peer Advisors were
                        student’s life.                                                                                dedicated career and     trained to identify
                        Emphasis on in-                                                                                employment services      circumstances that
                        person meetings                                                                                staff member             called for more
                                                                                                                                                professional help
                                                                                                                                                and to make
                                                                                                                                                appropriate referrals
Student:Counselor       34:1                     Not reported          Lorain Campus:          Varied, but rarely      Between 80:1 and         Not reported
Ratio                                                                  81:1;                   exceed 100:1            60:1
                                                                       Owens Campus:
                                                                       157:1
Educational             Navigator helps          The coach works       Counselor helps with    Available but           Students enroll in an    Peer advisors e-
Planning/Advising       student identify goals   with the student to   work-based, learning    underutilized           ASAP seminar             mailed advisees at
                        and steps necessary      develop a clear       efforts, juggling                               covering topics such     least biweekly to
                        to achieve those         vision of his/her     school and work,                                as goal-setting, study   solicit questions
                        goals                    goals and set up      and career                                      skills, and academic     about university
                                                 steps necessary to    aspirations                                     planning                 assimilation,
                                                 achieve those goals                                                                            scheduling, studying,
                                                                                                                                                and time
                                                                                                                                                management
Financial Supports
Non-tuition Financial   Students with a GPA      No                    Students are eligible   No                      Students receive free    No
Assistance              of 2.0 or above are                            for a $150 stipend                              use of textbooks and
                        eligible up $500 of                            per semester for two                            free MetroCards for
                        emergency financial                            semesters, usable for                           use on public
                        assistance a semester,                         any purpose                                     transportation,
                        capped at $1,500                                                                               contingent on
                                                                                                                       participation in the
                                                                                                                       program.



                                                                              40
Tuition Waivers         No                      No   No                      No                    3-11 percent of          No
                                                                                                   students received
                                                                                                   waiver in a given
                                                                                                   semester
Grade Bonus             No                      No   No                      $250 after midterms   No                       Substantial cash
                                                                             contingent on                                  awards, up to $5,000,
                                                                             staying enrolled at                            for meeting a target
                                                                             least halftime &                               GPA.
                                                                             earning passing
                                                                             grades; $500 upon
                                                                             completion of
                                                                             courses with a C
                                                                             average or better.
                                                                             Extended for two
                                                                             semesters; students
                                                                             can earn up to
                                                                             $2,000.
Academic
Enrollment Assistance   Advised on course       No   Yes                     No                    Yes                      No
                        enrollment.

Tutoring                Referrals to tutoring   No   Referrals to tutoring   No                    Students receive         No
                                                                                                   ASAP dedicated
                                                                                                   tutoring services
                                                                                                   separate from the
                                                                                                   usual college tutoring
                                                                                                   services
Learning                No                      No   No                      No                    Students enroll in       No
Communities/ Block                                                                                 blocked or linked
Classes                                                                                            courses in their first
                                                                                                   year. Students can
                                                                                                   register for courses
                                                                                                   early so that they can
                                                                                                   create convenient
                                                                                                   schedules and get
                                                                                                   seats in the courses
                                                                                                   they need




                                                            41
                                                  Table 3
                        Descriptive Characteristics of Community College Students
                                                                                                         Full Stay the
                                                    U.S.              Texas               TCC
                                                                                                        Course Sample
Variable                                              (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)
Age                                                 28.00                                 26.92             24.21
Under 30 years old                                   0.71              0.719              0.750             0.833
30 years old and over                                0.28              0.280              0.251             0.167
Female                                               0.57              0.558              0.579             0.655
Male                                                 0.43              0.442              0.421             0.345
White, non-Hispanic                                  0.51              0.342              0.389             0.273
Black, non-Hispanic                                  0.14              0.132              0.181             0.198
Asian/Pacific Islander                               0.06              0.044              0.044             0.031
Other Race                                           0.09              0.062              0.033             0.030
Hispanic                                             0.19              0.420              0.354             0.468
Part Time                                            0.60              0.748              0.869             0.446
Full Time                                            0.40              0.252              0.131             0.554
Receive Pell Grants                                  0.33                                                   0.986
First Generation College Student                     0.36                                                   0.583
N                                                7.3 million         700,963              8,849               869
Notes: National statistics are taken from the American Association of Community Colleges (AACC) 2014 Fact Sheet. Texas
statewide statistics were collected from txhighereddata.org. The TCC statistics represent averages from the Trinity River
Campus in Fall 2013. Due to the limited age data available, the age ranges for the TCC column are under 31 and 31 and
over. For students in the Stay the Course sample, full time students are defined as students who are enrolled in 12 or more
credits at the Fall 2013 census date.




                                                            42
                                                                   Table 4
                                    Mean Characteristics of Treatment Groups and Control Group, Fall 2013
                                                                                                       P-value on Test that Means are the
                                                                 Means by Group Assignment
                                                                                                             Same Across Groups
                                                                  STC                    EFA                                    STC &                EFA &
                                                                                                          Control
                                                               Treatment              Treatment                                 Control              Control
Variable                                                           (1)                    (2)                (3)                  (4)                  (5)
Age at Entry                                                     24.09                  24.865             24.33                 0.664                0.388
Female                                                           0.628                   0.642             0.681                 0.099                0.272
TSI's Remaining at Entry                                         0.537                   0.525             0.572                 0.477                0.382
Dependent                                                        0.516                   0.552             0.519                 0.928                0.386
Cumulative Hours Earned Prior to Entry                           11.34                  11.505             11.15                 0.795                0.660
Family Income                                                   $22,576                $22,906            $20,756                0.111                0.098
Between 0% and 50% of FPL                                        0.228                   0.264             0.262                 0.244                0.946
Between 50% and 100% of FPL                                      0.291                   0.241             0.294                 0.919                0.112
Between 100% and 150% of FPL                                     0.216                   0.221             0.198                 0.511                0.459
Between 150% and 200% of FPL                                     0.158                   0.167              0.15                 0.751                0.537
Above 200% of FPL                                                0.107                   0.107             0.096                 0.581                0.615
Estimated Family Contribution (FAFSA)                            $768                    $761              $650                  0.242                0.292
Age < 20                                                         0.449                   0.421             0.405                 0.197                0.666
Age 20 - 25                                                      0.256                   0.274             0.301                 0.140                0.438
Age 26+                                                          0.295                   0.304             0.294                 0.961                0.760
Black                                                            0.184                   0.241             0.216                 0.229                0.437
White                                                            0.405                   0.418             0.408                 0.926                0.780
Asian                                                            0.027                   0.037             0.035                 0.522                0.469
Other Race                                                       0.377                   0.304             0.349                 0.387                0.211
Hispanic                                                         0.477                   0.438             0.460                 0.624                0.556
Declared Intention to Earn Associate's Degree                    0.677                   0.679             0.690                 0.690                0.746

N                                                                   430                  299                 439
Notes: Means are from TCC administrative data for Fall 2016 for subgroups of the full STC study sample (N = 1,168). Degree propensity is the predicted
probability of earning a degree after six semesters, which is estimated on the control group using a probit model that includes as controls observable characteristics
at baseline. See Section V of the text for more details.




                                                                                 43
                                               Table 5
           The Effect of STC on Outcomes after Six Semesters for Main Sample and by Gender
                                          Full Sample                  Female Sample                     Male Sample
                                       ITT          TOT               ITT        TOT                   ITT        TOT
Outcomes                                (1)          (2)               (3)         (4)                  (5)        (6)
                                     0.056*        0.251*           0.084**     0.358**              -0.003      -0.014
    Enrolled in College              (0.033)      (0.152)           (0.041)     (0.178)              (0.058)     (0.293)
                                     [0.440]      {0.238}           [0.425]    {0.134}               [0.471]    {0.498}

                                      1.764         7.717            2.846*        11.793*           -0.307        -1.526
    Total Credits Earned             (1.314)       (5.697)           (1.682)       (6.931)           (2.117)      (10.361)
                                    [26.829]      {24.171}          [26.414]      {20.269}           27.725       {33.083}

                                      0.026         0.116             0.046         0.195            -0.005         -0.025
    Cumulative GPA                   (0.067)       (0.295)           (0.084)       (0.352)           (0.112)       (0.552)
                                     [2.495]       {0.189}           [2.490]       {0.117}           [2.504]       {0.426}

                                      0.037         0.165            0.065*         0.278*           -0.009         -0.046
    Earned any Degree                (0.026)       (0.119)           (0.034)       (0.146)           (0.042)       (0.212)
                                     [0.182]       {0.058}           [0.187]       {0.000}           [0.171]       {0.207}

                                      0.036         0.162           0.074**        0.315**           -0.025         -0.129
    Earned an Associate's
                                     (0.025)       (0.115)          (0.033)        (0.141)           (0.040)       (0.205)
    Degree
                                     [0.159]       {0.029}          [0.157]        {0.000}           [0.164]       {0.258}

N                                      869           869               569           569               300           300
Notes : The Main Sample includes students assigned to the full STC treatment and those assigned to the control group. ITT
estimates (β1 from equation 1) are from OLS regressions of the outcomes listed in each row on assignment to treatment age, age
squared, income, income squared, an indicator for female, and a set of race dummies. TOT estimates (γ1 from equation 2) are
from 2SLS regressions using assignment to treatment as an instrument for program participation. Take up = 1 if client completes
an intake form. 20 observations are lost when analyzing cumulative GPA (11 females, 9 males) due to missing data. In instances
in which the Control Complier Mean (CCM) is negative, it is reported as zero--see Section V of the text for more details.
Statistics reported under point estimate: (Standard error) [Mean outcome in control group] {CCM}. *Significant at the 10%
level, **significant at the 5% level.




                                                              44
                                                            Table 6a
                                  The Effect of STC on Outcomes after Six Semesters by Subsamples
                                                    Income                                    Race / Ethnicity
                                    ≤ Median Income              > Median Income              White, Non-Hispanic                Non-White
                                     ITT       TOT                ITT        TOT                 ITT      TOT                  ITT      TOT
Outcomes                              (1)       (2)                (3)        (4)                 (5)      (6)                 (7)       (8)
                                    0.024      0.091            0.083*      0.441*              0.005     0.023              0.069*    0.318*
    Enrolled in College            (0.047)    (0.178)           (0.048)    (0.259)             (0.066)   (0.284)             (0.039)  (0.181)
                                   [0.413]    {0.371}           [0.469]    {0.083}             [0.424]   {0.533}             [0.455]  {0.145}

                                    0.459         1.720          2.817          14.203           2.403         9.965          1.615         7.233
    Total Credits Earned           (1.831)       (6.754)        (1.885)         (9.439)         (2.604)      (10.441)        (1.520)       (6.760)
                                  [23.785]      {26.281}       [30.214]        {22.544}        [28.336]      {38.414}       [26.270]      {29.091}

                                    0.009         0.033          0.031          0.166           -0.039         -0.168         0.053         0.238
    Cumulative GPA                 (0.101)       (0.374)        (0.088)        (0.461)          (0.125)       (0.528)        (0.079)       (0.356)
                                   [2.354]       {0.105}        [2.647]        {0.341}          [2.803]       {0.335}        [2.391]       {0.140}

                                    0.024         0.092          0.050          0.267            0.035         0.155          0.041         0.189
    Earned any Degree              (0.036)       (0.135)        (0.039)        (0.210)          (0.051)       (0.224)        (0.031)       (0.142)
                                   [0.161]       {0.100}        [0.206]        {0.000}          [0.203]       {0.104}        [0.176]       {0.020}

                                    0.029         0.109          0.045          0.240            0.065         0.289          0.028         0.127
    Earned an Associate's
                                   (0.034)       (0.128)        (0.038)        (0.204)          (0.048)       (0.217)        (0.030)       (0.136)
    Degree
                                   [0.135]       {0.045}        [0.187]        {0.000}          [0.153]       {0.000}        [0.157]       {0.067}

N                                    435           435            434            434              237           237            632           632
Notes : Results are for subgroups of the Main Sample that includes students assigned to the full STC treatment and those assigned to the control group.
Statistics reported under point estimate: (Standard error) [Mean outcome in control group] {CCM}. *Significant at the 10% level, **significant at the
5% level. See notes to Table 5 for more details.




                                                                          45
                                                                           Table 6b
                                                 The Effect of STC on Outcomes after Six Semesters by Subsamples
                                                   Initial Credit Hours                                                        Outcome Propensity
                                     > Median Hours               ≤ Median Hours                    Lower Third                  Middle Third                  Upper Third
                                      ITT      TOT                 ITT      TOT                    ITT      TOT                 ITT       TOT                ITT       TOT
Outcomes                               (1)      (2)                (3)       (4)                   (5)        (6)               (7)        (8)                (9)       (10)
                                     0.068     0.310              0.051     0.228                 0.008     0.034              0.027      0.134            0.118**    0.657**
  Enrolled in College               (0.048)   (0.217)            (0.047)   (0.211)               (0.054)   (0.210)            (0.049)    (0.233)           (0.053)    (0.299)
                                    [0.478]   {0.222}            [0.399]   {0.219}               [0.411]   {0.320}            [0.464]    {0.417}           [0.448]    {0.000}

                                     0.886         3.904          2.604        11.304             0.404         1.603          -0.246        -1.106         4.066*        21.048*
  Total Credits Earned              (1.751)       (7.601)        (1.973)       (8.394)           (2.245)       (9.447)         (1.759)       (7.617)        (2.146)      (11.290)
                                   [27.373]      {26.223}       [26.279]      {22.269}          [21.764]      {23.975}        [28.741]      {33.689}       [31.164]      {17.996}

                                     0.012         0.055          0.043         0.194            -0.053         -0.237         0.061         0.308           0.050         0.214
  Cumulative GPA                    (0.043)       (0.192)        (0.042)       (0.188)           (0.131)       (0.663)        (0.088)       (0.449)         (0.103)       (0.457)
                                    [2.704]       {0.243}        [2.258]       {0.125}           [2.177]       {2.702}        [2.581]       {2.288}         [2.757]       {2.614}

                                     0.010         0.047         0.056*         0.251             0.008         0.037         -0.002         -0.016         0.094*         0.419*
  Earned any Degree                 (0.040)       (0.182)        (0.034)       (0.153)           (0.035)       (0.162)        (0.042)       (0.209)         (0.054)       (0.255)
                                    [0.239]       {0.230}        [0.122]       {0.000}           [0.096]       {0.067}        [0.205]       {0.218}         [0.251]       {0.000}

                                     0.018         0.080          0.047         0.214             0.012         0.053          0.023         0.098           0.068         0.334
  Earned an Associate's
                                    (0.039)       (0.176)        (0.032)       (0.144)           (0.030)       (0.141)        (0.035)       (0.163)         (0.049)       (0.163)
  Degree
                                    [0.208]       {0.154}        [0.108]       {0.000}           [0.095]       {0.031}        [0.163]       {0.089}         [0.223]       {0.000}

N                                     444           444            425            425              290            290           289            289            290           290
Notes : Results are for subgroups of the Main Sample that includes students assigned to the full STC treatment and those assigned to the control group. Degree propensity is the
predicted probability of earning a degree after six semesters, which is estimated on the control group using a probit model that includes as controls observable characteristics at
baseline. See Section V of the text for more details. Statistics reported under point estimate: (Standard error) [Mean outcome in control group] {CCM}. *Significant at the 10% level,
**significant at the 5% level. See notes to Table 5 for more details.




                                                                                         46
                                                 Table 7
         The Effect of EFA on Outcomes after Six Semesters for the Full EFA Sample and by Gender

                                              Full Sample                   Female Sample                     Male Sample
                                           ITT         TOT                 ITT        TOT                  ITT         TOT
Outcomes                                    (1)         (2)                 (3)        (4)                  (5)         (6)
                                          0.015        0.036              0.010       0.024               0.027        0.073
    Enrolled in College                  (0.037)      (0.088)            (0.046)     (0.104)             (0.065)      (0.168)
                                         [0.440]      {0.456}            [0.425]    {0.505}              [0.471]     {0.342}

                                          -0.443       -1.080            -1.068        -2.508             0.706          1.883
    Total Credits Earned                  (1.448)      (3.509)           (1.761)       (4.110)           (2.615)        (6.803)
                                         [26.829]     {29.756}          [26.414]      {31.548}          [27.725]       {26.057}

                                         -0.108         -0.259           -0.089         -0.206           -0.131         -0.348
    Cumulative GPA                       (0.079)       (0.190)           (0.097)       (0.223)           (0.139)       (0.363)
                                         [2.495]       {2.784}           [2.490]       {2.825}           [2.504]       {2.678}

                                         -0.014         -0.034           -0.032         -0.073            0.017         0.045
    Earned any Degree                    (0.029)       (0.068)           (0.035)       (0.080)           (0.050)       (0.130)
                                          0.182        {0.248}           [0.187]       {0.285}           [0.171]       {0.175}

                                         -0.012         -0.028           -0.014         -0.032           -0.007         -0.018
    Earned an Associate's
                                         (0.027)       (0.065)           (0.033)       (0.076)           (0.048)       (0.126)
    Degree
                                         [0.159]       {0.218}           [0.157]       {0.208}           [0.164]       {0.238}

N                                          738            738              491           491               247            247
Notes : Results are for the EFA Sample (N = 772) that includes students assigned to the EFA only treatment and those assigned to the
control group. Statistics reported under point estimate: (Standard error) [Mean outcome in control group] {CCM}. *Significant at the
10% level, **significant at the 5% level. See notes to Table 5 for more details.




                                                                47
                                                Table 8
           The Effect of STC on Outcomes after Two Semesters for Main Sample and by Gender
                                            Full Sample                   Female Sample                     Male Sample
                                         ITT         TOT                 ITT        TOT                   ITT        TOT
Outcomes                                  (1)          (2)                (3)         (4)                  (5)        (6)
                                       0.064**      0.289**            0.075**     0.319**               0.040       0.206
    Enrolled in Classes at
                                       (0.027)      (0.121)            (0.034)     (0.143)              (0.045)     (0.225)
    TCC
                                       [0.759]      {0.544}            [0.749]    {0.586}               [0.779]    {0.625}

                                        0.016          0.072             0.036         0.153            -0.027          -0.140
    Enrolled in College                (0.026)        (0.117)           (0.033)       (0.140)           (0.042)        (0.218)
                                       [0.797]        {0.811}           [0.783]       {0.720}           [0.829]        {1.043}

                                        1.064*        4.749*            1.238*        5.200*              0.781         4.028
    Total Credits Earned                (0.560)       (2.486)           (0.698)       (2.912)            (0.950)       (4.807)
                                       [13.897]      {11.832}          [13.772]      {11.467}           [14.168]      {12.372}

                                        0.055          0.243             0.063         0.266             0.054          0.271
    Cumulative GPA                     (0.070)        (0.309)           (0.088)       (0.369)           (0.118)        (0.577)
                                       [2.468]        {2.442}           [2.469]       {2.365}           [2.465]        {2.522}

                                        0.012          0.054             0.011         0.011             0.012          0.064
    Earned any Degree                  (0.008)        (0.035)           (0.010)       (0.010)           (0.013)        (0.069)
                                       [0.007]        {0.000}           [0.007]       {0.005}           [0.007]        {0.000}

                                        0.008          0.035             0.009         0.038             0.006          0.029
    Earned an Associate's
                                       (0.006)        (0.029)           (0.008)       (0.033)           (0.012)        (0.059)
    Degree
                                       [0.005]        {0.000}           [0.003]       {0.000}           [0.007]        {0.000}

N                                        869            869               569            569              300            300
Notes : Results are for the Main Sample that includes students assigned to the full STC treatment and those assigned to the control
group. Statistics reported under point estimate: (Standard error) [Mean outcome in control group] {CCM}. *Significant at the 10%
level, **significant at the 5% level. See notes to Table 5 for more details.




                                                                48
                                                 Table 9
            The Effect of STC on Outcomes after Four Semesters for Main Sample and by Gender
                                            Full Sample                   Female Sample                     Male Sample
                                         ITT          TOT                ITT        TOT                  ITT         TOT
Outcomes                                  (1)          (2)                (3)        (4)                  (5)         (6)
                                       -0.008        -0.037            -0.008      -0.035               0.009        0.047
    Enrolled in Classes at
                                       (0.034)      (0.152)            (0.042)     (0.177)             (0.057)      (0.290)
    TCC
                                       [0.456]      {0.473}            [0.468]    {0.463}              [0.429]     {0.405}

                                       -0.017         -0.077           -0.005         -0.021           -0.030          -0.155
    Enrolled in College                (0.032)       (0.145)           (0.041)       (0.172)           (0.054)        (0.276)
                                       [0.604]       {0.609}           [0.582]       {0.528}           [0.650]        {0.736}

                                        1.097         4.914             1.895         8.016             -0.155        -0.794
    Total Credits Earned               (1.031)       (4.579)           (1.309)       (5.506)            (1.670)       (8.380)
                                      [23.138]      {21.449}          [22.756]      {18.428}           [23.962]      {26.996}

                                        0.022         0.097             0.038         0.159             0.012          0.061
    Cumulative GPA                     (0.068)       (0.299)           (0.087)       (0.360)           (0.114)        (0.558)
                                       [2.476]       {2.544}           [2.466]       {2.460}           [2.463]        {2.661}

                                       -0.013         -0.061           -0.012         -0.050           -0.010          -0.053
    Earned any Degree                  (0.020)       (0.087)           (0.026)       (0.108)           (0.029)        (0.146)
                                       [0.100]       {0.114}           [0.110]       {0.129}           [0.079]        {0.053}

                                       -0.004         -0.020            0.002         0.008            -0.007          -0.037
    Earned an Associate's
                                       (0.019)       (0.084)           (0.025)       (0.104)           (0.027)        (0.139)
    Degree
                                       [0.087]       {0.063}           [0.094]       {0.055}           [0.071]        {0.037}

N                                        869            869              569            569              300             300
Notes : Results are for the Main Sample that includes students assigned to the full STC treatment and those assigned to the control
group. Statistics reported under point estimate: (Standard error) [Mean outcome in control group] {CCM}. *Significant at the 10%
level, **significant at the 5% level. See notes to Table 5 for more details.




                                                                49
                                                         Figure 1
             Frequency of Discussion Topics During Student-Navigator Meetings

  40%      35.3%
  35%
  30%
                    24.1%
  25%
  20%                        16.9% 16.8%
  15%                                           13.1% 12.1% 11.3%
                                                                             9.1%
  10%
                                                                                      4.2%
   5%                                                                                           1.7%     0.6%      0.5%
   0%




Notes: Topics such as academic, work, and health are an aggregate of several, more specific categories. Mass emails and
administrative records have been excluded (meaningful interactions only, N=2,382). All data are for the Main Sample. Topic
Discussion data is only available for meetings that occurred between 8/23/13 - 7/14/15.




                                                          50
                                               Figure 2
                         Breakdown of EFA for STC Participants by Payment Type

                                                     Childcare: 2%

                               Utilities: 33%                           Housing: 23%



                                                                             Other: 5%

                                                                            School Supplies: 9%

                                           Transportation: 29%




Notes : Data are from CCFW case notes. Sample includes all EFA payments to STC participants (N = 94).




                                                           51
                Figure 3
Consort Diagram for RCT Research Design




                  52
                                                                     Appendix Table 1
                                                     Baseline Descriptive Statistics by Compliance Status
                                                                     STC Treatment Group                                           EFA Treatment Group
                                                                                                 P-value on                                                P-value on
                                                                                                  Test that                                                 Test that
                                                                                 Non-            Means are                                 Non-            Means are
                                                            Compliers                                                 Compliers
                                                                               compliers          the same                               compliers          the same
                                                                                                   Across                                                    Across
                                                                                                   Groups                                                    Groups
Varaible                                                         (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)               (5)                 (6)
Age at Entry                                                   25.78             23.62               0.017              26.751            23.491               0.001
Female                                                          0.67             0.616               0.338               0.675             0.618               0.319
TSI's Remaining at Entry                                       0.574             0.527               0.571               0.587             0.480               0.197
Dependent                                                      0.457             0.533               0.197               0.484             0.601               0.045
Cumulative Hours Earned Prior to Entry                         10.69             11.52                0.52              11.817            11.277               0.676
Family Income                                                 $20,121           $23,263              0.116              $23,812           $22,246              0.467
Between 0% and 50% of FPL                                      0.287             0.211               0.121               0.262             0.266               0.939
Between 50% and 100% of FPL                                    0.309             0.286               0.668               0.230             0.249               0.714
Between 100% and 150% of FPL                                   0.181             0.226               0.346               0.214             0.225               0.819
Between 150% and 200% of FPL                                   0.138             0.164               0.552               0.175             0.162               0.771
Above 200% of FPL                                              0.085             0.113               0.439               0.119             0.098               0.568
Estimated Family Contribution (FAFSA)                          $730              $779                0.793               $801              $732                0.677
Under 20 Years Old                                             0.372              0.47               0.092               0.365             0.462               0.093
Between 20 and 25 Years Old                                    0.266             0.253               0.799               0.262             0.283               0.684
Above 25 Years Old                                             0.362             0.277               0.111               0.373             0.254               0.028
Black                                                          0.181             0.185               0.935               0.262             0.225               0.468
White                                                          0.415             0.402               0.819               0.421             0.416               0.939
Asian                                                          0.036             0.032                0.86               0.040             0.035               0.821
Other Race                                                     0.372             0.378               0.921               0.278             0.324               0.396
Hispanic                                                       0.436             0.488               0.374               0.413             0.457               0.451
Declared Intention to Earn Associate's Degree                  0.723             0.664               0.275               0.722             0.647               0.172

N                                                                94                336                                    126                173
Notes: Table includes all students that were randomized into either the STC treatment group or the EFA treatment group. Compliance (or take-up) equals 1 if client signed
an intake form at their first meeting with the service providers.




                                                                                    53
