                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SHORT- AND LONG-HORIZON BEHAVIORAL FACTORS

                                            Kent Daniel
                                          David Hirshleifer
                                              Lin Sun

                                        Working Paper 24163
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w24163


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2017




We appreciate helpful comments from Jawad Addoum (FIRS discussant), Lauren Cohen, Chong Huang,
Danling Jiang, Frank Weikai Li (CICF discussant), Christian Lundblad (Miami Behavioral Finance
Conference discussant), Anthony Lynch (SFS Cavalcade discussant), Stefan Nagel, Christopher Schwarz,
Robert Stambaugh (AFA discussant), Zheng Sun, Siew Hong Teoh, Yi Zhang (FMA discussant), Lu
Zheng, and two anonymous referees. We also thank seminar participants at UC Irvine, University
of Nebraska, Lincoln, Florida State University, Arizona State˛University, and from participants in
the FIRS meeting at Quebec City, Canada, the FMA meeting at Nashville, TN, the SFS Cavalcade
North America meeting at Vanderbilt University, the China International Conference in Finance at
Hangzhou, the Miami Behavioral Finance Conference 2017, and the AFA Annual Meetings at Philadelphia.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24163.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Kent Daniel, David Hirshleifer, and Lin Sun. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Short- and Long-Horizon Behavioral Factors
Kent Daniel, David Hirshleifer, and Lin Sun
NBER Working Paper No. 24163
December 2017, Revised February 2019
JEL No. G02,G12,G14

                                            ABSTRACT

We propose a theoretically-motivated factor model based on investor psychology and assess its ability
to explain the cross-section of U.S. equity returns. Our factor model augments the market factor with
two factors which capture long- and short-horizon mispricing. The long-horizon factor exploits the
information in managers' decisions to issue or repurchase equity in response to persistent mispricing.
The short-horizon earnings surprise factor, which is motivated by investor inattention and evidence
of short-horizon underreaction, captures short-horizon anomalies. This three-factor risk-and-behavioral
model outperforms other proposed models in explaining a broad range of return anomalies.


Kent Daniel                                        Lin Sun
Graduate School of Business                        Florida State University
Columbia University                                Tallahassee, FL 32312
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 421                       linsunck@gmail.com
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
kd2371@columbia.edu

David Hirshleifer
The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
4291 Pereira Drive
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
david.h@uci.edu
In his 2011 Presidential Address to the American Finance Association, John Cochrane asks three
questions about what he describes as the “zoo” of new anomalies:

         First, which characteristics really provide independent information about average
     returns? Second, does each new anomaly variable also correspond to a new factor formed
     on those same anomalies? Third, how many of these new factors are really important
     (and can account for many characteristics)?

      Several approaches to developing a parsimonious factor model have been proposed in the

literature. One approach is based upon rational asset pricing theory in an efficient market (Fama

and French, 2015, 2018; Hou, Xue, and Zhang, 2015). A second approach is to extract factors using a

statistical analysis of the returns to assets or characteristic-sorted portfolios, while potentially

imposing structural constraints implied by rational asset pricing theory (Kelly, Pruitt, and Su, 2017;

Freyberger, Neuhierl, and Weber, 2017; Kozak, Nagel, and Santosh, 2017; Lettau and Pelger, 2018).

Finally, Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) develop a set of “mispricing factors” using a purely empirical

approach of averaging characteristics known, from extant empirical research, to have power to

forecast the cross-section of average returns. As Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) put it, “Rather than

construct a factor using stocks rankings on a single anomaly variable, such as investment, we

construct a factor by averaging rankings across multiple anomalies” (p. 1271). They construct their

two factors using the 11 well-documented anomalies examined by Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012,

2014, 2015).

      In contrast with these approaches, we propose a model that supplements the market factor with

just two theory-based behavioral factors, and show that this model does a good job of explaining the

cross-section of expected returns. Building on past literature, our two behavioral factors are designed

to capture long- and short-horizon mispricing.

      The novelty of our approach comes from motivating the factor model based upon different

forms of mispricing. Behavioral theories suggest distinct mispricing mechanisms that will correct at

shorter or longer horizon. For example, it has been hypothesized that investors with limited attention

underreact to public information that arrives at fairly high-frequency, such as quarterly earnings

announcements. Building on insights of Bernard and Thomas (1990), in the models of Hirshleifer

and Teoh (2003), DellaVigna and Pollet (2009), and Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2011), a subset of

investors fail to take into account the implications of the latest earnings surprises for future earnings.

                                                    1

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
As a consequence, stock prices underreact to earnings surprises, resulting in abnormal returns (the

post-earnings announcement drift anomaly, or PEAD). Such misperceptions about the subsequent

earnings should be corrected at reasonably short time horizons when new earnings are reported.

Consistent with this hypothesis, Ball and Brown (1968) and numerous other studies suggest that the

resulting mispricing is corrected over the next few quarterly earnings announcements.

       In contrast, some biases will result in more persistent, longer-horizon mispricing. For example,

investors who are overconfident about their private information signals will overreact to these signals,

leading to a value effect wherein firms with high stock valuations relative to fundamental measures

subsequently experience low returns. Owing to overconfidence in their private signals, investors are

relatively unwilling to correct their perceptions as further (public) earnings news arrives. Indeed, in the

models of Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998) and Gervais and Odean (2001), the arrival of

new public information can temporarily increase overconfidence and mispricing. So the correction of

overconfidence-driven mispricing will take place over a much longer time horizon than mispricing that

derives solely from limited attention. The persistence associated with the value effect, for example,

suggests that this process can last for many years.1

       Furthermore, in the model of Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), there are regime shifting

beliefs about the nature of the earnings time series. An under-extrapolative belief regime (their

“mean-reverting” regime) leads to post-earnings announcement drift and momentum. In this regime

the positive returns that follow a positive earnings surprise dissipate rapidly when the next few earnings

surprises prove earnings to be higher than expected. In contrast their over-extrapolative (“trending”)

regime is more persistent, because a brief trend-opposing sequence of earnings surprises does not

provide sufficient evidence to overcome the extrapolative expectations investors have formed about

more distant earnings. We therefore identify a short-horizon and a long-horizon behavioral factor

which together capture both short- and long-horizon mispricing.

       In behavioral models, return comovement can result from commonality in stock mispricing
   1
     A complicating issue is that some behavioral theories also use overconfidence to explain price momentum, which
is a short-horizon anomaly (lasting about a year). Empirically, part of the price momentum effect is explained by
earnings momentum (Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok, 1996), which is much like post-earnings announcement drift.
The remaining part of the price momentum effect, according to the Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998) model,
derives from dynamic patterns of shifts in overconfidence. This mechanism differs from both the short-run mechanism
of the limited attention theory for PEAD, and the long-run static overconfidence mechanism for the value effect and
financing anomalies.




                                                         2

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
(Barberis and Shleifer, 2003), as well as commonality in investor errors in interpreting signals about

fundamental economic factors (Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam, 2001).                          Since mispricing

predicts future returns owing to subsequent correction, this implies that behavioral factors can be

used to construct a factor model that better describes the cross-section of expected returns.2 Just as

firms that are exposed to systematic risk factors earn an associated risk premium, firms that are

heavily exposed to behavioral factors earn a conditional return premium (see, e.g., the model of

Hirshleifer and Jiang (2010)). Fama and French (1993, 2015) construct risk factors based on firm

characteristics that they argue capture risk exposures; we instead supplement the market factor with

two behaviorally-motivated factors.             Here, we argue that the mispricing effects of numerous

behavioral biases, occurring at both long- and short-horizons, can be captured by two behavioral

factors: a financing factor FIN that captures long-horizon mispricing, and an inattention factor

PEAD that captures short-horizon mispricing.

       Consistent with the behavioral theories discussed above, our long-horizon factor is based on the

intuition from the model of Stein (1996), who argues that when a firm becomes over- or underpriced,

the optimal response for the firm is to issue or repurchase its own stock, while not necessarily to

change its level of investment. Managers are well-positioned to lead their firms to act as arbitrageurs

of their own stock prices, since managers have superior information about the intrinsic value of their

firms. Even so, if investors were fully rational, they would fully impound the information contained in

a firm’s decision to issue or repurchase equity (Myers and Majluf, 1984), so that the financing decision

would not be a proxy for mispricing. However, in models of investor overconfidence, the market does

not fully impound this information. Empirically, there are on average persistent and strong negative

abnormal returns following issuance activity, and positive abnormal returns following repurchases.3

Precisely because the market underreacts to issuance/repurchase activity, it is in firms’ interests to
   2
      Several other studies also suggest that behavioral biases systematically affect asset prices. For example, Goetzmann
and Massa (2008) construct a behavioral factor from trades of disposition-prone investors and find that exposure to
this disposition factor seems to be priced. Similarly, Baker and Wurgler (2006) suggest including investor sentiment
in models of prices and expected returns, and Kumar and Lee (2006) find that retail investor sentiment leads to stock
return comovement incremental to market, size, value and momentum factors. Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) develop a
behavioral factor model based on commonality in mispricing.
    3
      See Loughran and Ritter (1995, 2000), Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1995), Brav, Geczy, and Gompers (2000),
Bradshaw, Richardson, and Sloan (2006), for post-event underperformance of new issues. See Lakonishok and Vermaelen
(1990), Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and Vermaelen (1995), and Bradshaw, Richardson, and Sloan (2006) for post-event
outperformance of repurchases. Daniel and Titman (2006) and Pontiff and Woodgate (2008) develop comprehensive
measures of a firm’s total issuances and repurchases.




                                                            3

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
engage in “market timing,” that is, issuing or repurchasing equity to exploit pre-existing mispricing.4,5

In essence, the argument here is that managers who do not fully share the market’s biased expectations

observe mispricing and exploit it in the interest of the existing shareholders who do not participate in

either the firm’s new issues or repurchases.

       The intuition that issuance/repurchase activity is a catch-all for many possible sources of

“stubborn” investor misperceptions (those that are unlikely to be corrected by just a few more

earnings announcements) is key to our financing-based mispricing factor.                            This hypothesis is

supported by the evidence of Greenwood and Hanson (2012), which suggests that managers exploit

mispricing that derives from many possible sources. Their measure of characteristic mispricing, the

issuer-repurchaser spread, is defined as the difference in a given characteristic (e.g., size) between

recent stock issuers and repurchasers. They find that this characteristic-spread measure forecasts the

corresponding characteristic-based factor returns for most of the characteristics they examine,

including book-to-market (i.e., HML) and size (i.e., SMB). For example, large firms underperform

after years when issuing firms are large relative to repurchasing firms.6                      Here we go further by

showing that a factor model including a financing factor (constructed as the return spread between

recent issuers and repurchasers) can price numerous long-horizon anomaly portfolios. (As we discuss

momentarily, it cannot on its own price short-horizon anomaly portfolios.)

       Our financing factor FIN is a composite of the 1-year net-share-issuance (NSI) and 5-year

composite-share-issuance (CSI) measures of Pontiff and Woodgate (2008) and Daniel and Titman

(2006), respectively. Following the approach of Fama and French (1993), our FIN factor portfolio is

based on two-by-three sort on size and the financing characteristic which is a 50/50 combination of

the NSI and CSI measures, and goes long the two value-weighted low-issuance portfolios and short

the two high-issuance portfolios. The choice to build our factor using the 50/50 combination of NSI

and CSI is based on robustness considerations. There are undoubtedly other combinations of these
   4
      Ritter (1991) and many others argue that firms may issue and repurchase shares to “time” share mispricing. Stein
(1996) develops a theoretical model of market timing. Empirical evidence suggests that firms issue equity when their
price-to-book ratio is high, and repurchase when they are low (Dong, Hirshleifer, and Teoh, 2012; Khan, Kogan, and
Serafeim, 2012); that these sales and repurchases forecast the firms’ future returns in a way that is consistent with market
timing; that earnings surprises tend to be more negative following equity issues (Denis and Sarin, 2001); and, in surveys,
that managers state that their issuance and repurchase activity is designed to exploit mispricing (Graham and Harvey,
2001). Baker and Wurgler (2002) provide a good summary of the evidence on market timing.
    5
      Alternatively, Eckbo, Masulis, and Norli (2000), Berk, Green, and Naik (1999) and Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang (2008)
propose or test risk-based explanations for the new issues anomaly.
    6
      Greenwood and Hanson (2012) examine seven characteristics: book-to-market, size, nominal share price, distress,
payout policy, profitability, and industry.


                                                             4

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
issuance metrics that might work better than our equal-weighted average, at least in-sample.

        Consistent with its theoretical motivation, we find that our FIN factor captures predominantly

longer-term mispricing and correction (one year or longer). For several reasons, it is much less likely

to capture shorter-horizon mispricing.                Equity issuance and repurchase have disclosure, legal,

underwriting, and other costs that likely constrain firms from issuing to exploit very short-horizon

mispricing. There are also informational barriers to high-frequency issuance/repurchase strategies.

Owing to these frictions, such corporate events tend to occur only occasionally, rather than as

continuously updated responses to even transient changes in market conditions.7 In addition, the

fixed costs associated with initiating any issuance or repurchase program would constrain firms from

exploiting short-horizon mispricing.8

        Because FIN is unlikely to capture shorter-horizon mispricing, we introduce a second

behavioral factor intended to capture short-term mispricing. Motivated by the theory that limited

investor attention induces stock market underreaction to earnings information (Hirshleifer and Teoh,

2003; DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009; Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh, 2011), we consider a post-earnings

announcement drift (PEAD) factor. PEAD is the phenomenon that firms that experience positive

earnings surprises subsequently earn higher returns than those with negative earnings surprises.

Bernard and Thomas (1989) argue that this return differential is not a rational risk premium, and

instead reflects delayed price response to information. A recent empirical literature suggests that this

delayed response derives from limited investor attention.9                    If the source of PEAD is that some

investors neglect the implications of current earnings news for future earnings, any mispricing is

likely to be corrected as the next few earnings are announced. Indeed, the evidence indicates that

this correction is complete within a year (Bernard and Thomas, 1989).
    7
      U.S. regulation potentially creates substantial time lags in registering security issues. Issuance also subjects the firm
to possible investor skepticism about the possibility that firms with high value of assets in place are issuing to exploit
private information, as modeled by Myers and Majluf (1984). Flexibility in issuance timing can be increased through
shelf-registration, allowing firms to exploit even transient private information, but by the same token, investors are likely
to be especially skeptical when firms maintain such flexibility.
    8
      The larger the total mispricing, the greater the benefit to a firm of trading to exploit it. An anomaly in which
abnormal returns continue for 5 years represents a greater total mispricing than if a similar (or even somewhat smaller)
per-year abnormal return persists only a year.
    9
      For example, market reactions to earnings surprises are muted when the earnings announcement is released during
low-attention periods such as non-trading hours (Francis, Pagach, and Stephan, 1992; Bagnoli, Clement, and Watts, 2005),
Fridays (DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009), days with many same-day earnings announcements by other firms (Hirshleifer,
Lim, and Teoh, 2009), and in down market or low trading volume periods (Hou, Peng, and Xiong, 2009). At these times,
the immediate price and volume reactions to earnings surprises are weaker and the post-earnings announcement drift is
stronger.



                                                              5

                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
      We therefore hypothesize that PEAD reflects high-frequency systematic mispricing caused by

limited investor attention to earnings-related information, and use a PEAD factor to capture

comovement associated with high-frequency mispricing. Earnings announcements are of course not

the only source of fundamental news that investors might underreact to at a quarterly frequency.

However, earnings announcements provide an especially good window into short-term underreaction,

because they are highly relevant for fundamental value and arrive regularly for every firm each

quarter, and because all value-relevant news is ultimately manifested in earnings.

      Our PEAD factor is constructed by going long firms with positive earnings surprises and short

firms with negative surprises. For robustness, PEAD, like FIN, is based on two-by-three sort on size

and earning-announcement returns, with value-weighted portfolios.

      Our factor model supplements the market factor from the CAPM with these two behavioral

factors to form a three-factor risk-and-behavioral composite model, with behavioral factors designed

to capture common mispricing induced by investors’ psychological biases. This approach is consistent

with theoretical models in which both risk and mispricing proxies predict returns (Daniel, Hirshleifer,

and Subrahmanyam, 2001; Barberis and Huang, 2001; Kozak, Nagel, and Santosh, 2017). By using

both long- and short-horizon behavioral factors, we seek to capture both long-term mispricing that

takes a few years to correct and short-term mispricing that takes a few quarters to correct.

      We empirically assess the incremental ability of behavioral factors to explain expected returns

relative to the factors used in other models, including both traditional factors (such as the market, size,

value, and return momentum factors) and other recently prominent factors (such as the investment and

profitability factors). Barillas and Shanken (2017) suggest that when comparing models with traded

factors, “...the models should be compared in terms of their ability to price all returns, both test assets

and traded factors.” To do this, we first run spanning tests to examine how well other (traded) factors

explain the performance of FIN and PEAD and vice versa. We find that a factor model that includes

both FIN and PEAD prices many of the traded factors proposed in the literature, including several of

the new factors proposed in Fama and French (2015), Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015), and Stambaugh

and Yuan (2017). In sharp contrast, reverse regressions show that other (traded) factors do not fully

explain the abnormal returns associated with FIN and PEAD.

      We then explore the extent to which FIN and PEAD explain the returns of portfolios


                                                    6

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
constructed by sorting on the characteristics associated with well-known return anomalies.                           We

consider 34 anomalies, closely following the list of anomalies considered in Hou, Xue, and Zhang

(2015). Since FIN and PEAD are designed to capture mispricing over different horizons, we are

especially interested in how well FIN captures long-horizon anomalies and how well PEAD captures

short-horizon anomalies. Therefore, we categorize the 34 anomalies into two groups: 12 short-horizon

anomalies including price momentum, earnings momentum, and short-term profitability, and 22

long-horizon anomalies including long-term profitability, value, investment and financing, and

intangibles.    We compare the performance of our three-factor composite model built on 3 firm

characteristics with recently proposed factor models: the four-factor model of Novy-Marx (2013,

NM4) built on 5 characteristics, the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015, FF5) built on 4

characteristics, the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015, HXZ4) built on 3

characteristics, and the four-factor model of Stambaugh and Yuan (2017, SY4) built on 12

characteristics.10

       We find that across the 12 short-horizon anomalies, the composite model fully captures all

anomalies at the 5% significance level (i.e., none have significant alphas). In contrast, 11 anomalies

have significant FF5 alphas, 2 have significant NM4 alphas, 1 has a significant HXZ4 alpha, and 4

have significant SY4 alphas. The mean |α̂| is lower for the composite model than for any of the four

alternative models. Finally, the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989, GRS) F -test fails to reject the

hypothesis that the 12 composite-model alphas are jointly zero, but rejects each of the four alternative

models at a 1% significance level.

       The composite model also does a good job explaining the 22 long-horizon anomaly portfolios,

but for these portfolios the SY4 and NM4 models also perform well. For the composite model, 3

of the 22 alphas are significant at the 5% significance level. For competing models, the numbers of

significant alphas are 7 (FF5), 3 (NM4), 5 (HXZ4), 3 (SY4), etc. The GRS F -test that the 22 long-

horizon anomaly portfolio alphas are jointly zero is not rejected for the SY4 model, and only rejected

at a 10% level for our composite model or the NM4 model. The GRS test does, however, reject this

null at a 1% significance level for both the FF5 and HXZ4 models. The good performance of the SY4
   10
      Consistent with convention in this literature since Fama and French (1993), both our FIN and PEAD factor portfolios
are based on bivariate (3×2) sorts on the relevant characteristic and firm size (i.e., Market Equity). In addition to
keeping in mind how many factors are in each model, to assess parsimony it is useful to bear in mind the number of firm
characteristics used to construct each factor model. We therefore provide characteristic counts for each model.



                                                           7

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
model appears to result primarily from the inclusion of their MGMT factor, which is constructed from

six characteristics associated with investment and financing.

        Overall, across all 34 long- and short-horizon anomalies, our three-factor behavioral-composite

model performs well. Only 3 anomalies have 5% significant composite-model alphas. In comparison,

there are 18 significant FF5 alphas, 5 significant NM4 alphas, 6 significant HXZ4 alphas, and 7

significant SY4 alphas. The composite model also gives the smallest GRS F -statistic. The composite

model therefore outperforms both standard and recent enhanced factor models in explaining the large

set of anomalies studied in Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). This evidence is consistent with the hypothesis

that many existing anomalies, such as momentum, profitability, value, investment and financing, and

intangibles, can be attributed to systematic mispricing.

        Thus, relative to other proposed factor models, our composite model prices both short- and

long-horizon anomalies at least as well. Our model is motivated by theory, and is arguably more

parsimonious.11       Because our composite model is motivated by just two hypotheses—that firm

managers time issuance to arbitrage longer-horizon mispricing and that shorter-horizon mispricing

results from inattention—our model requires just two behavioral factors in addition to the market

factor. The competing models we examine all use either more factors, more characteristics, or both.

        Why do just two proxies for mispricing (external financing and earnings surprises) capture a

wide set of anomalies? These proxies can capture misperceptions deriving from multiple behavioral

biases, each somewhat different. However, to the extent that a firm’s manager is aware of that firm’s

total mispricing—resulting from this variety of biases—and attempts to arbitrage this mispricing via

issuance/repurchase activities (the scale of which is proportional to the magnitude of the

mispricing), our long-horizon behavioral factor FIN can provide a good summary of the various

sources of longer-term mispricing.12 Similarly, to the extent that short-horizon anomalies derive from

psychological biases that induce underreaction to fundamentals, a firm’s earnings information may
   11
      Evaluating parsimony requires care, since it is well known that any pattern of returns can be “explained” ex post by
a single-factor model in which the factor is the ex-post mean-variance efficient portfolio (see also the discussion of Novy-
Marx (2016)). Still, when factors are built from characteristics, it is likely that the use of more characteristics and/or
more factors tends to grant greater freedom to overfit the cross-section of returns. Certainly a focus of the empirical
factor pricing literature since Fama and French (1992) has been on identifying models that explain the cross-section of
returns with a small number of factors, presumably owing to a preference for parsimony.
   12
      Although models of overconfidence offer a motivation for seeking a factor based on long-horizon mispricing, the
market timing motivation for the FIN factor means that it does not directly pinpoint what investor psychological bias is
driving mispricing.




                                                             8

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
be a good summary of higher-frequency information about firm value that investors misvalue, in

which case loadings on the PEAD factor may do a good job of capturing such mispricing.

         To further evaluate the performance of our composite factor model, we perform cross-sectional

tests.     If FIN and PEAD are indeed priced behavioral factors that capture commonality in

mispricing, then behavioral models imply that firm loadings on FIN and PEAD should be proxies for

underpricing. In particular, FIN loadings are proxies for persistent underpricing and PEAD loadings

for transient underpricing. In consequence, these loadings should positively predict the cross-section

of stock returns.

         The dynamic nature of mispricing implies that any given firm’s loadings on behavioral factors

will vary substantially over time. We therefore estimate firms’ loadings on these factors using daily

stock returns over a short horizon, e.g., one month. Using Fama and MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional

regressions, we find that FIN loadings significantly predict future stock returns, even after controlling

for most of the 34 anomaly characteristics that we examine. In contrast, estimated PEAD loadings

have no incremental power to forecast future returns. As we discuss in Section 3, the problems are

estimation error when PEAD loadings are unstable, and the heavy influence of small illiquid firms in

Fama-MacBeth regression tests.

         Furthermore, we find that consistent with behavioral models, the return predictability associated

with FIN and PEAD factors is increasing with proxies for limits to arbitrage. These implications do

not hold for effects in rational frictionless models of risk premia.

         Finally, the observed premia of the behavioral factors we propose could alternatively be

interpreted as rational risk premia. This mirrors the fact that the factors in traditional models

(other than the market factor) can instead be interpreted as reflecting mispricing. However, we

motivate our two behavioral factors with behavioral/mispricing arguments.               Following Daniel,

Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (2001) and Kozak, Nagel, and Santosh (2018), in a setting in which

investors with biased expectations coexist with unbiased (rational) arbitrageurs, the presence of the

arbitrageurs ensures that there are no pure arbitrage opportunities. This will necessarily link the

covariance structure and the expected returns of the individual assets; that is, behavioral factors will

be priced, and the Sharpe ratios associated with the behavioral factors will be bounded.             The

loadings on the behavioral factors will correctly price individual securities, but the factors themselves


                                                     9

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
will not necessarily covary with aggregate fundamental risks, as would the risk factors in a fully

rational setting with no biased investors.

       For example, they will not covary with innovations in marginal utility based on aggregate

consumption. However, the factors should covary with measures of the innovations in marginal

utility for the subset of arbitrageurs in the economy. For example, to the extent that broker-dealers

act as rational arbitrageurs, broker-dealer leverage should price behavioral anomalies, in that it

captures “risk” for these agents (He and Krishnamurthy, 2013; Adrian, Etula, and Muir, 2014; He,

Kelly, and Manela, 2017). Indeed one interpretation of our long-horizon behavioral factor FIN is that

it captures the first-order condition for a rational optimizing firm in a setting such as that of Stein

(1996), in which mispricing of a firm’s issued securities is driven by behavioral biases.

       We are not the first to construct a PEAD factor or a financing factor. Our contribution is to use

these factors in a theoretically motivated and parsimonious factor pricing model, to show that such a

model explains a broad range of both short- and long-horizon anomalies.13

       A growing literature seeks to explain a wide set of anomalies with a small set of factors. This

is the motivation for the tests of Fama and French (1996), and more recently Novy-Marx (2013),

Fama and French (2015, 2018), Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015), and Stambaugh and Yuan (2017). Our

paper goes further in three key ways. First, we identify a strong dichotomy between short- and long-

horizon anomalies, with short-horizon anomalies predominantly explained by our PEAD-based factor,

and long-horizon anomalies predominantly explained by the financing factor. Second, our approach is

distinct from this literature, in that our behavioral factors are based on theoretical arguments as to

what variables should capture long- and short-horizon mispricing. Finally, as noted earlier, our factor

model provides a better fit to a wide set of anomalies and factors.
  13
     Chordia and Shivakumar (2006) and Novy-Marx (2015a) construct PEAD factors and argue that the predictive
power of past returns is subsumed by a zero-investment portfolio based on earnings surprises. Novy-Marx (2015b) uses a
PEAD factor to price the ROE factor of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). Hirshleifer and Jiang (2010) propose a behavioral
factor, the underpriced-minus-overpriced (UMO) factor, based on firms’ external financing activities, such as debt/equity
repurchase and issuance events over the previous 24 months.




                                                           10

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
1        Comparison of Behavioral Factors with Other Factors

1.1      Factor Definitions


         We construct the financing factor (FIN) based on the 1-year net share issuance (NSI) and

5-year composite share issuance (CSI) measures of Pontiff and Woodgate (2008) and Daniel and

Titman (2006), respectively. Daniel and Titman’s 5-year CSI measure is simply the firm’s 5-year

growth in market equity, minus the 5-year equity return, in logs. Thus, any issuance activity such as

seasoned issues, the exercise of employee stock options, and equity-financed acquisitions will increase

the issuance measure, while activity such as share repurchases, cash dividends, and other actions that

pay cash out of the firm will decrease the issuance measure. Note that corporate actions such as splits

and stock dividends don’t affect the market capitalization or the return, and thus leave the composite

issuance measure unchanged. Pontiff and Woodgate’s NSI measure is identical to CSI, except that NSI

uses a 1-year horizon and excludes cash dividends. Both issuance measures earn significant abnormal

returns (incremental to each other) during our sample period of 1972 to 2014. Details on variable

construction are provided in Appendix A.14

         As noted above, the key differences between CSI and NSI are the horizons and the treatment of

cash dividends. It seems plausible that managers might adjust dividend policy to respond to mispricing

at a roughly 5-year horizon, but that frictions would constrain managers from adjusting dividends to

respond to mispricing at annual horizon. Empirically, dividend yields do in fact forecast returns at

longer horizons. To minimize data mining, we have elected to construct FIN based on NSI and CSI

measures identical to those used in the Pontiff and Woodgate (2008) and Daniel and Titman (2006)

studies. Our procedure of combining two existing financing measures off the shelf from existing papers

eliminates numerous potential degrees of freedom in how a researcher might potentially form a FIN

factor by tweaking existing financing measures.

         The FIN factor is constructed using all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ common stocks with

CRSP share codes of 10 or 11. Following Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015), we exclude financial firms and

firms with negative book equity. At the end of each June, we assign these firms to one of the two

size groups (small “S” and big “B”) based on whether that firm’s market equity is below or above the
    14
     Pontiff and Woodgate (2008) note that Daniel and Titman’s 5-year composite issuance measure, while strong in the
post-1968, is weak pre-1970; see also Daniel and Titman (2016).


                                                         11

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
NYSE median size breakpoint. Independently, we sort firms into one of the three financing groups

(low “L”, middle “M”, or high “H”) based on 1-year NSI and 5-year CSI, respectively. The three

financing groups are created based on an index of NSI and CSI rankings.

     Specifically, we first sort firms into three CSI groups (low, middle, or high) using 20% and 80%

breakpoints for NYSE firms. Special care is needed when sorting firms into NSI groups, since about

one quarter of our NSI observations are negative (i.e., are repurchasing firms). If we were to use

NYSE 20% and 80% breakpoints to assign NSI groups, then in some formation years we would have

all repurchasing firms in the bottom 20% group, without differentiating between firms with high and

low repurchases. Similarly, on the issuance side, using a simple NSI sort would cause no distinction

between large and small issuances in some formation years. To address this, each June we separately

sort all repurchasing firms (with negative NSI) into two groups using the NYSE median breakpoint,

and sort all issuing firms (with positive NSI) into three groups using NYSE 30% and 70% breakpoints.

We then assign the repurchasing firms with the most negative NSI to the low NSI group, the issuing

firms in the top group to the high NSI group, and all other firms to the middle group.

     Finally, we assign firms into one of the three financing groups (low “L”, middle “M”, or high

“H”) based on an index of NSI and CSI rankings. If a firm belongs to the high group by both NSI

and CSI rankings, or to the high group by NSI rankings while missing CSI rankings due to missing

data (or vice versa), the firm is assigned to the high financing group (“H”). If a firm belongs to the

low group by both NSI and CSI rankings, or to the low group by one ranking while missing the other,

it is assigned to the low financing group (“L”). In all other cases, firms are assigned to the middle

financing group (“M”).

     Six portfolios (SL, SM, SH, BL, BM, and BH) are formed based on the intersections of size and

financing groups, value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated for each month from July to the next

June, and the portfolios are rebalanced at the end of the next June. The FIN factor return each month

is calculated as average return of the low financing portfolios (SL and BL) minus average return of

the high financing portfolios (SH and BH), that is, F IN = (rSL + rBL )/2 − (rSH + rBH )/2.

     PEAD is the post-earnings announcement drift factor, which is intended to capture investor

limited attention. It is again constructed in the fashion of Fama and French (1993). Following Chan,

Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996), earnings surprise is measured as the four-day cumulative abnormal


                                                 12

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
return around the most recent quarterly earnings announcement date (COMPUSTAT quarterly item

RDQ).15 Specifically,

                  d=1
                  X
       CARi =           (Ri,d − Rm,d ),
                 d=−2


where Ri,d is stock i’s return on day d and Rm,d is the market return on day d relative to the earnings

announcement date. We require valid daily returns on at least two of the trading days in this four-day

window. We also require the COMPUSTAT earnings date (RDQ) to be at least two trading days prior

to the month end. In forming the PEAD portfolio, we sort on CARi from the most recent earnings

announcement. If, however, there is no earnings announcement in the past six months, then firm i is

excluded from the PEAD portfolio.

       To construct the PEAD factor portfolio in month t, we begin with all NYSE, AMEX, and

NASDAQ common stocks with CRSP share codes of 10 or 11, excluding financial firms.                             At the

beginning of each month t, we first assign firms to one of two size groups (small “S” or big “B”) based

on whether that firm’s market equity at the end of month t − 1 is below or above the NYSE median

size breakpoint. Each stock is also independently sorted into one of three earnings surprise groups

(low “L”, middle “M”, or high “H”) based on CARi at the end of month t − 1, using 20% and 80%

breakpoints for NYSE firms. Six portfolios (SL, SM, SH, BL, BM, and BH) are formed based on the

intersections of the two groups, and value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated for the current

month. The month t PEAD factor return is then the average return of the high earnings surprise

portfolios (SH and BH) minus the average return of the low earnings surprise portfolios (SL and BL),

that is, P EAD = (rSH + rBH )/2 − (rSL + rBL )/2.
  15
     If investors underreact to fundamental news by a fixed percentage, then a greater announcement-date return implies
a proportional future alpha. Previous studies of earnings momentum have used return-based surprise measures such
as CARi and earnings-based measures such as the standardized unexpected earnings (SUE) (Chan, Jegadeesh, and
Lakonishok, 1996). Several advantages motivate our choice of a return-based measure. First, an earnings-based measure
of surprise necessarily compares announced earnings to analyst-forecasted earnings or to a time-series historical proxy
for the earnings expectation, either of which is a noisy proxy for the true expected earnings. In addition, the degree
of earnings persistence affects the information content in any given earnings surprise. SUE does not account for this,
whereas a return-based measure does. Moreover, previous literature indicates that return-based measures such as CAR
better forecast future stock returns than do earnings-based measures (see, e.g., Brandt, Kishore, Santa-Clara, and
Venkatachalam, 2008).




                                                          13

                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
1.2    Competing Factor Models


       We compare our behavioral factors and the three-factor composite model, which is built on 3

firm characteristics, with traditional factor models, such as the CAPM (Sharpe, 1964; Lintner, 1965;

Black, 1972), models that include the Mkt-Rf, SMB, HML, and MOM factors proposed by Fama and

French (1993) and Carhart (1997), as well as a set of recently proposed factors and models.16 Monthly

factor returns are either downloaded from Kenneth French’s web site or provided by the relevant

authors.17

       Novy-Marx (2013, NM4) proposes a four-factor model consisting of a market factor, a value

factor, a momentum factor, and a profitability factor (PMU). The profitability factor is constructed

based on gross profits-to-assets from Compustat annual files. The value, momentum, and profitability

characteristics are demeaned by the average characteristic for firms in the same industry, to hedge the

factor returns for industry exposure. Thus the model is built on 5 characteristics: value, momentum,

gross profits-to-assets, size, and industry. To differentiate from their standard versions, we label the

industry-adjusted value and momentum factors as HML(NM4) and MOM(NM4). All factor portfolios

are annually rebalanced at the end of each June.

       Fama and French (2015, FF5) propose a five-factor model built on 4 characteristics. It consists

of a market factor, a size factor, a value factor, an investment factor (CMA), and a profitability factor

(RMW). The investment factor is formed based on annual change in total assets and the profitability

factor based on operating profitability. The size, investment, and profitability factors are formed by a

triple sort on size, change in total assets, and operating profitability. All factor portfolios are annually

rebalanced at the end of each June.

       Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015, HXZ4) propose a q-factor model consisting of four factors built on

3 characteristics: a market factor, a size factor, an investment factor (IVA), and a profitability factor

(ROE). The size, investment, and profitability factors are formed by a triple sort on size, change in

total assets from Compustat annual files, and ROE from Compustat quarterly files. To differentiate

from the standard size factor, we label the size factor in this model as SMB(HXZ4). The size and IVA
    16
       The 3 characteristics of our composite model are external financing, earnings surprises, and size. When firm size is
used in a model to form a factor, as is the case in forming our FIN and PEAD factors and factors in other models, size
is counted as one of the model’s characteristics regardless of whether the model includes a size factor.
    17
       We are grateful to all these authors for providing their factor return data.



                                                            14

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
factor portfolios are rebalanced annually at the end of each June, and the ROE factor is rebalanced

each month.

       The proxy for investment used in the Fama and French (2015) and Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015)

is the annual change in total assets, scaled by the 1-year lagged total assets. Cooper, Gulen, and Ion

(2017) argue that the use of asset growth as a proxy for investment is problematic, in that the use

of an investment factor based on investment measures such as CAPX or PPE growth renders these

factor models far less effective in explaining the cross-section of returns.

       Lastly, Stambaugh and Yuan (2017, SY4) propose a four-factor model built on 12 characteristics.

The four factors are a market factor, a size factor, and two mispricing factors (MGMT and PERF).

The MGMT factor is constructed based on 6 characteristics related to investment and financing:

net share issuance, composite issuance, operating accruals, net operating assets, asset growth, and

investment-to-assets. The PERF factor is a composite factor based on 5 characteristics including

price momentum and profitability: distress, O-Score, momentum, gross profitability, and return on

assets. The size factor is formed using only stocks least likely to be mispriced (based on the above

eleven characteristics), to reduce the effect of arbitrage asymmetry. We label it SMB(SY4). The

SMB(SY4), MGMT and PERF factors are rebalanced each month.



1.3    Summary Statistics


       Table 1 reports summary statistics for our zero-investment behavioral factor portfolios, and for

a set of factor portfolios proposed in previous literature. Panel A of Table 1 shows that, over our

sample period, FIN offers the highest average premium of 0.80% per month and a monthly Sharpe

ratio of 0.20. The t-statistic testing whether the FIN premium is zero is 4.6, well above the hurdle of

3.0 for new factors proposed by Harvey, Liu, and Zhu (2016). PEAD offers an average premium of

0.65% per month and the highest monthly Sharpe ratio of 0.35. Consistent with this, the t-statistic

testing whether the mean PEAD factor returns is zero is 7.91, the highest among the factors.18

       Comparing FIN with investment and profitability factors (e.g., CMA, IVA, PMU, RMW) and
  18
     The share issuance effect is slightly stronger among large firms, and the PEAD effect much stronger among small
firms. A FIN factor built on large firms, F INB = rBL − rBH , earns an average premium of 0.83% per month, while
FIN built on small firms, F INS = rSL − rSH , earns 0.77% per month. A PEAD factor built on large firms, P EADB =
rBH − rBL , earns an average premium of 0.38% per month, while PEAD built on small firms, P EADS = rSH − rSL ,
earns 0.94% per month. This is consistent with evidence in the literature.


                                                        15

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
the composite mispricing factor MGMT shows that FIN offers a substantially higher factor premium,

and comparable Sharpe ratio and t-statistic. Comparing PEAD with factors based on short-horizon

characteristics (e.g., MOM, ROE) and the composite mispricing factor PERF, PEAD offers comparable

factor premium but substantially higher Sharpe ratio and t-statistic.19

      Panel B reports pairwise correlation coefficients between factor portfolios. We find that different

versions of SMB, HML, and MOM are highly correlated, with correlation coefficients (ρ) greater than

0.90 in most cases. The two investment factors (CMA, IVA) are highly correlated with ρ = 0.90, and

strongly correlated with the value factors (HML, HML(NM4)) with ρ between 0.55 to 0.69. The three

profitability factors (PMU, RMW, ROE) are strongly correlated with each other with ρ around 0.60.

Also, the correlations of ROE with the two momentum factors (MOM, MOM(NM4)) are about 0.5.

      Not surprisingly, the composite MGMT factor, constructed on six investment and financing

characteristics, is highly correlated with value factors (HML, HML(NM4)) and investment factors

(CMA, IVA), with ρ ranging from 0.59 to 0.76. The PERF factor, which is constructed on five

characteristics including price momentum and profitability, is highly correlated with both momentum

factors (MOM, MOM(NM4)) and profitability factors (PMU, RMW, ROE), with ρ ranging from 0.48

to 0.72.

      Lastly, although FIN is constructed using only external financing, its returns are correlated with

both value factors (HML, HML(NM4)) and investment factors (CMA, IVA), with ρ between 0.50

and 0.66, consistent with issuing firms having both high valuation ratios and substantial investment

levels. FIN is highly correlated with the composite MGMT factor with ρ = 0.80, suggesting that

financing characteristics might be a dominant component in the composition of the MGMT factor.

This suggests that it may not be necessary to use such a large number of characteristics to get a factor

that is effective in explaining the cross-section of expected returns. FIN is moderately correlated with

profitability factors (PMU, RMW, ROE) and the composite PERF factor, with ρ around 0.35. As

we would expect, PEAD is strongly correlated with momentum factors (MOM, MOM(NM4)) and the
   19
      In Internet Appendix Table A1, we report factor means and t-values for the 1972-1990 and 1991-2014 subperiods,
respectively. Sample sizes are of course smaller in subperiods, reducing t-values. In the earlier subperiod, FIN has a
mean return of 1.12% per month (t = 5.75), and PEAD has a mean of 0.77% per month (t = 7.32). Both point estimates
are extremely large. In the later subperiod, FIN has a mean return of 0.56% per month (t = 2.09), and PEAD has a
mean of 0.55% per month (t = 4.59). Both point estimates are large, though smaller than in the earlier time period. It
is possible that the underlying effects are weakening over time (see McLean and Pontiff (2016)). On the other hand, we
expect subperiod variation by chance.




                                                         16

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
composite PERF factor, with ρ ranging from 0.38 to 0.48, and moderately correlated with the earnings

profitability factor ROE, with ρ = 0.22. This is consistent with the finding in the literature that

earnings momentum, price momentum, and earnings profitability are correlated, apparently driven

at least in part by market underreaction to latest earnings news (Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok,

1996). Finally, the correlation between FIN and PEAD is −0.05, suggesting that the two behavioral

factors capture different sources of mispricing.

      Panel C summarizes the portfolio weights, returns, and the maximum ex-post Sharpe ratios that

can be achieved by combining various factors to form the tangency portfolio. Rows (1) and (2) show

that combining the Fama-French three factors achieves a maximum monthly Sharpe ratio of 0.22,

and adding the MOM factor increases the Sharpe ratio to 0.31. Rows (3)−(6) show that the optimal

combination of factors from the Fama and French (2015), Novy-Marx (2013), Hou, Xue, and Zhang

(2015), and Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) models achieve realized monthly Sharpe ratios of 0.36, 0.57,

0.43, and 0.50, respectively. In rows (7) and (8), combining two behavioral factors, FIN and PEAD,

achieves a Sharpe ratio of 0.41, while adding the MKT factor increases the Sharpe ratio to 0.52. Thus,

the three-factor composite model earns a Sharpe ratio higher than standard factor models, and all

recently prominent models except for the Novy-Marx (2013) model.

      Rows (9)−(12) show that, with the three-factor composite model as a baseline, other recent

prominent factors only marginally increase the Sharpe ratio. For example, adding PMU of the Novy-

Marx (2013) model or CMA and RMW of the Fama and French (2015) model each increases the

Sharpe ratio from 0.52 to 0.54. Adding IVA and ROE of the Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) model

increases the Sharpe ratio from 0.52 to 0.55, and adding MGMT and PERF of the Stambaugh and

Yuan (2017) model increases it to 0.56. Finally, rows (13) and (14) show that combining all factors

excluding FIN and PEAD achieves a maximum Sharpe ratio of 0.54. Adding FIN and PEAD results

in a very substantial further increase of the Sharpe ratio to 0.65.



1.4   Comparing Behavioral Factors with Other Factors


      When comparing models with traded factors, it is important to compare their ability to price

all returns, that is, both test assets and traded factors (Barillas and Shanken, 2017). Here, using

spanning tests, we assess the power of our behavioral factors to price each of the factors from the


                                                   17

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
alternative models, and vice versa. Specifically, we run time-series regressions of the monthly returns

of one factor on other proposed factors and examine the regression intercepts (alphas). If a factor is

subsumed by a set of other factors, we expect the regression alpha to be close to zero.

      In interpreting tests between factors, it is important to keep in mind that winning the horse race

is not the only criterion for a good model. It is always possible to construct an overfitted model that

will “beat” all other factors ex post. It is therefore crucial for a model to have a strong combination

of theoretical motivation, parsimony, and good fit.

      Table 2 reports the results of regressions of behavioral factor returns on other sets of factor

returns. The significant intercepts from the Fama-French three-factor model, the Carhart model, the

Fama and French (2015) five-factor model and the Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) q-factor model suggest

that the factors in these models do not explain the FIN premium. However, the profitability-based

model of Novy-Marx (2013) and the four-factor mispricing model of Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) are

able to fully capture the FIN premium. The former model derives its explanatory power from its HML

and PMU factors, and the latter from its MGMT factor. Given the high correlation between MGMT

and FIN (ρ = 0.80, in Panel B of Table 1), it is not surprising that the MGMT factor subsumes

FIN. On the other hand, none of those models fully explain the PEAD premium. The ‘kitchen sink’

regression of the PEAD factor returns on all alternative model factors shows that PEAD continues to

earn a significant alpha of 0.58% per month (t = 6.76), even after controlling for the exposure to all

other proposed factors from the alternative models.

      Overall, we confirm that PEAD offers abnormally high returns relative to all the other factors

we examine, including the investment, profitability and mispricing factors of Stambaugh and Yuan

(2017). FIN offers abnormal returns relative to many other factors, except for the profitability factor

PMU of Novy-Marx (2013) and the composite MGMT factor of Stambaugh and Yuan (2017).

      Table 3 reports the results of regressions of other factors on our two behavioral factors.20 With

just FIN and PEAD, our two-factor behavioral model fully explains 7 out of the 10 factors we examine,

such as the value factor HML, the momentum factor MOM, the investment and profitability factors

CMA and RMW of Fama and French (2015), the profitability factor ROE of Hou, Xue, and Zhang

(2015), and the MGMT and PERF factors of Stambaugh and Yuan (2017). The exceptions are the
   20
      Modified versions of SMB, HML, and MOM factors are not examined here, as Table 1 shows that those modified
versions are highly correlated with each other.


                                                      18

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
size factor SMB, the profitability factor PMU of Novy-Marx (2013), and the investment factor IVA of

Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). Adding the market factor, our three-factor composite model does not

explain CMA and MGMT factors either, which load negatively on the market factor and therefore

earn significant alphas under the model. However, for the factors other than SMB for which the alphas

remain statistically significant, 48% of the premium earned by these factors is explained by exposure

to the factors in the the BF3 model.21

       This significant t-statistic on SMB shows that, at least ex post, the BF3 model could have

been improved by the addition of SMB as a fourth factor. However, while statistically significant, the

economic improvement that would result from adding SMB to the model is small. Specifically, the

Sharpe ratio of the optimal ex-post combination of the three BF3 factors is 0.52 (in Panel C of Table

1). We find that adding a SMB factor to our BF3 model only increases the Sharpe ratio from 0.52 to

0.54.22

       Also, if managers time their issuance and repurchase, then our factor model should capture all

long-horizon mispricing without recourse to a size factor. It is important for a factor model to have

a theoretical motivation rather than just an ex-post empirical one. As it turns out, our BF3 model

comes close to pricing all long-horizon anomalies (as shown in Section 2), and additional inclusion of

SMB does not help the model get much closer, as evidenced by the small change in the Sharpe ratio

when we add in an SMB factor.

       Overall, we find that FIN and PEAD capture a large fraction of the premia of the factors

from the alternative models, but not vice versa. The evidence suggests that FIN and PEAD contain

important incremental information about average returns relative to existing factors. This motivates

further testing of their ability to explain well-known return anomalies, which we do in the next section.
  21
      In Internet Appendix Tables A2 and A3, we report spanning regressions for the 1972-1990 and 1991-2014 subperiods,
respectively. The results are generally consistent with those in the whole sample period. In particular, in the later
subperiod, no other factors can explain our PEAD factor. The only models that can explain our FIN factor are NM4,
HXZ4, and SY4. In contrast, our factor model explains all factors from competing models, with three exceptions: SMB,
PMU, and RMW.
   22
      The improvement in the squared Sharpe ratio is the Treynor-Black squared information ratio, which can also be
calculated using t(α) from the regression of SMB on the BF3 factors in Table 3.




                                                          19

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
2     Explaining Anomaly Returns with Behavioral Factors

2.1   Anomaly Magnitudes and Correlations


      We next examine whether our composite model explains the various return anomalies

documented in the academic literature. We focus on 34 robust anomalies based upon the list of

anomalies considered in Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) that earn significant excess returns over their

sample period of 1972 to 2012. We exclude the systematic volatility (Svol) of Ang, Hodrick, Xing,

and Zhang (2006) and the revisions in analysts’ earnings forecasts (6-month holding period, RE-6) of

Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996) from the set of anomalies considered by Hou, Xue, and

Zhang (2015), as these two portfolios do not earn statistically significant excess returns over our

sample period.    In addition to the remaining HXZ anomalies, we also consider the cash-based

operating profitability (CbOP) of Ball, Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Nikolaev (2016). Although our

strong inclination is to stick with the HXZ anomalies, to minimize our own discretion, we make an

exception in this case given the evidence in Fama and French (2018) that an anomaly portfolio based

upon cash-based operating profitability dominates one based upon operating profitability.

      Since FIN is constructed using a firm’s financing activities, and PEAD using the firm’s quarterly

earnings surprises, we further posit that FIN captures longer-term predictability, and that PEAD

captures short-term underreaction to recent earnings news and the correction to such high-frequency

mispricing. Given that FIN and PEAD are designed to capture mispricing over different horizons,

we are especially interested in how well FIN captures long-horizon anomalies and how well PEAD

captures short-horizon anomalies.

      We define as long-horizon those anomalies which continue to earn statistically significant positive

excess returns for 1 to 3 years after portfolio formation. The trading strategies for each of these long-

horizon anomaly portfolios are rebalanced annually. In contrast, short-horizon anomalies are those

based upon quarterly accounting reports or high-frequency price information. Such anomalies typically

have a higher decay rate of return predictability as the forecast horizon is extended. The premia earned

by short-horizon anomaly portfolios generally become statistically insignificant after 1 year, and the

trading strategies based on these anomalies are rebalanced monthly.

      Based on these criteria, we group the 34 anomalies into 12 short-horizon anomalies, including


                                                   20

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
price momentum, earnings momentum, and short-term profitability, and 22 long-horizon anomalies

including long-term profitability, value, investment and financing, and intangibles. Table 4 describes

the list of anomalies under each group, as well as the mean returns and Sharpe ratios of those long/short

anomaly portfolios. Definitions of anomaly characteristics are provided in Appendix A.

       To further validate our classification of long- vs. short-horizon anomalies, Table 5 reports the

decay rate of return predictability of each group of anomalies. Short-horizon anomaly portfolios are

formed and rebalanced each month, and long-horizon anomaly portfolios are annually rebalanced.

Using an event time approach, we examine the buy-and-hold returns of the short-horizon anomaly

portfolios in each of the 12 months after portfolio formation. Similarly, for long-horizon anomaly

portfolios, we examine the buy-and-hold returns in each of the 12 quarters post-formation. Panel A

confirms that the premia earned by short-horizon anomaly portfolios become statistically insignificant

after 6 to 9 months. On the other hand, Panel B shows that most long-horizon anomaly portfolios

continue to earn statistically significant abnormal returns for 1 to 3 years after portfolio formation.23

       Table 6 presents the pairwise time-series correlations of the anomaly portfolios, grouped by the

anomaly horizon.       Panel A shows that, among short-horizon anomalies, the long/short portfolio

returns of price momentum, earnings momentum, and short-term earnings profitability are strongly

positively correlated, consistent with the literature (Chordia and Shivakumar, 2006; Novy-Marx,

2015a,b). Panel B presents the long-horizon anomaly return correlation matrix. Noticeably, the

long/short portfolio returns of value strategies are positively correlated with that of investment and

financing, but negatively correlated with that of long-term profitability. This is consistent with

existing evidence that growth firms generally issue more equity and invest more heavily.



2.2    Summary of Comparative Model Performance


       To examine how well behavioral factors account for various return anomalies, we run anomaly

portfolio regressions of the long/short (L/S) portfolio returns on FIN alone, PEAD alone, a two-factor

model with FIN and PEAD (BF2), and a three-factor risk-and-behavioral composite model with MKT,

FIN, and PEAD (BF3). If a model is efficient, the regression alphas of the L/S portfolios should be
  23
     There are a few exceptions. For example, GP/A and CbOP do not earn significant abnormal returns using this
event window approach. IvG, IvC, OA, and OC/A earn significant abnormal returns for less than 1 year. Still, we
classify these anomalies as long-horizon, as they are based upon annual accounting reports and it makes more sense to
form annually rebalanced trading strategies based on them.


                                                         21

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
statistically indistinguishable from zero. We compare the performance of our behavioral-motivated

models with standard factor models, such as the CAPM, the Fama-French three-factor model (FF3),

and the Carhart four-factor model (Carhart4), and recent prominent models, such as the profitability-

based factor model of Novy-Marx (2013, NM4), the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015, FF5),

the q-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015, HXZ4), and the four-factor mispricing model of

Stambaugh and Yuan (2017, SY4).24

        Table 7 summarizes the comparative performance of competing factor models in explaining the

set of 34 anomalies. We separately compare model performance on the 12 short-horizon anomalies

(Panel A), the 22 long-horizon anomalies (Panel B), and all 34 anomalies (Panel C). The column

labeled “H-L Ret” reports the monthly average excess return of each L/S anomaly portfolio.25 The

rest of the columns report the regression alphas of each L/S portfolio returns under different factor

models. At the bottom of each panel, we summarize model performance by several statistics: (1)

the number of significant alphas at the 5% level, (2) the average absolute alphas, (3) the average

absolute t-values of alphas, (4) the GRS F -statistics and p-values which test the null hypothesis that

all alphas are jointly zero (Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken, 1989), (5) the Hansen and Jagannathan

(1997, HJ) distance which measures the maximum pricing error generated by a model on a set of

testing portfolios, and (5) the F -statistics and p-values that test whether the average t2 of alphas

under a given model is larger than the average t2 of the composite-model alphas.26
   24
      In unreported results, we also check the performance of the liquidity factor model of Pastor and Stambaugh (2003),
which adds a traded liquidity factor to the Carhart model. We find that the liquidity factor does not help for explaining
most anomalies.
   25
      The only anomaly not earning significant excess return is the gross profits-to-assets ratio (GP/A) of Novy-Marx
(2013). Novy-Marx (2013) reports significant high-minus-low GP/A excess returns over the sample period of 1963 to
2010, while our sample period is 1972 to 2014. When restricting to the same period as Novy-Marx (2013), we do find
significant excess returns associated with GP/A. Still, we include GP/A in our analysis because it serves as the underlying
characteristic of the profitability factor (PMU) of the Novy-Marx (2013) model.
   26
      The HJ-distance is estimated as follows. Consider a portfolio of N assets, with a (gross) return vector Rt at month
t. Let 1N be an N-dimensional vector of ones, and Yt a K-dimensional vector of (gross)   q factor returns including one.
Following Hansen and Jagannathan (1997), the HJ-distance is estimated by Dist(δT )=      w0 (δT ) G−1
                                                                                                    T w(δT ), where δT =
(DT0 G−1      DT G−1
            −1 0                                                                               PT          0
      T DT )         1N is a GMM estimator that minimizes the distance Dist(δ),      DT = T1      t=1 Rt Yt , the weighting
               PT
matrix GT = T1 Tt=1 Rt Rt0 , T is the number of sample months, and the pricing       error vector w(δT ) = DT δT − 1N .
Jagannathan and Wang (1996) prove that the asymptotic distribution of T [Dist(δT )]2 is a weighted sum of χ2 (1)
distributed random variables. To get the critical value for T [Dist(δT )]2 , they suggest an algorithm that first draws
M × (N − K) random variables from χ2 (1) distribution, and then computes the simulated p-value that tests the null
hypothesis that the underlying factor model is specified correctly. We set M = 5000 random draws.




                                                            22

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
2.2.1     Fitting Short-horizon Anomalies


        Panel A of Table 7 compares different models on explaining the list of 12 short-horizon

anomalies. We first look at the number of significant alphas at the 5% level. Among standard factor

models, the CAPM and FF3 models do not capture most of these anomalies and the Carhart4 model

with a momentum factor explains about half of them. Not surprisingly, the FF3 and FF5 models

perform poorly, as these models are designed to price only the longer-horizon anomalies and not

shorter-horizon momentum-like anomalies. The NM4, HXZ4, and SY4 models each miss 2, 1, and 4

anomalies, respectively, owing to the inability of the MOM factor, the ROE factor, and the PERF

factor, respectively, to explain the short-horizon anomaly portfolio returns.               Among our

behaviorally-motivated models, we see that FIN alone captures only a few of these anomalies and

PEAD alone captures all of them. Combining the market factor with FIN and PEAD, our BF3

model fully captures all 12 anomalies. Overall, the evidence suggests that the PEAD factor achieves

great success in capturing abnormal returns associated with price momentum, earnings momentum,

and short-term profitability.

        Other statistics confirm the superior performance of the PEAD factor and our BF3 model. The

BF3 model gives the smallest average absolute alpha (|α| = 0.10%) and absolute t (|t| = 0.49%) among

all models. The F -tests suggest that the average of the squared t-statistics for the estimated alphas

(t2 ) under all other models are significantly larger than average t2 of BF3 alphas. Furthermore, the

BF3 model gives the smallest GRS F -statistic and does not reject the null hypothesis that all alphas

are jointly zero (GRS F = 1.15 and p = 0.32). It also gives the smallest HJ-distance and does not

reject the null hypothesis that the composite model is specified correctly (HJ = 14.66 and p = 0.49).

In contrast, all other models give substantially larger average absolute alphas and t, their GRS F -tests

reject the null hypotheses at the 1% level, and the HJ tests reject the null hypotheses that these models

are specified correctly at the 1% level (except for SY4 model which rejects the null at the 10% level).

        Although the PERF factor of the SY4 model is constructed on five characteristics related to

price momentum and profitability, our PEAD factor, which is constructed on just two characteristics,

size and earnings surprises, outperforms the composite PERF factor in capturing the 12 short-horizon

anomalies.




                                                   23

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
2.2.2    Fitting Long-horizon Anomalies


        We have argued that our FIN factor should be especially helpful for fitting long-horizon

anomalies, and that a factor model that disentangles long-horizon mispricing with the FIN factor

and short-horizon mispricing with the PEAD factor should help provide a parsimonious fit to

anomalies more generally.27          To test the effectiveness of our factor model, Panel B of Table 7

compares different models on explaining the list of 22 long-horizon anomalies. We first consider the

number of significant alphas at the 5% level. Among standard factor models, the CAPM does not

capture most of these anomalies, the FF3 model gives 12 significant alphas, and the Carhart4 model

gives 8 significant alphas. For competing models, the numbers of significant alphas are 7 (FF5), 3

(NM4), 5 (HXZ4), and 3 (SY4), respectively. Among our behavioral-motivated models, a single FIN

factor gives 6 significant alphas, performing as well as the FF5 and HXZ4 models. A single PEAD

factor does not capture most of these long-horizon anomalies, which is not surprising as PEAD is

designed to capture short-term mispricing. Lastly, our BF3 model (with MKT, FIN, and PEAD)

gives 3 significant alphas, outperforming the FF5 and HXZ4 models and performing equally well as

the NM4 and SY4 models.

        Other statistics confirm the good performance of the NM4, BF3, and SY4 models. The SY4

model gives the smallest average absolute alpha (|α| = 0.11%) and absolute t (|t| = 0.70%) among all

models. The F -tests suggest that the average of the squared t-statistics for the estimated alphas (t2 )

under FF5, NM4, and HXZ4 models are not significantly different from average t2 of BF3 alphas, but

the average t2 of SY4 alphas is significantly smaller than that of BF3 alphas. Furthermore, the SY4

model gives the smallest GRS F -statistic and does not reject the null hypothesis that all alphas are

jointly zero (GRS F = 0.74 and p = 0.80). The GRS F -tests only reject the null at a 10% significance

level for NM4 and BF3 models, while rejecting the null at a 1% significance level for all other models

including the FF5 and HXZ4 models. Lastly, the HJ tests cannot reject the null hypotheses that the

FF5, NM4, SY4 and BF3 models are specified correctly, while rejecting the null at 10% significance

level for the HXZ4 model.
  27
     There is a subtle argument for why the PEAD factor may help capture even long-horizon anomalies to some extent.
Consider a stock that is underpriced based on a long-horizon anomaly characteristic, which implies high expected returns.
If that characteristic is persistent, the stock was on average also underpriced one quarter ago. So the latest earnings
surprise (relative to market expectations) was on average probably positive. So some portion of the high expected return
of the asset is likely to reflect post-earning announcement drift. This suggests that the PEAD factor can, to some extent,
help capture long-horizon anomalies.



                                                           24

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
        While the FF5 and HXZ4 models each include an investment factor, both models fail to

explain the average returns of several investment-related anomaly portfolios, such as net operating

assets (NOA), investment-to-asset ratio (IVA), inventory changes (IvC), and operating accruals

(OA). Similarly, the FF5 and HXZ4 models, each with a profitability factor, do not capture the

cash-based operating profitability (CbOP) effect, while our BF3 model does, despite the fact that

neither FIN nor PEAD is directly constructed on investment or profitability characteristics.

        The good performance of the SY4 model appears to result from the inclusion of its MGMT

factor, which is constructed on six long-horizon characteristics related to investment and financing,

allowing it to price investment-related anomalies. Interestingly our single long-horizon factor (FIN)

performs almost as well as the MGMT factor in capturing abnormal returns associated with 22 firm

characteristics. This is consistent with the fact that the two factors have a correlation of about 0.8.



2.2.3    Fitting All Anomalies


        Panel C of Table 7 summarizes model performance on the 34 anomalies. Our BF3 model gives

just 3 significant alphas at the 5% level, while the FF5, NM4, HXZ4, and SY4 models give 18, 5, 6,

and 7 significant alphas, respectively. The SY4 model gives the smallest, and the BF3 model gives the

second smallest, average absolute alpha and absolute t among all models. The F -tests suggest that the

average of the squared t-statistics for the estimated alphas (t2 ) under NM4 and SY4 models are not

significantly different from average t2 of BF3 alphas, but the average t2 of FF5 and HXZ4 alphas are

significantly larger than that of BF3 alphas at 1% and 10% significance levels, respectively. Unlike in

Panel A and B, the GRS F -tests reject the null hypotheses of all alphas jointly zero under all models,

while the BF3 model achieves the smallest GRS F -statistic. Similarly, the HJ tests reject the null

hypotheses under all models, while the BF3 model gives the smallest HJ-distance measure.28,29
  28
      In Internet Appendix Table A4, we perform split-sample tests that divides the sample into two roughly equal
subperiods: 1972-1990 and 1991-2014. The conclusion that our 3-factor composite model explains anomalies extremely
well is highly robust. The model explains all 34 anomalies during the earlier subperiod, in sharp contrast with the other
factor models we examine here. In the later subperiod, it explains all of the short-horizon anomalies and all but 4 of the
22 long-horizon anomalies; it has the lowest number of significant alphas except for the SY4 model (which has only 2
significant alphas).
   29
      In all tests, we use value-weighted test asset portfolios, so microcaps should have relatively little influence. For
robustness, we exclude microcaps (firms with size below the 20th percentile of NYSE firms) from the test assets and
from our factor portfolios. Internet Appendix Table A5 shows that our factor model performs about equally well. As a
further robustness check, we exclude from our factors and the test assets all stocks with prices < $5. Internet Appendix
Table A6 shows that the results are almost unchanged.




                                                           25

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
        Overall, a three-factor risk-and-behavioral composite model (BF3) with a market factor and

two behavioral factors outperforms both traditional factor models and recently prominent models in

explaining the 34 robust anomalies.30 Our findings suggest that many of the existing anomalies, such

as price and earnings momentum, profitability, value, investment and financing, and intangibles, can

be attributed to systematic mispricing.

        One criticism of characteristic-based factor models is that the factors are built upon the same

characteristics as the anomalies to be explained. Such models can have high explanatory power for

such anomalies for purely mechanical reasons (Daniel and Titman, 1997). As a robustness check, we

therefore rerun our tests where, for each factor model, we exclude the anomalies whose characteristics

are used to build the factors of that model. The results are very similar to our main results, and the

BF3 model continues to outperform the other models.

        Next, we present detailed factor regression results for each anomaly. For brevity, we show

statistics only for the long/short (L/S) hedged anomaly portfolios (not for decile portfolios).

Definitions of anomaly variables and portfolio constructions are described in Appendix A. Table 8

reports alphas and factor loadings from time-series regressions of each L/S anomaly portfolio returns

on recent prominent factor models. We examine factor loadings to gain insights into which factors

contribute to explaining which anomalies.



2.2.4     Earnings and Price Momentum


        Our test assets include five earnings momentum portfolios (SUE-1, SUE-6, ABR-1, ABR-6, RE-

1) and three price momentum portfolios (R6-6, R11-1, I-MOM). Panel A of Table 8 shows that, likely

owing to the lack of a momentum factor, the FF5 model does not capture any of these anomalies.

Panel B and C show that the momentum factor (MOM) of the NM4 model and the ROE factor of

the HXZ4 model help fully explain all anomalies, except for the post-earnings announcement drift

(ABR-1). Similarly, Panel D shows that the PERF factor, which is a composite factor formed on five

anomaly variables including price momentum, fully explains many of these anomalies but the post-
   30
      Going beyond the Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) list of anomalies, referees of this paper inquired whether our model
prices the long-term reversal effect of DeBondt and Thaler (1985), the one-month industry momentum effect of Moskowitz
and Grinblatt (1999), and the industry relative reversal effect of Da, Liu, and Schaumburg (2014). We find that our
model fully prices the first two, and that neither our model nor any of the competing models prices the last of these.
So inclusion of these in our main tests would improve the relative performance of our factor model. However, to avoid
cherry-picking, in our overall tests we stick to the Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) anomalies list.


                                                         26

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
earnings announcement drift (ABR-1, ABR-6). Lastly, Panel E shows that the PEAD factor fully

captures all anomalies.

        Overall, the PEAD factor, constructed on earnings surprises, exhibits stronger pricing power

for price and earnings momentum than does the MOM factor based on past returns, the ROE factor

based on earnings profitability, and the composite PERF factor based on momentum, distress, and

profitability.



2.2.5     Profitability


        Our test assets include six profitability anomaly portfolios.   Four are based on short-term

profitability metrics from quarterly COMPUSTAT files or based on earnings realizations (ROAQ,

ROEQ, NEI, FP), and two are based on longer-term profitability metrics from annual COMPUSTAT

files (GP/A, CbOP). The short-term profitability portfolios are rebalanced monthly, and the

long-term profitability portfolios are rebalanced annually.

        Panel A of Table 8 shows that despite inclusion of the profitability factor RMW, the FF5 model

fails to fully explain the premia earned by the profitability portfolios; most of these anomalies have

large and significant alphas after controlling for exposure to RMW. Panel B shows that the profitability

(PMU) factor of the NM4 model fully explains all but the failure probability effect (FP). Panel C shows

that the short-term profitability (ROE) factor of the HXZ4 model fully explains all but the cash-based

operating profitability effect (CbOP). Panel D shows that the PERF factor of the SY4 model does not

explain the quarterly ROE effect (ROEQ), earnings surprises measured by the number of consecutive

quarters with earnings increases (NEI), or the cash-based operating profitability effect (CbOP). Lastly,

Panel E shows that the PEAD factor based on earnings surprises fully captures all these profitability

anomalies.

        Overall, it is notable that the PEAD factor, constructed on earnings surprises, performs better

in capturing the profitability effects than the profitability factors of the FF5, NM4, and HXZ4 models

and the PERF factor of the SY4 model based on price momentum, distress, and profitability.




                                                   27

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
2.2.6     Value


        Our test assets include five value anomaly portfolios: B/M, E/P, CF/P, NPY, and DUR. Panel A

and B of Table 8 show that the FF5 and NM4 models fully explain all these anomalies, owing to the

inclusion of a value (HML) factor. In Panel C, without a value factor, the investment (IVA) factor of

the HXZ4 model explains all these anomalies except for the net payout yield effect (NPY). In Panel D,

the MGMT factor of the SY4 model, constructed on six anomaly variables related to investment and

financing, fully captures all these anomalies. Lastly, in Panel E, the FIN factor, constructed on external

financing, successfully captures all anomalies as well.



2.2.7     Investment and Financing


        Our test assets include nine investment anomaly portfolios (AG, NOA, IVA, IG, IvG, IvC,

OA, POA, PTA) and two financing anomaly portfolios (NSI, CSI). Panel A of Table 8 shows that

the investment (CMA) factor of the FF5 model fails to explain five anomaly portfolios (NOA, IVA,

IvC, OA, NSI). Panel B shows that the NM4 model derives most of its explanatory power from the

value (HML) factor and fully explains all but two anomaly portfolios (IvC and OA). In Panel C, the

investment (IVA) factor of the HXZ4 model explains all but two anomaly portfolios (OA and NSI).

In Panel D, the MGMT factor of the SY4 model explains all but one anomaly portfolio (OA). Lastly,

Panel E shows that our FIN factor captures all but one anomaly portfolio (IvC).

        Overall, the value factor (HML) and the investment factors (CMA and IVA) all play a role in

successfully pricing many, but not all, investment and financing anomaly portfolios. The profitability

factors (RMW, PMU, and ROE) to some extent help explain financing anomalies, but go in the wrong

direction for many investment anomalies. Not surprisingly, the MGMT factor, constructed on six

investment and financing return predictors, delivers the best performance. Interestingly, our FIN

factor, constructed on just two return predictors (external financing and firm size), delivers equally

good performance as the composite MGMT factor.




                                                   28

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
2.2.8     Intangibles


        Our test assets include four intangibles anomaly portfolios: OC/A, AD/M, RD/M, and OL.

Panel A of Table 8 shows that the size (SMB) factor of the FF5 model plays a role in successfully

pricing all but one anomaly portfolio (OC/A), which loads negatively on the HML and RMW factors

and earns a significant positive FF5 alpha. In Panel B, the HML factor of the NM4 model explains

all but one anomaly (OC/A), which loads negatively on the PMU factor. Panel C shows that the

SMB factor of the HXZ4 model explains all but one anomaly (RD/M), which loads negatively on the

ROE factor. Panel D shows that, with a modified size factor, the SY4 model captures all but one

anomaly (OC/A), which loads negatively on the MGMT factor. Lastly, Panel E shows that without

a size factor, our BF3 model fails to explain two anomalies (OC/A and RD/M).

        The evidence suggests that a size factor contributes greatly to capturing intangibles-related

anomalies, whereas profitability factors and financing factors tend to “explain” some of these

anomalies, such as OC/A and RD/M, in the wrong direction.                     Overall, our three-factor

risk-and-behavioral composite model has only a limited ability to explain the set of

intangibles-related anomalies, perhaps partly as a result of the lack of a size factor in the model.



3     Forecasting Returns with Behavioral Factor Loadings

3.1     Estimation Methods and Results


        If FIN and PEAD are behavioral factors that capture return comovement associated with

common mispricing, then loadings on FIN and PEAD will be underpricing proxies. As such, these

loadings should positively predict the cross-section of future stock returns.         We now test this

hypothesis.

        We expect mispricing to shift over time, owing to correction of past mispricing and innovations to

mispricing. Correspondingly, we expect substantial instability in firm-level behavioral factor loadings.

This implies substantial error in the estimation of such loadings unless an appropriate conditional

estimation technique is used to address the instability. This problem should be especially severe for

short-term mispricing, which tends to correct more quickly.


                                                    29

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
       A common presumption for risk factors (such as MKT) in many monthly return tests is that

loadings are persistent over periods of 3 to 5 years. As such, when estimating risk factor loadings, the

standard method has been to run rolling window regressions over the previous 60 months.31 However,

for our behavioral factors, this presumption is unlikely to apply. Though a firm characteristic (upon

which the behavioral factor is constructed) can be indefinitely mispriced by the market, no particular

firm is likely to stay over- or underpriced forever, and therefore individual firm loadings on behavioral

factors, especially short-horizon factors, should not be stable over longer horizons. We therefore

estimate firms’ loadings on behavioral factors using daily excess returns over a one-month horizon.32

       Specifically, estimated firm factor loadings at the start of month t come from regressions of each

firm’s daily (excess) returns on daily (excess) market, FIN, and PEAD factor returns over month

t − 1 (a minimum of 15 valid daily returns is required). The estimated coefficients on FIN and PEAD

(βF IN and βP EAD ) at the end of month t − 1 are then used to forecast firm-level stock returns in

month t in a Fama and MacBeth (1973) regression, with standard control variables and a broad set

of firm characteristics underlying the list of 34 robust anomalies that we examine. Standard controls

include log(ME), log(B/M), and the previous one-month, one-year, and three-year returns to control

for short-run contrarian, momentum, and long-term reversal, respectively. All regressors are winsorized

at top and bottom 1% and standardized to have zero mean and unit standard deviation, to make the

coefficients comparable.

       Table 9 reports the regression results. Models (1) and (2) show that estimated firm βF IN loadings

positively and significantly forecast the following month’s stock returns, with or without standard

controls. In models (3)−(9), we add one by one earnings momentum and short-term profitability

characteristics, and in model (10), we run a horse race between βF IN and all these characteristics,

we find that the coefficients on βF IN remain positive and statistically significant in all tests. This

suggesting that the return predictive ability of βF IN is incremental to these short-horizon anomaly

characteristics.

       In models (11)−(13), we include two financing characteristics used to construct FIN. We find
  31
      However, some recent papers have utilitized daily data over different horizons for estimating the correlation and
volatility components of firm loadings. See, e.g., Frazzini and Pedersen (2014).
   32
      The daily FIN and PEAD factor construction is identical to the construction of the corresponding monthly factors:
each (value-weighted) component portfolio is rebalanced each year at June month end for FIN, and at the end of each
month for PEAD.




                                                          30

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
that the coefficient on βF IN remains statistically significant when controlling for net share issuance

(NSI), but is only marginally significant after controlling for composite share issuance (CSI). When

including both NSI and CSI, βF IN becomes significant again. In models (14)−(22) we add, one by

one, a number of investment characteristics, and in model (23) we run a horse race between βF IN

and all these characteristics. The coefficients on βF IN remain highly significant in all regressions. In

model (24), when controlling for all financing and investment characteristics, the coefficient on βF IN

becomes marginally significant, primarily driven by the strong predictive power of composite share

issuance (CSI). The evidence suggests that the return predictive ability of βF IN is incremental to both

investment and financing characteristics.

       In models (25)−(38), we control for characteristics related to profitability, value, and intangibles.

Consistent with earlier evidence, the return predictive ability of βF IN stays robust and incremental

to profitability and value characteristics. When controlling for intangibles, the coefficients on βF IN

become weaker or statistically insignificant. This is consistent with the evidence in Tables 7 and 8

indicating that our behavioral factors exhibit weak pricing power for the intangibles-related anomalies,

in particular R&D.

       Overall, our findings suggest that estimated firm loadings on FIN positively and significantly

forecast future stock returns. This predictive power is robust to controlling for many well-known

return predictors in the literature. The evidence supports our hypothesis that FIN captures return

comovement resulting from common mispricing.

       While the predictive power of βF IN for future returns is statistically strong, the coefficients on

βP EAD are statistically insignificant in all models. A likely explanation is that the PEAD loadings,

βP EAD , are estimated with substantial noise owing to the fact that these are estimates of a transient

source of mispricing. PEAD is built on cumulative abnormal returns during the four-day window

around earnings announcement (CAR as defined above, or ABR-1 as defined in Table 4). Table 5

shows that the return predictive ability of ABR portfolios becomes much weaker or insignificant just

two quarters after portfolio formation.33
  33
     The correlation between PEAD characteristic (CAR) and estimated PEAD beta is very low−below 0.05. This
suggests that the PEAD-beta estimates are too noisy to predict the cross-section of stock returns. Regressions by
calendar month show that PEAD betas do not predict stock returns in most months (apart from May and September).




                                                       31

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
3.2    Discussion


       These cross-sectional tests generally confirm the predictive power of FIN factor loadings for

future returns, but not PEAD factor loadings. However, for several reasons, we place less weight on

the cross-sectional tests than the time-series tests, particularly for the higher-frequency PEAD factor.

First, each month, the cross-sectional regression (Fama and MacBeth, 1973) coefficient is the return of

a zero-investment portfolio (weighted by the corresponding regressor) in that month. These portfolios

can have large weights on microcap stocks which are costly to trade, and for which microstructure

noise can bias coefficient estimates. Second, since factor loadings are estimated with noise, there is

an errors-in-variables bias in the coefficients. As discussed earlier, such bias is likely to be especially

severe for the loadings on short-horizon behavioral factors. We discuss each of these points in turn.

       The intuition for the bias in the Fama-MacBeth coefficient estimates is as follows. In a setting

like ours where the characteristics (regressors) are relatively stable, the regression coefficient portfolio

will implicitly place relatively constant weight on securities from month to month, much like an

equal-weighted portfolio. Maintaining this approximate constant-weighting requires rebalancing the

portfolio each month, buying firms that have fallen in value and selling firms that have risen. Thus

any microstructure noise (or bid-ask bounce) that results in negative serial correlation in measured

returns will result in strong positive average returns for such portfolios as a result of this rebalancing.

However, these returns are not achievable, as even small transaction costs will tremendously reduce the

actual returns from such a strategy, especially for portfolios tilted towards small and illiquid firms.34

       In adddition, as noted above, the PEAD factor loadings are proxies for transient mispricing and

are therefore estimated with substantial noise. The resulting errors-in-variables problem will reduce

the ability of these loadings to subsume the effect of characteristics in predicting returns.

       Overall, the results for FIN loadings confirm our hypothesis that loadings on behavioral factors

are underpricing proxies.       The lack of a finding for PEAD loadings is neither confirmation nor

disconfirmation, since the theory suggests that such loadings are likely to be unstable and hard to

estimate. Indeed, most papers that introduce new factor models do not perform Fama-Macbeth

regressions, in part because of the errors-in-variables estimation challenges of such tests. Since the
  34
     Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2017) also discuss the biases inherent in the cross-sectional regression method. See their
discussion on p. 12.



                                                        32

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
errors-in-variables problem in cross-sectional regressions severely biases in favor of null findings, it is

notable that these tests do work for our FIN loadings.



4     Effects of Limits to Arbitrage

      We next conduct additional tests of the effects of limits to arbitrage to refine our understanding

of where FIN and PEAD are most effective. We focus on market frictions, which affect arbitrageurs’

ability to exploit mispricing. Owing to limits to arbitrage and short-sale constraints, we expect that

behavioral factors are especially good at explaining returns of stocks with high arbitrage frictions,

such as stocks in the short-leg portfolios and stocks with greater market frictions.



4.1   The Loadings on Behavioral Factors of Long- and Short-leg Portfolios


      To exploit anomaly profits, it is standard to form a zero-investment portfolio by going long

underpriced stocks and short overpriced stocks. Owing to short-sale constraints, overpriced stocks

in the short-leg portfolios are harder to correct and therefore more subject to mispricing. If FIN

and PEAD capture mispricing, they should explain the returns of the short-leg portfolios particularly

well. Generally, we expect the long-leg portfolios (underpriced) to load positively on FIN and PEAD

and the short-leg portfolios (overpriced) to load negatively. If FIN and PEAD explain the short legs

particularly well, we would expect the negative loadings of the short legs to be larger in absolute

magnitude than the positive loadings of the long legs. Moreover, since PEAD primarily captures

high-frequency mispricing and FIN captures low-frequency mispricing, we expect the result for PEAD

loadings to be more pronounced among short-horizon anomalies and the result for FIN loadings more

pronounced among long-horizon anomalies.

      We run time-series regressions of the long- and short-leg portfolio returns on our composite

model. We count how many short-horizon anomalies have more negative (larger in absolute magnitude)

PEAD loadings in the short legs than the positive loadings in the long legs, and we highlight these cases

in boldface. Similarly for long-horizon anomalies, we highlight the cases where the negative loadings

on the FIN factor in the short legs are larger (in absolute magnitude) than the positive loadings in

the long legs. Table 10 reports the results. Panel A shows that for the 12 short-horizon anomalies, 11


                                                    33

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
anomalies have larger negative and statistically significant βP EAD in the short legs. In contrast, only

1 anomaly has larger positive and statistically significant βP EAD in the long legs. The average βP EAD

is −0.51 for the short legs and 0.31 for the long legs. The evidence is consistent with our hypothesis

that PEAD primarily captures high-frequency mispricing embedded in short-horizon anomalies and

explains the returns of the short-leg portfolios particularly well.

      Similarly, Panel B shows that for the 22 long-horizon anomalies, 15 anomalies have larger

negative and statistically significant βF IN in the short legs. In contrast, just 3 anomalies have larger

positive and statistically significant βF IN in the long legs. The average βF IN is −0.27 for the short

legs and 0.03 for the long legs.        Again, the evidence confirms that FIN primarily captures

low-frequency mispricing embedded in long-horizon anomalies and explains the returns of the

short-leg portfolios particularly well. Overall, the findings support the idea that FIN and PEAD

capture commonality in mispricing.



4.2   Market Frictions and the Beta-Return Relation


      We have hypothesized that firm loadings or betas on FIN and PEAD are proxies for the degree

of mispricing, implying a positive relation between FIN or PEAD betas and future stock returns. In

Section 3, we confirmed the strong return predictive ability of FIN betas, but found that PEAD betas

have no statistically significant power to forecast future returns, potentially as a result of estimation

issues involving betas on transient mispricing among small illiquid firms.

      In this section, we further propose that market frictions impede arbitrage in mispricing, and

thereby affect the sensitivity of the FIN-beta/return relation. Owing to limits to arbitrage and short-

sale constraints, we expect high-friction stocks to have greater mispricing. Mispricing, as proxied by

factor betas on FIN, is measured with noise. For stocks with low frictions and low mispricing (either

over- or underpricing), most of the variation in the mispricing proxies (factor betas) would be noise.

For such stocks, we should observe low sensitivity of expected returns to estimated factor betas. In

contrast, for stocks with large frictions and thus greater potential under- or overpricing, we expect less

noise in the mispricing proxies and therefore high sensitivity of expected returns to estimated factor

betas. Therefore, we hypothesize that the FIN-beta/return relation should be stronger for high-friction

stocks.


                                                   34

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
      We first test this hypothesis using two-way portfolio sorts on friction proxies and factor betas.

Specifically, at the beginning of each month, we rank firms into 25 portfolios by independent sorts on

their FIN betas (from Section 3) and market friction proxies. Portfolios are held for the current month

and rebalanced at the beginning of the next month. We calculate value-weighted returns for each

portfolio, and corresponding Newey and West (1987) corrected t-statistics. Following the literature,

we use three friction proxies: the illiquidity measure (ILLIQ) of Amihud (2002), the institutional

ownership defined as shares held by institutions divided by shares outstanding (IO), and the residual

institutional ownership (RIO) of Nagel (2005), controlling for size. Firms with larger ILLIQ, or smaller

IO and RIO, have greater market frictions. Consistent with our hypothesis, Panel A of Table 11 shows

that, using ILLIQ and IO as friction proxies, the FIN-beta/return relation is positive and statistically

significant only for high-friction stocks. The results using RIO are consistent with our hypothesis but

statistically insignificant.

      Next, we run Fama and MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of monthly stock returns on

firms’ βF IN , the quintile ranks of their market friction proxies, and the interactions between βF IN

and friction ranks, controlling for standard return predictors. All regressors are winsorized at top and

bottom 1% and standardized to have zero mean and unit standard deviation, to make the coefficients

comparable. Panel B of Table 11 shows the results. We are particularly interested in the interaction

terms. The coefficients on the interaction between βF IN and ILLIQ ranks are statistically insignificant.

On the other hand, the coefficients on the interactions between βF IN and IO or RIO ranks are both

negative and statistically significant, suggesting that high-friction stocks (in low IO or RIO ranks)

have greater beta-return sensitivity.

      Overall, the evidence from portfolio sorts and cross-sectional regressions is largely consistent

with our hypothesis that the sensitivity of FIN-beta/return relation is stronger among stocks with

higher arbitrage frictions, indicating that FIN betas capture mispricing.



5    Conclusion

      We supplement the market factor of the CAPM with behavioral factors intended to capture

commonality in mispricing associated with psychological biases. We focus on two psychological biases



                                                   35

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
that are likely to affect asset prices: overconfidence and limited attention. Motivated by the idea

that investor overconfidence induces commonality in longer-horizon mispricing, and that managers

time share issuance and repurchase to exploit this mispricing (Stein, 1996; Daniel, Hirshleifer, and

Subrahmanyam, 1998, 2001), we create a financing factor (FIN) based on external financing. Motivated

by the theory that limited investor attention induces stock market underreaction to public news arrival,

we consider a post-earnings announcement drift factor (PEAD) constructed based upon earnings

surprises. We further hypothesize that FIN especially reflects the returns associated with long-term

(> 1 year) mispricing, and that PEAD especially reflects returns associated with shorter-term (< 1

year) mispricing.

      Our new factor model is designed to capture these complementary aspects of mispricing. We

test the ability of our three-factor risk-and-behavioral composite model to explain well-known return

anomalies.   This composite approach is suggested by theoretical models in which both risk and

misvaluation proxies predict returns.     We find that the FIN factor is dominant in explaining

long-horizon return anomalies, and the PEAD factor is dominant for short-horizon anomalies.

      We compare the model performance with standard factor models and recently prominent models,

such as the profitability-based model of Novy-Marx (2013), the five-factor model of Fama and French

(2015), the q-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015), and the mispricing model of Stambaugh

and Yuan (2017). Our composite model outperforms all other models in explaining the returns of

34 anomaly portfolios, based on the list of anomalies considered in Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). In

addition to its simple conceptual motivation, the composite model is parsimonious in the sense that,

along with the market, two behavioral factors built upon only three economic characteristics−size,

financing, and earnings surprise−capture a wide range of anomalies.

      If FIN and PEAD are indeed priced behavioral factors that capture commonality in mispricing,

then behavioral models imply that firm loadings on FIN should be proxies for persistent underpricing,

and loadings on PEAD should be proxies for transient underpricing. In consequence, these loadings

should positively predict the cross-section of stock returns. Using Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional

regressions, we confirm that estimated FIN loadings strongly forecast future returns. Notably, this

predictive power remains robust even after controlling for most of the 34 anomaly characteristics that

we examine. In contrast, estimated PEAD loadings have no return predictive ability. It is not clear



                                                  36

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
how to interpret the PEAD finding, since there are econometric issues associated with the instability

of the PEAD loadings as proxies for transient mispricing and the heavy influence of small illiquid firms

on Fama-MacBeth regression tests.

      Finally, we conduct several tests related to limits to arbitrage and provide additional evidence

suggesting that FIN and PEAD indeed capture mispricing effects. If these are behavioral factors, we

expect the mispricing that they identify to be stronger when limits to arbitrage, including short-sale

constraints, are more binding. We find that FIN and PEAD are particularly useful for predicting

the returns of stocks with high arbitrage frictions, such as over- rather than under-priced stocks, and

stocks with greater trading frictions.

      Our paper contributes to a large literature on factor pricing models and anomalies. It is a

mathematical fact that a one-factor model always exists that perfectly explains average returns, ex

post. But without theoretical motivation, such a model represents meaningless overfitting. The factor

model we offer has an attractive behavioral motivation, and also a better fit than existing factor models.

So our conceptual contribution here is not in devising novel factors. It is to suggest that based on

theoretical considerations, behavioral effects should be captured well by two behavioral factors that

reflect short- and long-horizon mispricing; and that when these are combined with the market factor

(to capture rational risk premia), the resulting factor model should capture the cross-section of stock

returns very effectively. Our empirical contribution is to show that this is indeed the case.

      Our paper also partially addresses the prevalent data-mining concern in the anomaly literature.

McLean and Pontiff (2016), Harvey, Liu, and Zhu (2016), and Linnainmaa and Roberts (2018) each

argue that some fraction of the return premia associated with various anomalies is a result of overfitting

rather than actual mispricing. In contrast, Lu, Stambaugh, and Yuan (2017) show that anomalies

previously identified in U.S. cross-sectional equity data are also significant in five non-U.S. markets,

suggesting that the characteristics underlying these anomalies robustly identify mispricing.

      The facts that our model fits very well and that the two behavioral factors contribute heavily

to fitting many well-known anomalies suggest that many important anomalies are about mispricing.

Furthermore, if anomalies can be explained by just a few economically-motivated factors, it suggests

to us that they are far from wholly spurious. In particular, the strong performance of our financing

factor in explaining anomalies suggests that corporate managers are issuing and repurchasing to exploit


                                                   37

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
many of the well-known anomalies. This also suggests that these effects have some basis in reality.




                                                 38

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
References
Adrian, T., E. Etula, and T. Muir, 2014, “Financial Intermediaries and the Cross-Section of Asset
 Returns,” The Journal of Finance, 69(6), 2557–2596.

Amihud, Y., 2002, “Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects,” Journal of
 Financial Markets, 5(1), 31–56.

Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang, 2006, “The Cross-Section of Volatility and Expected
 Returns,” Journal of Finance, 61(1), 259–299.

Bagnoli, M., M. B. Clement, and S. G. Watts, 2005, “Around-the-Clock Media Coverage and the
  Timing of Earnings Announcements,” Working paper, Purdue University.

Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2002, “Market Timing and Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance, 57(1),
  1–32.

        , 2006, “Investor Sentiment and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance,
  61(4), 1645–1680.

Balakrishnan, K., E. Bartov, and L. Faurel, 2010, “Post loss/profit announcement drift,” Journal of
  Accounting and Economics, 50(1), 20–41.

Ball, R., and P. Brown, 1968, “An Empirical Evaluation of Accounting Income Numbers,” Journal of
  Accounting Research, 6(2), 159–178.

Ball, R., J. Gerakos, J. T. Linnainmaa, and V. Nikolaev, 2016, “Accruals, cash flows, and operating
  profitability in the cross section of stock returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 121(1), 28–45.

Barberis, N., and M. Huang, 2001, “Mental Accounting, Loss Aversion, and Individual Stock Returns,”
  Journal of Finance, 56(4), 1247–1292.

Barberis, N., and A. Shleifer, 2003, “Style investing,” Journal of Financial Economics, 68(2), 161–199.

Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, “A model of investor sentiment,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 49(3), 307–343.

Barillas, F., and J. A. Shanken, 2017, “Which Alpha?,” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Barth, M. E., J. A. Elliott, and M. W. Finn, 1999, “Market Rewards Associated with Patterns of
  Increasing Earnings,” Journal of Accounting Research, 37(2), 387–413.

Basu, S., 1983, “The relationship between earnings’ yield, market value and return for NYSE common
  stocks: Further evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics, 12(1), 129–156.

Belo, F., and X. Lin, 2012, “The Inventory Growth Spread,” Review of Financial Studies, 25(1),
  278–313.

Berk, J. B., R. C. Green, and V. Naik, 1999, “Optimal Investment, Growth Options, and Security
  Returns,” Journal of Finance, 54(5), 1553–1607.

Bernard, V. L., and J. K. Thomas, 1989, “Post-Earnings-Announcement Drift: Delayed Price Response
  or Risk Premium?,” Journal of Accounting Research, 27(Supplement), 1–36.

       , 1990, “Evidence that Stock Prices Do Not Fully Reflect the Implications of Current Earnings
  for Future Earnings,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 13, 305–340.

                                                  39

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
Black, F., 1972, “Capital Market Equilibrium with Restricted Borrowing,” Journal of Business, 45,
  444–455.

Boudoukh, J., R. Michaely, M. Richardson, and M. Roberts, 2007, “On the Importance of Measuring
  Payout Yield: Implications for Empirical Asset Pricing,” Journal of Finance, 62(2), 877–915.

Bradshaw, M. T., S. A. Richardson, and R. G. Sloan, 2006, “The Relation between Corporate
  Financing Activities, Analysts’ Forecasts, and Stock Returns,” Journal of Accounting and
  Economics, 42(1-2), 53–85.

Brandt, M. W., R. Kishore, P. Santa-Clara, and M. Venkatachalam, 2008, “Earnings announcements
  are full of surprises,” Duke-Fuqua working paper.

Brav, A., C. Geczy, and P. A. Gompers, 2000, “Is the abnormal return following equity issuances
  anomalous?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 56(2), 209–249.

Campbell, J. Y., J. Hilscher, and J. Szilagyi, 2008, “In Search of Distress Risk,” Journal of Finance,
  63(6), 2899–2939.

Carhart, M. M., 1997, “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance, 52(1),
  57–82.

Chan, L. K., N. Jegadeesh, and J. Lakonishok, 1996, “Momentum Strategies,” Journal of Finance,
  51(5), 1681–1713.

Chan, L. K. C., J. Lakonishok, and T. Sougiannis, 2001, “The Stock Market Valuation of Research
  and Development Expenditures,” Journal of Finance, 56(6), 2431–2456.

Chordia, T., and L. Shivakumar, 2006, “Earnings and price momentum,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 80(3), 627–656.

Cooper, M. J., H. Gulen, and M. Ion, 2017, “The Use of Asset Growth in Empirical Asset Pricing
  Models,” University of Utah Working Paper.

Cooper, M. J., H. Gulen, and M. J. Schill, 2008, “Asset Growth and the Cross-Section of Stock
  Returns,” Journal of Finance, 63(4), 1609–1651.

Da, Z., Q. Liu, and E. Schaumburg, 2014, “A Closer Look at the Short-Term Return Reversal,”
 Management Science, 60(3), 541–804.

Daniel, K. D., D. Hirshleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam, 1998, “Investor Psychology and Security Market
 Under- and Overreactions,” Journal of Finance, 53(6), 1839–1885.

       , 2001, “Overconfidence, Arbitrage, and Equilibrium Asset Pricing,” Journal of Finance, 56(3),
  921–965.

Daniel, K. D., and S. Titman, 1997, “Evidence on the Characteristics of Cross-Sectional Variation in
 Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 52(1), 1–33.

       , 2006, “Market Reactions to Tangible and Intangible Information,” Journal of Finance, 61(4),
  1605–1643.

      , 2016, “Another Look at Market Responses to Tangible and Intangible Information,” Critical
  Finance Review, 5(1), 165–175.


                                                 40

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
Davis, J. L., E. F. Fama, and K. R. French, 2000, “Characteristics, Covariances, and Average Returns:
  1929 to 1997,” Journal of Finance, 55(1), 389–406.

DeBondt, W. F., and R. Thaler, 1985, “Does the Stock Market Overreact?,” Journal of Finance,
  3(40), 793–805.

Dechow, P. M., R. G. Sloan, and M. T. Soliman, 2004, “Implied Equity Duration: A New Measure of
  Equity Risk,” Review of Accounting Studies, 9(2), 197–228.

DellaVigna, S., and J. Pollet, 2009, “Investor Inattention and Friday Earnings Announcements,”
  Journal of Finance, 64(2), 709–749.

Denis, D. J., and A. Sarin, 2001, “Is the market surprised by poor earnings realizations following
  seasoned equity offerings?,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 36(2), 169–193.

Dong, M., D. A. Hirshleifer, and S. H. Teoh, 2012, “Overvalued Equity and Financing Decisions,”
 Review of Financial Studies, 25(12), 3645–3683.

Eckbo, B. E., R. W. Masulis, and O. Norli, 2000, “Seasoned Public Offerings: Resolution of the ‘new
  issues puzzle’,” Journal of Financial Economics, 56(2), 251–291.

Eisfeldt, A. L., and D. Papanikolaou, 2013, “Organization Capital and the Cross-Section of Expected
  Returns,” Journal of Finance, 68(4), 1365–1406.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 1992, “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of
  Finance, 47(2), 427–465.

       , 1993, “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 33, 3–56.

       , 1996, “Multifactor Explanations of Asset Pricing Anomalies,” Journal of Finance, 51(1),
  55–84.

       , 2015, “A Five-Factor Asset Pricing Model,” Journal of Financial Economics, 116(1), 1–22.

       , 2018, “Choosing Factors,” Journal of Financial Economics, 128, 234–252.

Fama, E. F., and J. MacBeth, 1973, “Risk, Return and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 81, 607–636.

Foster, G., C. Olsen, and T. Shevlin, 1984, “Earnings Releases, Anomalies, and the Behavior of
  Security Returns,” Accounting Review, 59(4), 574–603.

Francis, J., D. Pagach, and J. Stephan, 1992, “The Stock Market Response to Earnings Announcements
  Released During Trading versus Nontrading Periods,” Journal of Accounting Research, 30(2), 165–
  184.

Frazzini, A., and L. H. Pedersen, 2014, “Betting Against Beta,” Journal of Financial Economics,
  111(1), 1–25.

Freyberger, J., A. Neuhierl, and M. Weber, 2017, “Dissecting Characteristics Nonparametrically,”
  Working paper, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Gervais, S., and T. Odean, 2001, “Learning to be Overconfident,” Review of Financial Studies, 14(1),
 1–27.

                                                 41

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
Gibbons, M. R., S. A. Ross, and J. Shanken, 1989, “A Test of the Efficiency of a Given Portfolio,”
  Econometrica, 57(5), 1121–1152.

Goetzmann, W. N. ., and M. Massa, 2008, “Disposition Matters: Volume, Volatility, and Price Impact
 of a Behavioral Bias,” Journal of Portfolio Management, 34(2), 103–125.

Graham, J. R., and C. R. Harvey, 2001, “The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence from
  the field,” Journal of financial economics, 60(2-3), 187–243.

Green, J., J. R. M. Hand, and X. F. Zhang, 2013, “The supraview of return predictive signals,” Review
  of Accounting Studies, 18(3), 692–730.

Greenwood, R. M., and S. G. Hanson, 2012, “Share Issuance and Factor Timing,” Journal of Finance,
  67(2), 761–798.

Hafzalla, N., R. Lundholm, and E. M. Van Winkle, 2011, “Percent Accruals,” Accounting Review,
  86(1), 209–236.

Hansen, L. P., and R. Jagannathan, 1997, “Assessing Specification Errors in Stochastic Discount
  Factor Models,” Journal of Finance, 52(2), 557–590.

Harvey, C. R., Y. Liu, and H. Zhu, 2016, “... and the cross-section of expected returns,” Review of
 Financial Studies, 29(1), 5–68.

Haugen, R. A., and N. L. Baker, 1996, “Commonality in the determinants of expected stock returns,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 41(3), 401–439.

He, Z., B. Kelly, and A. Manela, 2017, “Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from many asset
  classes,” Journal of Financial Economics, 126(1), 1–35.

He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy, 2013, “Intermediary asset pricing,” American Economic Review, 103(2),
  732–70.

Hirshleifer, D., K. Hou, S. H. Teoh, and Y. Zhang, 2004, “Do Investors Overvalue Firms with Bloated
  Balance Sheets?,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 38(1), 297–331.

Hirshleifer, D., and D. Jiang, 2010, “A Financing-Based Misvaluation Factor and the Cross Section of
  Expected Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, 23(9), 3401–3436.

Hirshleifer, D., S. S. Lim, and S. H. Teoh, 2009, “Driven to Distraction: Extraneous Events and
  Underreaction to Earnings News,” Journal of Finance, 64(5), 2289–2325.

        , 2011, “Limited Investor Attention and Stock Market Misreactions to Accounting
  Information,” Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 1(1), 35–73.

Hirshleifer, D., and S. H. Teoh, 2003, “Limited attention, information disclosure, and financial
  reporting,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 36(1), 337–386.

Hou, K., L. Peng, and W. Xiong, 2009, “A Tale of Two Anomalies: The Implication of Investor
  Attention for Price and Earnings Momentum,” Working paper, Ohio State University.

Hou, K., C. Xue, and L. Zhang, 2015, “Digesting Anomalies: An Investment Approach,” Review of
 Financial Studies, 28(3), 650–705.

       , 2017, “Replicating Anomalies,” Working paper, Ohio State University.

                                                 42

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
Hribar, P., and D. W. Collins, 2002, “Errors in Estimating Accruals: Implications for Empirical
  Research,” Journal of Accounting Research, 40(1), 105–134.

Ikenberry, D., J. Lakonishok, and T. Vermaelen, 1995, “Market underreaction to open market share
  repurchases,” Journal of Financial Economics, 39(2-3), 181–208.

Jagannathan, R., and Z. Wang, 1996, “The Conditional CAPM and the Cross-Section of Expected
  Returns,” Journal of Finance, 51(1), 3–53.

Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman, 1993, “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers: Implications for
  Stock Market Efficiency,” Journal of Finance, 48(1), 65–91.

Kelly, B. T., S. Pruitt, and Y. Su, 2017, “Some characteristics are risk exposures, and the rest are
  irrelevant,” Chicago Booth Research Paper.

Khan, M., L. Kogan, and G. Serafeim, 2012, “Mutual Fund Trading Pressure: Firm-Level Stock Price
 Impact and Timing of SEOs,” Journal of Finance, 67(4), 1371–1395.

Kozak, S., S. Nagel, and S. Santosh, 2017, “Shrinking the Cross Section,” Working paper, University
 of Michigan.

       , 2018, “Interpreting factor models,” Journal of Finance, 73, 1183–1223.

Kumar, A., and C. M. Lee, 2006, “Retail Investor Sentiment and Return Comovements,” Journal of
 Finance, 61(5), 2451–2486.

Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1994, “Contrarian Investment, Extrapolation, and Risk,”
  Journal of Finance, 49(5), 1541–1578.

Lakonishok, J., and T. Vermaelen, 1990, “Anomalous Price Behavior Around Repurchase Tender
  Offers,” Journal of Finance, 45(2), 455–477.

Lettau, M., and M. Pelger, 2018, “Factors that fit the time series and cross-section of stock returns,”
  National Bureau of Economic Research working paper.

Linnainmaa, J. T., and M. R. Roberts, 2018, “The History of the Cross-Section of Stock Returns,”
  Review of Financial Studies, 31(7), 2606–2649.

Lintner, J., 1965, “Security prices, risk, and maximal gains from diversification,” Journal of Finance,
  20(4), 587–615.

Loughran, T., and J. R. Ritter, 1995, “The new issues puzzle,” Journal of Finance, 50(1), 23–51.

       , 2000, “Uniformly least powerful tests of market efficiency,” Journal of Financial Economics,
  55(3), 361–389.

Lu, X., R. F. Stambaugh, and Y. Yuan, 2017, “Anomalies Abroad: Beyond Data Mining,” Working
  paper, Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance.

Lyandres, E., L. Sun, and L. Zhang, 2008, “The New Issues Puzzle: Testing the Investment-Based
  Explanation,” Review of Financial Studies, 21(6), 2825–2855.

McLean, R. D., and J. Pontiff, 2016, “Does academic research destroy stock return predictability?,”
 Journal of Finance, 71(1), 5–32.



                                                  43

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
Moskowitz, T. J., and M. Grinblatt, 1999, “Do Industries Explain Momentum?,” Journal of Finance,
 54(4), 1249–1290.

Myers, S. C., and N. S. Majluf, 1984, “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when Firms
 Have Information That Investors do not Have,” Journal of Financial Economics, 13(2), 187–221.

Nagel, S., 2005, “Short sales, institutional investors and the cross-section of stock returns,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 78(2), 277–309.

Newey, W. K., and K. D. West, 1987, “A Simple, Positive, Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and
  Autocorrelation Consistent Covaiance Matrix,” Econometrica, 55(3), 703–708.

Novy-Marx, R., 2011, “Operating Leverage,” Review of Finance, 15(1), 103–134.

       , 2013, “The other side of value: The gross profitability premium,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 108(1), 1–28.

       , 2015a, “Fundamentally, momentum is fundamental momentum,” Working paper, University
  of Rochester.

       , 2015b, “How can a q-theoretic model price momentum?,” Working paper, University of
  Rochester.

       , 2016, “Backtesting strategies based on multiple signals,” Working paper, University of
  Rochester.

Pastor, L., and R. F. Stambaugh, 2003, “Liquidity Risk and Expect Stock Returns,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 111(3), 642–685.

Pontiff, J., and A. Woodgate, 2008, “Share Issuance and Cross-Sectional Returns,” The Journal of
  Finance, 63(2), 921–945.

Richardson, S. A., R. G. Sloan, M. T. Soliman, and I. Tuna, 2005, “Accrual reliability, earnings
  persistence and stock prices,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 39(3), 437–485.

Ritter, J. R., 1991, “The Long-Run Performance of Initial Public Offerings,” Journal of Finance,
  46(1), 3–27.

Rosenberg, B., K. Reid, and R. Lanstein, 1985, “Persuasive evidence of market inefficiency,” Journal
  of Portfolio Management, 11(3), 9–16.

Sharpe, W. F., 1964, “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of
  Risk,” Journal of Finance, 19(3), 425–442.

Sloan, R., 1996, “Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows about future
  earnings?,” Accounting Review, 71(3), 289–315.

Spiess, K., and J. Affleck-Graves, 1995, “Underperformance in long-run stock returns following
  seasoned equity offerings,” Journal of Financial Economics, 38(3), 243–267.

Stambaugh, R. F., J. Yu, and Y. Yuan, 2012, “The Short of It: Investor Sentiment and Anomalies,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 104, 288–302.

Stambaugh, R. F., J. Yu, and Y. Yuan, 2014, “The long of it: Odds that investor sentiment spuriously
  predicts anomaly returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 114(3), 613–619.

                                                  44

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
Stambaugh, R. F., J. Yu, and Y. Yuan, 2015, “Arbitrage Asymmetry and the Idiosyncratic Volatility
  Puzzle,” Journal of Finance, 70(5), 1903–1948.

Stambaugh, R. F., and Y. Yuan, 2017, “Mispricing Factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 30, 1270–
  1315.

Stein, J. C., 1996, “Rational Capital Budgeting in an Irrational World,” Journal of Business, 69(4),
  429–455.

Thomas, J. K., and H. Zhang, 2002, “Inventory Changes and Future Returns,” Review of Accounting
  Studies, 7(2-3), 163–187.

Xing, Y., 2008, “Interpreting the Value Effect Through the Q-Theory: An Empirical Investigation,”
  Review of Financial Studies, 21(4), 1767–1795.




                                                 45

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                                                          Table 1: Summary Statistics of Factor Portfolios
     Panel A reports the mean and standard deviations of monthly factor returns for a set of traded factors. In addition, we report the t-statistic testing whether the
     mean return is different from zero, the corresponding monthly Sharpe ratio, and the sample period for each return factor. Panel B reports Pearson correlations
     between factor portfolio returns, and Panel C reports summary statistics for the ex post tangency portfolios of various factor-portfolio combinations. These factors
     include the Mkt-Rf, SMB, HML, MOM factors proposed by Fama and French (1993) and Carhart (1997), and modified versions of these factors proposed by
     Novy-Marx (2013, NM4), Fama and French (2015, FF5), Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015, HXZ4), and Stambaugh and Yuan (2017, SY4). In addition we include: the
     investment factors CMA and IVA of Fama and French (2015) and Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015), the profitability factors PMU, RMW, and ROE of Novy-Marx
     (2013), Fama and French (2015), and Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015), and the two mispricing factors MGMT and PERF of Stambaugh and Yuan (2017). Monthly
     factor returns are either from Kenneth French’s web page or provided by corresponding authors. FIN and PEAD are our behavioral factors. FIN is the
     financing-based misvaluation factor constructed based upon two financing characteristics, net share issuance and composite issuance. PEAD is the post-earnings
     announcement drift factor, constructed based upon earnings surprises (measured as the four-day cumulative abnormal returns around quarterly earnings
     announcements). In Panel C, we add asterisk after factors SMB, HML and MOM, meaning these factors have modified versions, and asterisk after models NM4,
     FF5, HXZ4 and SY4, meaning these models use modified factors.


       Panel A: Factor premiums

                          Mean         Std         t-value      SR          N            Sample period
46




       MKT                0.53         4.59        2.62         0.12        510          1972:07   –   2014:12
       SMB                0.17         3.13        1.19         0.05        510          1972:07   –   2014:12
       SMB(HXZ4)          0.29         3.14        2.06         0.09        510          1972:07   –   2014:12
       SMB(SY4)           0.41         2.81        3.28         0.15        498          1972:07   –   2013:12
       HML                0.41         2.94        3.14         0.14        510          1972:07   –   2014:12
       HML(NM4)           0.44         1.49        6.43         0.29        486          1972:07   –   2012:12
       MOM                0.68         4.44        3.45         0.15        510          1972:07   –   2014:12
       MOM(NM4)           0.61         2.90        4.6          0.21        486          1972:07   –   2012:12
       CMA                0.37         1.95        4.27         0.19        510          1972:07   –   2014:12
       IVA                0.43         1.86        5.23         0.23        510          1972:07   –   2014:12
       PMU                0.27         1.18        5.06         0.23        486          1972:07   –   2012:12
       RMW                0.34         2.24        3.44         0.15        510          1972:07   –   2014:12
       ROE                0.56         2.59        4.88         0.22        510          1972:07   –   2014:12
       MGMT               0.67         2.87        5.24         0.23        498          1972:07   –   2013:12
       PERF               0.65         3.90        3.73         0.17        498          1972:07   –   2013:12
       FIN                0.80         3.92        4.6          0.20        510          1972:07   –   2014:12
       PEAD               0.65         1.85        7.91         0.35        510          1972:07   –   2014:12




                           Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
     Panel B: Correlation matrix

                                         SMB    SMB                      HML                   MOM
                      MKT       SMB                             HML           MOM                        CMA      IVA    PMU     RMW     ROE     MGMT PERF             FIN
                                        (HXZ4) (SY4)                    (NM4)                  (NM4)
     SMB               0.26
     SMB(HXZ4)         0.25     0.95
     SMB(SY4)          0.21     0.92       0.93
     HML              -0.28     -0.22      -0.05     -0.05
     HML(NM4)         -0.19     -0.04       0.09      0.10      0.81
     MOM              -0.14      0.01       0.01      0.03      -0.17      -0.12
     MOM(NM4)         -0.19     -0.06      -0.07     -0.04      -0.20      -0.18      0.95
     CMA              -0.39     -0.12      -0.02      0.01      0.69       0.61       0.02      -0.01
     IVA              -0.37     -0.23      -0.12     -0.09      0.68       0.55       0.04       0.02    0.90
     PMU              -0.29     -0.27      -0.25     -0.17      -0.10      -0.22      0.25       0.28    -0.03    0.03
     RMW              -0.21     -0.22      -0.16     -0.13       0.01      -0.01      0.21       0.24    -0.03    0.00    0.57
     ROE              -0.19     -0.38      -0.31     -0.28      -0.10      -0.21      0.49      0.52     -0.08    0.06    0.59   0.58
     MGMT             -0.54     -0.39      -0.29     -0.25      0.72       0.59       0.06       0.06    0.76    0.76     0.16   0.16    0.09
     PERF             -0.26     -0.09      -0.12     -0.05      -0.30      -0.24      0.72      0.70     -0.06   -0.06    0.59   0.48    0.63     0.01
     FIN              -0.50     -0.49      -0.38     -0.30      0.65       0.50       0.09       0.09    0.58    0.66     0.35   0.35    0.33     0.80      0.15
47




     PEAD             -0.10      0.03       0.00      0.01      -0.16      -0.13      0.46      0.48      0.00   -0.04    0.09   0.07    0.22     0.00      0.38       -0.05

     Panel C: Ex post tangency portfolios

                                                                                        Portfolio Weights                                                Tangency Portfolios
                                   MKT       SMB*      HML*       MOM*        RMW       CMA      PMU      IVA    ROE     MGMT    PERF   FIN     PEAD     Mean   Std       SR
     (1)   FF3                      0.29      0.15       0.56                                                                                            0.41   1.86     0.22
     (2)   Carhart4                 0.23      0.09      0.43       0.26                                                                                  0.49   1.58     0.31
     (3)   FF5*                     0.17      0.06      -0.01                  0.31     0.47                                                             0.38   1.06     0.36
     (4)   NM4*                     0.10                 0.40      0.11                           0.39                                                   0.40   0.70     0.57
     (5)   HXZ4*                    0.14      0.13                                                        0.44   0.29                                    0.46   1.08     0.43
     (6)   SY4*                     0.22      0.17                                                                       0.43    0.18                    0.59   1.20     0.50
     (7)   BF2                                                                                                                          0.22    0.78     0.68   1.64     0.41
     (8)   BF3                      0.19                                                                                                0.26    0.55     0.66   1.29     0.52

     (9) BF3 + PMU                  0.16                                                          0.29                                  0.17    0.39     0.55   1.01     0.54
     (10) BF3 + RMW, CMA            0.16                                       0.10     0.19                                            0.13    0.41     0.56   1.05     0.54
     (11) BF3 + IVA, ROE            0.16                                                                  0.25   0.09                   0.11    0.40     0.58   1.06     0.55
     (12) BF3 + MGMT, PERF          0.20                                                                                 0.27    0.07   0.06    0.39     0.64   1.15     0.56

     (13) All factors ex. BF2       0.15      0.15      -0.01      -0.02      -0.04     -0.09     0.25   0.14    0.13    0.28    0.05                    0.47   0.86     0.54
     (14) All factors               0.12      0.11       0.01      -0.05      -0.02     -0.13     0.23   0.17    0.08    0.20    0.02   0.00    0.26     0.49   0.76     0.65


                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                                                Table 2: Factor Regressions of Behavioral Factors on Other Factors
     This table reports the results of time-series regressions of behavioral factors on the sets of factors incorporated in other factor models: (1) the Fama-French
     three-factor model (FF3), (2) the Carhart four-factor model (Carhart4), (3) the profitability-based model of Novy-Marx (2013, NM4), (4) the five-factor model of
     Fama and French (2015, FF5), (5) the q-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015, HXZ4), (6) the four-factor mispricing model of Stambaugh and Yuan (2017,
     SY4), and (7) the “kitchen sink” model with all factors. The asterisk after factors SMB, HML and MOM means that these factors have modified versions and the
     asterisk after models NM4, FF5, HXZ4 and SY4 means these models use modified factors. The sample period is from 1972:07 to 2014:12, depending on data
     availability. Newey-West corrected t-statistics (with 6 lags) are shown in parentheses.

                Mean                        α         MKT        SMB*       HML*       MOM*      PMU       RMW       CMA       IVA       ROE       MGMT       PERF      Adj. R2

       FIN      0.80***   (1) FF3           0.71***   -0.24***   -0.38***   0.67***                                                                                     60.4%
                (4.60)                      (5.61)    (-5.55)    (-5.55)    (9.22)
                          (2) Carhart4      0.59***   -0.21***   -0.38***   0.72***    0.13***                                                                          63.2%
                                            (4.64)    (-5.74)    (-4.92)    (10.54)    (2.93)
                          (3) NM4*          -0.02     -0.26***              1.41***    0.04      1.23***                                                                56.4%
                                            (-0.13)   (-8.29)               (13.29)    (0.27)    (4.10)
                          (4) FF5*          0.34***   -0.13***   -0.19***   0.45***                        0.68***   0.56***                                            73.9%
                                            (3.59)    (-4.88)    (-3.58)    (9.26)                         (9.20)    (7.43)
                          (5) HXZ4*         0.31**    -0.19***   -0.25***                                                      1.14***   0.29***                        58.5%
48




                                            (2.42)    (-4.32)    (-2.68)                                                       (10.49)   (3.01)
                          (6) SY4*          0.12      -0.05      -0.14                                                                             1.02***    0.13**    68.1%
                                            (1.14)    (-1.22)    (-1.25)                                                                           (16.69)    (2.54)
                          (7) All factors   -0.03     -0.06*     -0.14***   0.41***    -0.04     0.35**    0.14      -0.42**   0.54***   0.13      0.58***    0.09      79.1%
                                            (-0.24)   (-1.77)    (-2.70)    (5.51)     (-0.69)   (2.07)    (0.83)    (-2.22)   (3.07)    (1.49)    (10.12)    (1.51)

       PEAD     0.65***   (1) FF3           0.73***   -0.06***   0.02       -0.12***                                                                                     3.2%
                (7.91)                      (8.47)    (-2.70)    (0.34)     (-2.75)
                          (2) Carhart4      0.56***   -0.03      0.01       -0.06      0.18***                                                                          19.2%
                                            (7.34)    (-1.27)    (0.40)     (-1.47)    (6.31)
                          (3) NM4*          0.54***   -0.02                 -0.09      0.31***   -0.11                                                                  20.3%
                                            (6.27)    (-0.66)               (-1.27)    (6.74)    (-1.04)
                          (4) FF5*          0.70***   -0.05**    -0.05      -0.14***                       -0.05     0.10                                                3.8%
                                            (7.90)    (-2.05)    (-1.31)    (-2.95)                        (-0.94)   (1.18)
                          (5) HXZ4*         0.60***   -0.04*     0.05                                                          -0.09     0.16***                         7.0%
                                            (5.78)    (-1.71)    (0.89)                                                        (-1.11)   (2.91)
                          (6) SY4*          0.53***   -0.00      0.02                                                                              -0.00      0.18***   13.6%
                                            (5.61)    (-0.14)    (0.42)                                                                            (-0.03)    (5.23)
                          (7) All factors   0.58***   -0.02      -0.01      -0.06      0.15***   -0.15     -0.03     0.25*     -0.27**   0.04      0.03       0.06      23.9%
                                            (6.76)    (-0.76)    (-0.15)    (-1.24)    (3.38)    (-1.10)   (-0.24)   (1.72)    (-2.11)   (0.41)    (0.41)     (1.17)


                           Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                                              Table 3: Factor Regressions of Other Factors on Behavioral Factors
     This table reports the results of time-series regressions of other factors on behavioral factors. SMB, HML, and MOM are the standard size, value, and momentum
     factors. PMU is the profitability factor of Novy-Marx (2013). RMW and CMA are the investment and profitability factors of Fama and French (2015). IVA and
     ROE are the investment and profitability factors of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). MGMT and PERF are the two composite mispricing factors of Stambaugh and
     Yuan (2017). The sample period is from 1972:07 to 2014:12, depending on data availability. Newey-West corrected t-statistics (with 6 lags) are shown in
     parentheses.


                        Mean              α           FIN          PEAD        Adj. R2             α          MKT          FIN          PEAD         Adj. R2
            SMB         0.17              0.47***     -0.39***     0.01        23.6%               0.45***    0.02         -0.38***     0.02         23.5%
                        (1.19)            (3.65)      (-4.56)      (0.10)                          (3.09)     (0.25)       (-3.44)      (0.14)

            HML         0.41***           0.15        0.49***      -0.20***    43.9%               0.12       0.03         0.50***      -0.19***     43.9%
                        (3.14)            (1.24)      (13.76)      (-3.36)                         (0.89)     (0.53)       (11.94)      (-3.43)

            MOM         0.68***           -0.15       0.13         1.12***     22.2%               -0.09      -0.05        0.10         1.11***      22.2%
                        (3.45)            (-0.53)     (0.97)       (5.30)                          (-0.34)    (-0.66)      (0.68)       (5.62)

            PMU         0.27***           0.14**      0.10***      0.07        12.8%               0.18***    -0.04        0.08***      0.06         14.0%
49




                        (5.06)            (2.28)      (4.04)       (1.43)                          (2.96)     (-1.63)      (2.68)       (1.28)

            RMW         0.34***           0.11        0.20***      0.11        12.6%               0.13       -0.02        0.19***      0.10         12.5%
                        (3.44)            (1.29)      (2.97)       (0.90)                          (1.50)     (-0.63)      (2.65)       (0.89)

            CMA         0.37***           0.12        0.29***      0.03        33.9%               0.18**     -0.06*       0.26***      0.01         35.1%
                        (4.27)            (1.36)      (6.47)       (0.53)                          (2.02)     (-1.89)      (5.17)       (0.25)

            IVA         0.43***           0.19***     0.31***      -0.01       43.2%               0.22***    -0.02        0.30***      -0.02        43.3%
                        (5.23)            (2.65)      (10.25)      (-0.31)                         (2.90)     (-0.99)      (9.40)       (-0.51)

            ROE         0.56***           0.17        0.22***      0.33***     16.0%               0.16       0.00         0.23***      0.33***      15.8%
                        (4.88)            (1.14)      (3.40)       (2.70)                          (1.24)     (0.11)       (3.23)       (2.86)

            MGMT        0.67***           0.16*       0.59***      0.06        64.2%               0.29***    -0.11***     0.52***      0.02         66.2%
                        (5.24)            (1.82)      (12.25)      (0.96)                          (3.05)     (-3.25)      (9.72)       (0.48)

            PERF        0.65***           -0.02       0.17         0.82***     17.1%               0.17       -0.16**      0.07         0.77***      19.4%
                        (3.73)            (-0.09)     (1.54)       (6.21)                          (0.87)     (-2.29)      (0.63)       (6.61)




                           Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                                                                                  Table 4: List of Anomalies
     This table reports the list of anomalies considered in the paper, closely matching the set of robust anomalies (with significant abnormal returns) considered in Hou,
     Xue, and Zhang (2015). We classify the total 34 anomalies into two groups: 12 short-horizon anomalies and 22 long-horizon anomalies. Short-horizon anomalies
     include earning momentum, price momentum, and short-term profitability. Long-horizon anomalies include long-horizon profitability, value, investment and
     financing, and intangibles. The last two columns report the monthly mean returns (in percent) of the long/short anomaly portfolios and the Sharpe ratios. The
     sample period runs from 1972:07 to 2014:12, depending on data availability.

      Panel A: Short-horizon anomalies (12)

      Category               Symbol    List of anomalies                                                                                                            L-S Ret(%)   Sharpe ratio
      Earnings momentum      SUE-1     Standardized unexpected earnings (1-month holding period), Foster, Olsen, and Shevlin (1984)                                    0.40          0.13
                             SUE-6     Standardized unexpected earnings (6-month holding period), Foster, Olsen, and Shevlin (1984)                                    0.19          0.07
                             ABR-1     Cumulative abnormal returns around earnings announcements (1-month holding period), Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996)      0.79          0.25
                             ABR-6     Cumulative abnormal returns around earnings announcements (6-month holding period), Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996)      0.28          0.14
                             RE-1      Revisions in analysts’ earnings forecasts (1-month holding period), Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996)                      0.60          0.13
      Return momentum        R6-6      Return momentum (6-month prior returns, 6-month holding period), Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)                                    0.72          0.13
                             R11-1     Return momentum (11-month prior returns, 1-month holding period), Fama and French (1996)                                        1.18          0.18
                             I-MOM     Industry momentum (6-month prior returns, 6-month holding period), Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999)                               0.62          0.12
      Profitability          ROEQ      Quarterly ROE (1-month holding period), Haugen and Baker (1996)                                                                 0.75          0.15
                             ROAQ      Quarterly ROA (1-month holding period), Balakrishnan, Bartov, and Faurel (2010)                                                 0.53          0.11
                             NEI       Number of consecutive quarters with earnings increases (1-month holding period), Barth, Elliott, and Finn (1999)                0.34          0.12
                             FP        Failure probability (quarterly updated, 6-month holding period), Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008)                        0.58          0.09
50




      Panel B: Long-horizon anomalies (22)

      Category               Symbol    List of anomalies                                                                                                            L-S Ret(%)   Sharpe Ratio
      Profitability          GP/A      Gross profits-to-assets ratio, Novy-Marx (2013)                                                                                 0.22          0.06
                             CbOP      Cash-based operating profitability, Ball, Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Nikolaev (2016)                                              0.42          0.10
      Value                  B/M       Book-to-market equity, Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein (1985)                                                                     0.62          0.14
                             E/P       Earnings-to-price, Basu (1983)                                                                                                  0.47          0.10
                             CF/P      Cash flow-to-price, Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994)                                                                     0.45          0.10
                             NPY       Net payout yield, Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson, and Roberts (2007)                                                            0.65          0.17
                             DUR       Equity duration, Dechow, Sloan, and Soliman (2004)                                                                              0.64          0.15
      Investment and
                             AG        Asset growth, Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008)                                                                                  0.43          0.12
      financing
                             NOA       Net operating assets, Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang (2004)                                                                  0.38          0.12
                             IVA       Investment-to-assets, Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang (2008)                                                                           0.50          0.17
                             IG        Investment growth, Xing (2008)                                                                                                  0.38          0.13
                             IvG       Inventory growth, Belo and Lin (2012)                                                                                           0.33          0.10
                             IvC       Inventory changes, Thomas and Zhang (2002)                                                                                      0.45          0.14
                             OA        Operating accruals, Sloan (1996) and Hribar and Collins (2002)                                                                  0.24          0.08
                             POA       Percent operating accruals, Hafzalla, Lundholm, and Van Winkle (2011)                                                           0.39          0.13
                             PTA       Percent total accruals, Hafzalla, Lundholm, and Van Winkle (2011)                                                               0.40          0.12
                             NSI       Net share issuance, Pontiff and Woodgate (2008)                                                                                 0.69          0.22
                             CSI       Composite share issuance, Daniel and Titman (2006)                                                                              0.56          0.14
      Intangibles            OC/A      Organizational capital-to-assets, Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013)                                                              0.40          0.11
                             AD/M      Advertisement expense-to-market, Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis (2001)                                                        0.67          0.13
                             RD/M      R&D-to-market, Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis (2001)                                                                          0.71          0.12
                             OL        Operating leverage, Novy-Marx (2011)                                                                                            0.37          0.09



                              Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                                                        Table 5: Decay Rate of Anomaly Portfolio Returns
     This table reports the decay rate of various anomaly portfolio returns. Short-horizon anomaly portfolios are formed and rebalanced each month. Using an event
     time approach, we calculate the value-weighted buy-and-hold portfolio returns in each of the 12 months, and in each of the 4 quarters, after portfolio formation
     (weighted by firm size in the ranking month). Long-horizon anomaly portfolios are formed and rebalanced each June. We calculate value-weighted buy-and-hold
     portfolio returns in each of the 12 quarters, and in each of the 3 years, after portfolio formation (weighted by firm size in the ranking month). Panel A reports the
     average long/short portfolio returns of short-horizon anomalies over each return window, and Panel B for long-horizon anomalies, with Newey-West corrected
     t-statistics (6 lags for monthly or quarterly window, 12 lags for annual window). When a long/short portfolio earns significant returns in predicted direction over a
     return window, we highlight this case in boldface. The sample period runs from 1972:07 to 2014:12, depending on data availability.
                                                                        Panel A: Short-horizon anomalies
                                             SUE       ABR         RE         R6          R11        I-MOM       ROEQ       ROAQ     NEI       FP

                                                        Long/short portfolio returns in each of the 12 months post formation
                             Month t + 1     0.40***   0.78***     0.60***    0.50        1.18***    0.57**      0.75***    0.53**   0.34***   -0.63*
                                             (3.59)    (6.02)      (2.80)     (1.65)      (4.06)     (2.23)      (3.11)     (2.35)   (3.01)    (-1.89)
                             Month t + 2     0.20      0.15        0.44**     0.51*       0.98***    0.47*       0.46*      0.39*    0.23*     -0.61*
                                             (1.47)    (1.08)      (2.08)     (1.80)      (3.27)     (1.88)      (1.86)     (1.65)   (1.95)    (-1.94)
                             Month t + 3     0.06      0.01        0.26       0.68**      0.78***    0.41        0.38*      0.31     0.15      -0.43
                                             (0.48)    (0.10)      (1.28)     (2.32)      (2.69)     (1.63)      (1.66)     (1.36)   (1.27)    (-1.30)
                             Month t + 4     0.16      0.11        0.15       0.70**      0.84***    0.57**      0.35       0.32     0.18      -0.52
                                             (1.29)    (0.92)      (0.78)     (2.16)      (2.89)     (2.34)      (1.42)     (1.39)   (1.48)    (-1.62)
                             Month t + 5     0.13      0.33**      -0.09      0.92***     0.56*      0.55**      0.34       0.29     0.17      -0.48
                                             (1.02)    (2.16)      (-0.48)    (3.11)      (1.91)     (2.21)      (1.42)     (1.28)   (1.40)    (-1.57)
51




                             Month t + 6     0.19      0.26*       0.06       1.15***     0.35       0.92***     0.29       0.23     0.14      -0.49
                                             (1.38)    (1.84)      (0.30)     (4.10)      (1.30)     (3.58)      (1.16)     (1.03)   (1.15)    (-1.58)
                             Month t + 7     0.18      0.23*       0.06       0.88***     0.38       1.00***     0.13       0.14     0.08      -0.41
                                             (1.31)    (1.83)      (0.33)     (3.00)      (1.38)     (3.57)      (0.50)     (0.62)   (0.64)    (-1.36)
                             Month t + 8     0.17      0.12        0.11       0.70***     0.14       0.78**      0.05       0.05     0.06      -0.28
                                             (1.12)    (0.78)      (0.51)     (2.78)      (0.50)     (2.44)      (0.20)     (0.22)   (0.49)    (-0.90)
                             Month t + 9     -0.04     0.11        0.15       0.34        -0.02      0.69**      -0.04      0.00     0.02      -0.18
                                             (-0.29)   (0.78)      (0.74)     (1.41)      (-0.06)    (2.52)      (-0.14)    (0.01)   (0.13)    (-0.58)
                             Month t + 10    -0.13     0.08        0.08       0.14        -0.06      0.30        0.14       0.20     0.00      -0.12
                                             (-0.96)   (0.57)      (0.39)     (0.63)      (-0.20)    (1.30)      (0.57)     (0.93)   (0.01)    (-0.39)
                             Month t + 11    -0.17     0.17        0.14       -0.31       -0.19      0.20        0.16       0.22     -0.03     0.01
                                             (-1.36)   (1.41)      (0.69)     (-1.25)     (-0.71)    (0.79)      (0.62)     (1.01)   (-0.23)   (0.03)
                             Month t + 12    -0.14     0.05        0.21       -0.60**     -0.50*     -0.01       -0.04      0.09     -0.02     0.29
                                             (-1.14)   (0.42)      (0.93)     (-2.23)     (-1.82)    (-0.03)     (-0.14)    (0.43)   (-0.14)   (0.89)

                                                        Long/short portfolio returns in each of the 4 quarters post formation
                             Quarter t + 1   0.75**    1.09***     1.33**     1.92**      3.09***    1.61**      1.54**     1.20*    0.72**    -1.58*
                                             (2.34)    (3.30)      (2.42)     (2.34)      (3.85)     (2.35)      (2.29)     (1.85)   (2.28)    (-1.73)
                             Quarter t + 2   0.42      0.81**      0.06       2.88***     1.79**     2.10***     0.90       0.81     0.45      -1.45*
                                             (1.24)    (2.24)      (0.13)     (3.46)      (2.29)     (3.14)      (1.33)     (1.28)   (1.35)    (-1.67)
                             Quarter t + 3   0.32      0.47        0.23       1.94***     0.55       2.51***     0.10       0.18     0.10      -0.91
                                             (0.80)    (1.31)      (0.43)     (2.75)      (0.73)     (3.09)      (0.15)     (0.29)   (0.30)    (-1.04)
                             Quarter t + 4   -0.44     0.30        0.39       -0.78       -0.80      0.45        0.31       0.51     -0.09     0.18
                                             (-1.32)   (0.96)      (0.80)     (-1.19)     (-1.07)    (0.67)      (0.46)     (0.85)   (-0.27)   (0.21)

                           Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                                                            Panel B: Long-horizon anomalies
                      GP/A      CbOP      B/M         E/P        CF/P        NPY        DUR          AG            NOA        IVA        IG

                                          Long/short portfolio returns in each of the 12 quarters post formation

     Quarter t + 1    0.58      0.97*     1.98***     1.51**     1.37**      1.84***    -1.95***     -1.25**       -1.11***   -1.42***   -1.21***
                      (1.40)    (1.68)    (3.17)      (2.38)     (2.27)      (3.31)     (-3.46)      (-2.57)       (-2.59)    (-3.37)    (-3.18)
     Quarter t + 2    0.47      0.73      2.34***     1.55***    1.34**      1.76***    -2.11***     -1.61***      -1.00**    -1.62***   -1.47***
                      (1.15)    (1.20)    (3.92)      (2.74)     (2.37)      (3.38)     (-3.86)      (-3.42)       (-2.32)    (-3.89)    (-3.91)
     Quarter t + 3    0.40      0.64      2.36***     1.92***    1.51***     1.63***    -2.07***     -1.40***      -0.82**    -1.47***   -1.50***
                      (0.92)    (1.03)    (4.22)      (3.56)     (2.64)      (3.35)     (-3.79)      (-3.14)       (-2.01)    (-3.59)    (-3.93)
     Quarter t + 4    0.27      0.45      2.09***     1.81***    1.54***     1.24***    -2.00***     -1.08**       -0.86**    -1.26***   -1.33***
                      (0.61)    (0.73)    (3.85)      (3.46)     (2.71)      (2.91)     (-3.50)      (-2.35)       (-2.14)    (-3.21)    (-3.58)

     Quarter t + 5    0.18      0.52      1.95***     1.65***    1.35**      1.43***    -1.83***     -1.11**       -1.08***   -1.28***   -1.00***
                      (0.41)    (0.90)    (3.43)      (3.21)     (2.39)      (3.58)     (-3.14)      (-2.51)       (-2.78)    (-3.22)    (-2.85)
     Quarter t + 6    -0.02     0.39      1.63***     1.66***    1.36**      1.41***    -1.74***     -0.79**       -0.92**    -0.95**    -0.87**
                      (-0.05)   (0.70)    (2.84)      (3.01)     (2.40)      (3.28)     (-3.09)      (-2.04)       (-2.23)    (-2.49)    (-2.41)
     Quarter t + 7    0.05      0.11      1.27**      1.18**     1.10**      1.07**     -1.41***     -0.48         -0.82*     -0.65      -0.65*
                      (0.10)    (0.19)    (2.24)      (2.22)     (1.99)      (2.32)     (-2.60)      (-1.24)       (-1.88)    (-1.51)    (-1.72)
52




     Quarter t + 8    0.10      0.15      1.11*       0.89*      0.81        0.75       -1.45**      -0.48         -0.64      -0.67      -0.18
                      (0.22)    (0.25)    (1.96)      (1.70)     (1.42)      (1.53)     (-2.38)      (-1.22)       (-1.39)    (-1.49)    (-0.43)

     Quarter t + 9    0.01      -0.11     0.94*       1.00**     0.70        0.54       -1.18**      -0.30         -0.38      -0.60      -0.01
                      (0.03)    (-0.19)   (1.79)      (1.99)     (1.23)      (1.15)     (-2.00)      (-0.74)       (-0.79)    (-1.27)    (-0.01)
     Quarter t + 10   -0.06     -0.22     0.99*       0.81       0.71        0.42       -0.97*       -0.25         -0.42      -0.82*     0.04
                      (-0.13)   (-0.36)   (1.94)      (1.64)     (1.28)      (0.91)     (-1.72)      (-0.59)       (-0.98)    (-1.72)    (0.08)
     Quarter t + 11   -0.02     -0.20     1.11**      0.79       0.64        0.27       -0.99*       -0.16         -0.30      -0.78      0.05
                      (-0.04)   (-0.35)   (2.25)      (1.59)     (1.15)      (0.58)     (-1.83)      (-0.35)       (-0.75)    (-1.60)    (0.11)
     Quarter t + 12   -0.15     -0.30     1.30***     0.68       0.65        0.32       -0.90*       -0.01         -0.33      -0.87*     -0.32
                      (-0.36)   (-0.57)   (2.70)      (1.30)     (1.18)      (0.69)     (-1.72)      (-0.03)       (-0.85)    (-1.96)    (-0.72)


                                            Long/short portfolio returns in each of the 3 years post formation

     Year t + 1       1.56      2.83      8.60***     6.32***    5.21**      6.58***    -8.09***     -4.39***      -3.67**    -5.33***   -5.30***
                      (0.96)    (1.29)    (3.58)      (2.93)     (2.18)      (3.46)     (-3.55)      (-2.62)       (-2.06)    (-3.23)    (-4.39)
     Year t + 2       -0.13     0.91      6.15**      5.74***    4.57**      5.36***    -6.25***     -2.35         -3.31**    -2.89*     -2.25
                      (-0.07)   (0.40)    (2.55)      (2.94)     (2.07)      (3.50)     (-2.66)      (-1.53)       (-2.19)    (-1.77)    (-1.48)
     Year t + 3       -0.51     -1.09     4.85**      3.49*      2.94        1.59       -4.45**      0.10          -0.93      -2.49      -0.03
                      (-0.31)   (-0.47)   (2.45)      (1.85)     (1.35)      (0.94)     (-2.07)      (0.06)        (-0.58)    (-1.32)    (-0.02)




             Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                                                       Panel B: Long-horizon anomalies (continued )
                      IvG       IvC           OA           POA         PTA         NSI         CSI         OC/A     AD/M      RD/M      OL

                                          Long/short portfolio returns in each of the 12 quarters post formation

     Quarter t + 1    -0.89**   -1.26***      -0.62*       -1.07***    -1.15***    -1.94***    -1.57***    1.01**   2.11***   2.24***   1.12**
                      (-2.35)   (-3.44)       (-1.75)      (-2.63)     (-2.90)     (-4.24)     (-2.99)     (2.28)   (2.96)    (2.92)    (2.09)
     Quarter t + 2    -0.72*    -1.06***      -0.66*       -1.17***    -1.17***    -1.91***    -1.70***    0.66     2.16***   2.40***   1.22**
                      (-1.92)   (-2.77)       (-1.78)      (-3.18)     (-3.01)     (-4.23)     (-3.31)     (1.27)   (2.99)    (3.23)    (2.26)
     Quarter t + 3    -0.68**   -0.87**       -0.86**      -1.24***    -1.28***    -1.75***    -1.70***    0.44     2.18***   2.06***   1.33**
                      (-1.97)   (-2.26)       (-2.36)      (-3.69)     (-3.51)     (-4.12)     (-3.38)     (0.78)   (3.01)    (3.15)    (2.48)
     Quarter t + 4    -0.45     -0.57         -0.72*       -0.90***    -0.97**     -1.83***    -1.67***    0.43     1.80***   1.72***   1.33**
                      (-1.27)   (-1.46)       (-1.84)      (-2.68)     (-2.36)     (-4.73)     (-3.38)     (0.78)   (2.64)    (2.62)    (2.55)

     Quarter t + 5    -0.40     -0.44         -0.65        -0.94***    -1.36***    -1.90***    -1.65***    0.44     1.52**    1.50**    1.23**
                      (-1.20)   (-1.13)       (-1.60)      (-2.68)     (-3.29)     (-5.21)     (-3.34)     (0.81)   (2.29)    (2.32)    (2.42)
     Quarter t + 6    0.05      -0.12         -0.23        -0.62*      -1.09**     -1.57***    -1.40***    0.52     1.59**    1.37**    1.03**
                      (0.14)    (-0.28)       (-0.58)      (-1.70)     (-2.54)     (-4.13)     (-2.73)     (1.02)   (2.36)    (2.01)    (1.99)
     Quarter t + 7    0.14      0.04          0.21         -0.27       -0.91**     -1.51***    -1.14**     0.70     1.51**    1.24*     0.95*
                      (0.36)    (0.09)        (0.54)       (-0.72)     (-2.11)     (-3.66)     (-2.20)     (1.36)   (2.25)    (1.77)    (1.81)
53




     Quarter t + 8    0.07      -0.14         0.20         -0.37       -0.81**     -1.31***    -1.04**     0.58     1.23*     0.80      0.83
                      (0.17)    (-0.35)       (0.53)       (-0.99)     (-2.02)     (-2.90)     (-1.98)     (1.10)   (1.86)    (1.11)    (1.56)

     Quarter t + 9    0.04      0.04          0.33         -0.11       -0.57       -1.22**     -0.91*      0.52     1.19*     0.68      0.76
                      (0.10)    (0.11)        (0.89)       (-0.29)     (-1.47)     (-2.52)     (-1.72)     (0.94)   (1.81)    (0.88)    (1.41)
     Quarter t + 10   0.05      0.02          0.29         -0.02       -0.75**     -1.45***    -0.68       0.65     1.06      0.87      0.78
                      (0.13)    (0.06)        (0.80)       (-0.04)     (-2.10)     (-2.87)     (-1.28)     (1.24)   (1.62)    (1.18)    (1.39)
     Quarter t + 11   0.07      0.08          0.29         0.07        -0.68*      -1.35***    -0.62       0.87*    0.68      0.84      0.78
                      (0.15)    (0.25)        (0.76)       (0.18)      (-1.81)     (-2.85)     (-1.19)     (1.67)   (1.00)    (1.20)    (1.38)
     Quarter t + 12   0.08      0.14          0.01         0.09        -0.88**     -1.17***    -0.76       0.90*    0.85      1.00      0.80
                      (0.20)    (0.41)        (0.04)       (0.22)      (-2.42)     (-2.65)     (-1.48)     (1.82)   (1.22)    (1.45)    (1.42)


                                            Long/short portfolio returns in each of the 3 years post formation

     Year t + 1       -2.49**   -3.38***      -2.76**      -3.69***    -4.26***    -7.30***    -6.71***    3.06     8.08***   8.15***   4.65**
                      (-2.13)   (-2.59)       (-2.54)      (-3.00)     (-3.22)     (-4.92)     (-3.82)     (1.58)   (2.87)    (3.13)    (2.28)
     Year t + 2       0.27      -0.14         -0.38        -2.15*      -4.26***    -6.61***    -5.38***    2.70     6.38**    5.71**    3.69**
                      (0.21)    (-0.09)       (-0.27)      (-1.88)     (-3.18)     (-4.93)     (-3.02)     (1.38)   (2.20)    (2.25)    (2.01)
     Year t + 3       0.62      0.45          1.03         0.18        -2.96**     -5.00***    -3.07*      3.12     4.28      4.04      2.84
                      (0.39)    (0.33)        (0.83)       (0.14)      (-2.06)     (-3.31)     (-1.86)     (1.61)   (1.55)    (1.41)    (1.42)




              Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                                                           Table 6: Correlations Between Anomaly Portfolios
     This table reports pairwise correlation coefficients between returns of the long/short hedged anomaly portfolios. The signs of L/S portfolios are converted, when
     necessary, to ensure that the L/S portfolio returns reflect the actual (positive) arbitrage profits. Panel A reports correlations among 12 short-horizon anomalies, and
     Panel B reports correlations among 22 long-horizon anomalies. Correlation coefficients greater than 0.30 are highlighted in bold. The sample period runs from
     1972:07 to 2014:12, depending on data availability.



     Panel A: Short-horizon anomalies
                       SUE-1    SUE-6    ABR-1    ABR-6     RE-1      R6-6    R11-1    I-MOM        ROEQ      ROAQ      NEI

       Earnings momentum
       SUE-6            0.73
       ABR-1            0.31      0.24
       ABR-6            0.28      0.20    0.60
       RE-1             0.34      0.32    0.29      0.30

       Return momentum
       R6-6             0.34      0.36    0.34     0.53     0.48
       R11-1            0.37      0.41    0.38     0.50     0.50      0.91
54




       I-MOM            0.34      0.35    0.33     0.44     0.36      0.78     0.77

       Profitability
       ROEQ             0.36      0.33     0.16     0.11    0.35      0.20     0.25       0.19
       ROAQ             0.36      0.35     0.16     0.14    0.32      0.26     0.29       0.23        0.91
       NEI              0.46      0.50     0.20     0.29    0.27      0.38     0.41       0.32        0.57      0.60
       FP               0.38      0.41     0.20     0.20    0.34      0.37     0.39       0.36        0.77      0.81    0.49




                               Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
     Panel B: Long-horizon anomalies
                 GP/A       CashOP    B/M     E/P     CF/P    NPY     DUR      AG     NOA     IVA       IG     NSI     CSI     IvG     IvC     OA     POA     PTA     OC/A    Ad/M   RD/M

      Profitability
      CashOP        0.43

      Value
      B/M           -0.45     -0.44
      E/P           -0.28     -0.11   0.68
      CF/P          -0.35     -0.15   0.71    0.90
      NPY            0.07     0.34    0.32    0.49    0.43
      DUR           -0.41     -0.30   0.87    0.70    0.75    0.34

      Investment and financing
      AG            -0.14     -0.11   0.52    0.43    0.43    0.48    0.49
55




      NOA           0.32      0.30    -0.24   -0.20   -0.23   0.14    -0.27    0.11
      IVA           -0.14     -0.01   0.33     0.21    0.19   0.32    0.31    0.57    0.26
      IG            -0.06     -0.06   0.32     0.27    0.23   0.39     0.26   0.52    0.18    0.43
      NSI            0.24     0.40     0.20   0.36    0.32    0.68     0.20   0.39    0.31    0.38    0.33
      CSI           -0.04     0.39    0.34    0.49    0.49    0.72    0.40    0.44    0.09    0.37    0.36    0.64
      IvG           -0.14      0.00   0.33     0.24    0.28   0.36    0.29    0.51    0.20    0.49    0.48    0.30    0.39
      IvC           -0.22     -0.09   0.34     0.22    0.28   0.23    0.32    0.45    0.14    0.50    0.37     0.19   0.33    0.58
      OA            -0.11      0.11   -0.06   -0.16   -0.02   0.00    -0.10   -0.05   0.22    0.05    -0.02   -0.10   0.10    0.19    0.30
      POA           -0.12      0.09   0.33     0.24   0.35    0.40    0.33    0.45    0.06    0.30     0.30    0.29   0.45    0.46    0.40    0.36
      PTA            0.06      0.14    0.28    0.30    0.29   0.60     0.28   0.50    0.10    0.37    0.37    0.46    0.47    0.41    0.36    0.05    0.45

      Intangibles
      OC/A          -0.08     -0.38   0.04    -0.13   -0.06   -0.41   -0.01   -0.06    0.02   -0.01   -0.03   -0.24   -0.29   -0.10    0.05    0.12   -0.11   -0.26
      Ad/M          -0.03     -0.31   0.49    0.46    0.43     0.27   0.45    0.36    -0.16    0.18    0.25    0.15    0.20    0.11    0.11   -0.14    0.19    0.24   -0.01
      RD/M          -0.06     -0.40   0.31     0.09    0.08   -0.07    0.20    0.12    0.17    0.21    0.08   -0.06   -0.18   -0.02    0.10    0.00   -0.06   -0.05    0.24   0.32
      OL            0.31       0.18   0.04     0.18    0.06    0.26    0.07    0.11    0.17    0.15    0.19   0.32     0.16    0.00   -0.13   -0.33   -0.05    0.15   -0.17   0.25    0.16




                              Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                                                                    Table 7: Comparative Model Performance
     This table reports comparative performance of different factor models in explaining anomalies. We compare three sets of factor models. The first set includes
     standard factor models: the CAPM, Fama-French three-factor model (FF3), and Carhart four-factor model (Carhart4). The second set includes four recent models:
     the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015, FF5), the profitability-based model of Novy-Marx (2013, NM4), the q-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015,
     HXZ4), and the four-factor mispricing model of Stambaugh and Yuan (2017, SY4). The last set includes our behavioral-motivated models: a single factor FIN, a
     single factor PEAD, a two-factor model with FIN and PEAD (BF2), and a three-factor risk-and-behavioral composite model with MKT, FIN, and PEAD (BF3).
     The table reports the regression alphas from time-series regressions of long/short anomaly portfolio returns on each factor model, with Newey-West corrected
     t-statistics (6 lags). Panel A compares model performance for short-horizon anomalies, Panel B for long-horizon anomalies, and Panel C for all anomalies. As
     comparative statistics, we summarize the number of significant alphas at 5% level, the average absolute alphas and t-values, the F -statistics and p-values that test
     whether the average t2 of alphas under a given model is significantly larger than the average t2 of the composite-model alphas, the GRS F -statistics and p-values
     following Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), and the HJ-distance following Hansen and Jagannathan (1997). The sample period runs from 1972:07 to 2014:12,
     depending on data availability.
     Panel A: Short-horizon anomalies
                           List of Anomalies                   H-L Ret    CAPM       FF3        Carhart4   FF5        NM4        HXZ4       SY4        FIN        PEAD      BF2       BF3
       Earnings            Standardized
                                                       SUE-1   0.40***    0.46***    0.51***    0.30**     0.42***    0.25*      0.13       0.18       0.33***    0.07      -0.01     0.08
       momentum (5)        Unexpected Earnings
                                                       SUE-6   0.19*      0.23**     0.33***    0.12       0.19*      0.07       -0.02      0.03       0.18       -0.07     -0.10     -0.01
                           CAR around earnings
                                                       ABR-1   0.79***    0.82***    0.91***    0.69***    0.87***    0.69***    0.73***    0.67***    0.83***    -0.08     -0.07     -0.04
                           announcements
                                                       ABR-6   0.28***    0.29***    0.37***    0.18**     0.40***    0.18*      0.23*      0.22**     0.32***    -0.12*    -0.09     -0.06
56




                           Revisions in analysts’
                                                       RE-1    0.60***    0.63***    0.75***    0.31       0.55**     0.23       0.14       0.28       0.61***    0.15      0.14      0.18
                           earnings forecasts

       Return
                           Past returns                R6-6    0.72***    0.74***    0.95***    -0.05      0.82***    -0.30*     0.21       0.02       0.77**     -0.12     -0.09     -0.08
       momentum (3)
                                                       R11-1   1.18***    1.22***    1.43***    0.18       1.15***    -0.21      0.39       0.09       1.20***    0.11      0.10      0.10
                           Industry momentum           I-MOM   0.62***    0.66***    0.76***    -0.07      0.58**     -0.42*     0.14       -0.10      0.57**     -0.17     -0.25     -0.26

       Profitability (4)   Quarterly ROE               ROEQ    0.75***    0.92***    1.12***    0.82***    0.58***    0.10       0.10       0.48***    0.30       0.51*     0.02      0.12
                           Quarterly ROA               ROAQ    0.53**     0.71***    0.94***    0.62***    0.42***    -0.15      0.04       0.25       0.10       0.26      -0.21     -0.07
                           N. consecutive qtrs with
                                                       NEI     0.34***    0.35***    0.57***    0.37***    0.42***    0.18       0.13       0.28**     0.33***    0.07      0.05      0.04
                           earnings increases
                           Failure probability         FP      -0.58*     -1.01***   -1.24***   -0.62***   -0.39**    0.73***    -0.04      0.04       0.07       -0.14     0.64**    0.20
       Short-horizon
                           N. significant α at 5%              10         12         12         7          11         2          1          4          8          0         0         0
       anomalies (12)
                           Average |α|                         0.58       0.67       0.82       0.36       0.57       0.29       0.19       0.22       0.47       0.16      0.15      0.10
                           Average |t|                         3.11       3.70       4.68       2.40       3.21       1.58       1.08       1.39       2.32       0.78      0.67      0.49
                                        Average t2
                           F -stat =   Average t2
                                                               34.84***   47.46***   73.99***   25.28***   37.45***   11.85***   8.75***    11.13***   23.07***   2.54*     2.31*
                                                BF 3
                           p-value                             (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.06)    (0.08)
                           GRS F -stat                         4.08***    4.73***    5.88***    4.25***    3.44***    4.37***    2.37***    2.70***    4.87***    2.00**    2.38***   1.15
                           p-value                             (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.01)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.02)    (0.01)    (0.32)
                           HJ-distance                                    44.20***   43.44***   30.99***   36.50***   32.20***   34.12***   26.73*     44.12***   26.04**   23.39**   14.66
                           p-value                                        (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.09)     (0.00)     (0.02)    (0.03)    (0.49)

                             Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
     Panel B: Long-horizon anomalies
                          List of Anomalies                    H-L Ret    CAPM       FF3        Carhart4   FF5        NM4        HXZ4       SY4       FIN        PEAD       BF2       BF3
      Profitability (2)   Gross profits-to-assets     GP/A     0.22       0.18       0.37**     0.33**     0.01       -0.14      0.03       -0.02     0.20       0.19       0.18      0.06
                          Cash-based operating
                                                      CashOP   0.42**     0.60***    0.89***    0.71***    0.61***    0.04       0.53***    0.41***   0.14       0.17       -0.14     0.14
                          profitability

      Value (5)           Book-to-market              B/M      0.62***    0.69***    0.05       0.06       0.10       0.07       0.26       -0.00     0.30       0.75***    0.41*     0.36
                          Earnings-to-price           E/P      0.47**     0.61***    0.01       -0.04      -0.01      -0.27      0.05       -0.02     -0.01      0.74***    0.22      0.22
                          Cash flow-to-price          CF/P     0.45**     0.58***    0.01       -0.06      0.02       -0.20      0.12       0.06      0.01       0.66***    0.18      0.21
                          Net payout yield            NPY      0.65***    0.85***    0.56***    0.52***    0.24*      -0.03      0.39***    0.09      0.02       0.73***    0.05      0.11
                          Equity duration             DUR      -0.64***   -0.75***   -0.16      -0.08      -0.15      0.01       -0.28      -0.03     -0.28      -0.75***   -0.36*    -0.38*

      Investment and
                          Asset growth                AG       -0.43**    -0.52***   -0.17      -0.10      0.08       0.07       0.10       0.25      -0.10      -0.48***   -0.13     -0.13
      financing (11)
                          Net operating assets        NOA      -0.38**    -0.37**    -0.49***   -0.37***   -0.38**    -0.15      -0.36*     -0.03     -0.43**    -0.21      -0.26*    -0.27*
                          Investment-to-assets        IVA      -0.50***   -0.58***   -0.40***   -0.34**    -0.31**    -0.30      -0.25*     -0.09     -0.29**    -0.46***   -0.23     -0.27*
                          Investment growth           IG       -0.38***   -0.44***   -0.24*     -0.18      -0.08      -0.10      0.02       0.05      -0.18      -0.44***   -0.22*    -0.22
                          Inventory growth            IvG      -0.33**    -0.40***   -0.22      -0.11      -0.08      -0.11      0.04       0.02      -0.07      -0.36**    -0.09     -0.09
                          Inventory changes           IvC      -0.45***   -0.51***   -0.36***   -0.28**    -0.32**    -0.47**    -0.26*     -0.19     -0.32**    -0.45***   -0.32**   -0.42**
                          Operating accruals          OA       -0.24*     -0.26**    -0.29**    -0.27*     -0.48***   -0.51***   -0.52***   -0.37**   -0.25*     -0.21      -0.22     -0.29*
                          Percent operating
                                                      POA      -0.39***   -0.48***   -0.28**    -0.20      -0.09      -0.13      -0.08      -0.07     -0.11      -0.42***   -0.11     -0.12
57




                          accruals
                          Percent total accruals      PTA      -0.40***   -0.50***   -0.30**    -0.27*     -0.06      -0.06      -0.10      -0.00     -0.01      -0.48***   -0.06     -0.05
                          Net share issuance          NSI      -0.69***   -0.80***   -0.67***   -0.58***   -0.28**    -0.10      -0.32**    -0.12     -0.22**    -0.69***   -0.19     -0.11
                          Composite issuance          CSI      -0.56***   -0.80***   -0.51***   -0.41***   -0.20*     -0.02      -0.20      -0.07     0.10       -0.60***   0.12      -0.04

                          Organizational
      Intangibles (4)                                 OC/A     0.40**     0.28*      0.28**     0.15       0.30**     0.53***    0.20       0.28**    0.73***    0.20       0.56***   0.47***
                          capital-to-assets
                          Advertisement
                                                      Ad/M     0.67***    0.69***    0.10       0.17       -0.05      0.07       0.05       0.03      0.35       1.04***    0.71***   0.52*
                          expense-to-market
                          R&D-to-market               RD/M     0.71***    0.53**     0.30       0.37*      0.43*      0.53       0.80***    0.10      1.05***    0.67**     1.05***   0.83***
                          Operating leverage          OL       0.37*      0.41**     0.33*      0.29       -0.00      -0.22      -0.11      -0.06     0.17       0.34*      0.12      0.08
      Long-horizon
                          N. significant α at 5%               19         20         12         8          7          3          5          3         6          16         4         3
      anomalies (22)
                          Average |α|                          0.47       0.54       0.32       0.27       0.19       0.19       0.23       0.11      0.24       0.50       0.27      0.25
                          Average |t|                          2.63       3.09       2.19       1.84       1.38       0.96       1.36       0.70      1.41       2.61       1.48      1.33
                                       Average t2
                          F -stat =   Average t2
                                                               3.00***    4.31***    2.86***    2.01*      1.35       0.68       1.20       0.45      1.37       3.17***    1.27
                                               BF 3
                          p-value                              (0.01)     (0.00)     (0.01)     (0.05)     (0.24)     (0.81)     (0.34)     (0.97)    (0.23)     (0.00)     (0.29)
                          GRS F -stat                          3.06***    3.91***    3.13***    2.22***    1.97***    1.55*      2.08***    0.74      2.59***    2.29***    1.94***   1.47*
                          p-value                              (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.01)     (0.05)     (0.00)     (0.80)    (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.01)    (0.08)
                          HJ-distance                                     63.58***   38.76*     16.78      29.49      24.15      34.34*     13.89     57.79***   56.67***   47.96**   35.72
                          p-value                                         (0.00)     (0.07)     (0.90)     (0.16)     (0.73)     (0.05)     (0.90)    (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.01)    (0.35)



                            Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
     Panel C: All anomalies
                                                    H-L Ret   CAPM      FF3       Carhart4    FF5       NM4       HXZ4      SY4       FIN       PEAD      BF2        BF3
      All anomalies
                        N. significant α at 5%      29        32        24        15          18        5         6         7         14        16        4          3
      (34)
                        Average |α|                 0.51      0.58      0.50      0.30        0.33      0.22      0.22      0.15      0.32      0.38      0.23       0.20
                        Average |t|                 2.80      3.31      3.07      2.04        2.03      1.18      1.26      0.95      1.73      1.96      1.19       1.03
                                     Average t2
                        F -stat =   Average t2
                                                    5.08***   7.13***   7.52***   3.54***     3.71***   1.41      1.69*     1.15      2.79***   3.13***   1.34
58




                                             BF 3
                        p-value                     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)      (0.00)    (0.16)    (0.07)    (0.34)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.20)
                        GRS F -stat                 3.54***   3.95***   3.70***   3.10***     2.60***   2.65***   2.42***   1.71***   3.31***   2.41***   2.12***    1.61**
                        p-value                     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)      (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.01)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.02)
                        HJ-distance                           131.18*** 123.65*** 105.47***   108.66*** 107.69*** 103.59*** 77.14**   123.13*** 102.96*** 89.74***   76.39**
                        p-value                               (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)      (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.01)    0.00      (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.01)




                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                                                   Table 8: Factor Regressions of Long/Short Anomaly Portfolios
     This table reports alphas and factor betas from time-series regressions of long/short anomaly portfolio returns on recent prominent factor models. Panel A, B, C, D
     report regression alphas and factor betas under the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015), the profitability-based factor model of Novy-Marx (2013), the
     q-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015), and the four-factor mispricing model of Stambaugh and Yuan (2017), respectively. Panel E reports the alphas and
     betas under our three-factor risk-and-behavioral composite model (BF3). Newey-West corrected t-statistics (with 6 lags) are shown in parentheses. The sample
     period runs from 1972:07 to 2014:12, depending on data availability.

                             Earnings momentum                          Return momentum                                      Profitability                                        Value
                SUE-1     SUE-6      ABR-1     ABR-6     RE-1       R6-6        R11-1     I-MOM     ROEQ       ROAQ       NEI        FP         GP/A       CbOP       B/M        E/P        CF/P

                                                                    Panel A: The five-factor model of Fama and French (2015, FF5)
      α         0.42***   0.19*      0.87***   0.40***   0.55**     0.82***     1.15***   0.58**    0.58***    0.41***    0.42***    -0.39**    0.01       0.61***    0.10       -0.01      0.02
      βM KT     -0.10**   -0.07*     -0.08**   -0.06**   -0.03      -0.09       -0.10     -0.09     -0.12***   -0.16***   -0.03      0.40***    0.09*      -0.25***   0.01       -0.07      -0.07
      βSM B     -0.03     -0.06      -0.08     -0.01     -0.09      -0.03       0.07      0.06      -0.48***   -0.47***   -0.17***   0.71***    0.06       -0.61***   0.46***    0.33***    0.27***
      βHM L     -0.18     -0.25***   -0.15     -0.14**   -0.28      -0.47**     -0.60**   -0.23     -0.27**    -0.26***   -0.33***   0.35**     -0.47***   -0.34***   1.04***    1.29***    1.23***
      βRM W     0.14      0.18**     -0.06     -0.07     0.26*      0.03        0.27      0.17      1.37***    1.32***    0.46***    -1.47***   0.90***    0.73***    -0.32***   0.27***    0.12
      βCM A     0.20      0.20       0.06      -0.05     0.22       0.25        0.51      0.19      0.15       0.05       -0.08      -0.49*     0.21       -0.08      0.23*      -0.36**    -0.30**

                                                                   Panel B: The profitability-based model of Novy-Marx (2013, NM4)
      α         0.25*     0.07       0.69***   0.18*     0.23       -0.30*      -0.21     -0.42*    0.10       -0.15      0.18       0.73***    -0.14      0.04       0.07       -0.27      -0.20
59




      βM KT     -0.07*    -0.04      -0.04     -0.00     0.01       0.15***     0.18***   0.08**    -0.13***   -0.14***   0.04       0.39***    0.15***    -0.22***   -0.07      -0.14***   -0.15***
      βHM L     -0.13     -0.15      -0.19*    -0.19**   -0.19      0.13        0.29*     0.51***   -0.08      -0.01      -0.40***   -0.72***   -0.17      -0.15      1.76***    1.89***    1.75***
      βM OM     0.32***   0.34***    0.40***   0.33***   0.77***    1.70***     2.10***   1.36***   0.36*      0.43***    0.30***    -0.84***   -0.02      0.32***    -0.10      -0.07      0.01
      βP M U    0.18      0.05       -0.17     -0.09     0.02       -0.35**     -0.27     -0.35     2.09***    2.00***    0.63***    -2.36***   1.39***    1.35***    -0.45**    0.20       -0.11

                                                                   Panel C: The q-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015, HXZ4)
      α         0.13      -0.02      0.73***   0.23*     0.14       0.21        0.39      0.14      0.10       0.04       0.13       -0.04      0.03       0.53***    0.26       0.05       0.12
      βM KT     -0.08*    -0.06      -0.07*    -0.04     0.01       -0.02       -0.03     -0.06     -0.10***   -0.16***   0.02       0.42***    0.07       -0.26***   -0.07      -0.15**    -0.14**
      βSM B     0.10*     0.10       0.07      0.07      0.10       0.34*       0.50**    0.37*     -0.37***   -0.35***   -0.08*     0.52***    0.01       -0.51***   0.41***    0.27*      0.18
      βIV A     0.01      -0.10      -0.16*    -0.16**   -0.09      -0.16       -0.02     0.01      0.04       -0.13      -0.30***   -0.16      -0.30***   -0.46***   1.26***    1.01***    0.99***
      βROE      0.49***   0.46***    0.26***   0.20***   0.76***    0.88***     1.20***   0.73***   1.42***    1.30***    0.64***    -1.50***   0.50***    0.66***    -0.48***   -0.01      -0.14

                                                           Panel D: The four-factor mispricing model of Stambaugh and Yuan (2017, SY4)
      α         0.18      0.03       0.67***   0.22**    0.28       0.02        0.09      -0.10     0.48***    0.25       0.28**     0.04       -0.02      0.41***    -0.00      -0.02      0.06
      βM KT     -0.03     -0.03      -0.03     -0.02     0.06       0.14**      0.21***   0.09      -0.02      -0.05      0.04       0.19**     0.13**     -0.15***   -0.01      -0.08      -0.09
      βSM B     0.02      0.01       0.02      0.01      -0.11      0.18        0.31*     0.24      -0.69***   -0.61***   -0.24***   0.75***    -0.03      -0.66***   0.66***    0.36**     0.30**
      βM GM T   0.07      -0.01      -0.05     -0.09     -0.10      0.03        0.21      0.12      0.18       0.15       -0.14**    -0.64***   -0.03      0.03       0.81***    0.77***    0.67***
      βP ERF    0.28***   0.26***    0.24***   0.17***   0.58***    0.85***     1.13***   0.73***   0.70***    0.72***    0.37***    -0.97***   0.33***    0.49***    -0.30***   -0.17*     -0.18*

                                                                              Panel E: The three-factor composite model (BF3)
      α         0.08      -0.01      -0.04     -0.06     0.18       -0.08       0.10      -0.26     0.12       -0.07      0.04       0.20       0.06       0.14       0.36       0.22       0.21
      βM KT     -0.08     -0.07      -0.02     -0.02     -0.03      -0.00       0.00      0.01      -0.08      -0.12*     0.01       0.37***    0.10**     -0.24***   0.04       -0.01      -0.02
      βF IN     0.05      -0.02      -0.02     -0.06*    -0.00      -0.04       0.02      0.10      0.52***    0.47***    0.02       -0.73***   0.08       0.22***    0.42***    0.60***    0.53***
      βP EAD    0.49***   0.39***    1.34***   0.61***   0.72***    1.29***     1.65***   1.23***   0.40*      0.44***    0.43***    -0.79***   0.07       0.35***    -0.15      -0.35***   -0.27**



                           Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
     (Continued )
                      Value                                                          Investment and financing                                                                 Intangibles
                NPY        DUR        AG         NOA        IVA         IG         IvG        IvC        OA         POA        PTA        NSI        CSI        OC/A       AD/M       RD/M       OL

                                                                        Panel A: The five-factor model of Fama and French (2015, FF5)
      α         0.24*      -0.15      0.08       -0.38**    -0.31**     -0.08      -0.08      -0.32**    -0.48***   -0.09      -0.06      -0.28**    -0.20*     0.30**     -0.05      0.43*      -0.00
      βM KT     -0.10***   0.03       -0.03      -0.02      0.04        -0.00      -0.02      0.04       0.06       -0.03      0.00       0.00       0.18***    0.09**     0.11**     0.21***    -0.01
      βSM B     -0.24***   -0.34***   -0.06      0.14*      -0.01       -0.14***   0.15**     0.04       0.26***    0.20***    0.17**     0.10*      0.25***    0.52***    0.67***    0.68***    0.30***
      βHML      0.45***    -1.06***   -0.17***   0.41***    0.07        -0.03      -0.03      0.02       -0.04      -0.19***   -0.16      -0.04      -0.38***   -0.28***   0.85***    0.07       0.05
      βRM W     0.53***    0.17**     0.06       -0.02      0.25***     -0.06      0.12       0.32***    0.42***    -0.06      -0.22**    -0.69***   -0.42***   -0.25***   0.29**     -0.55***   0.88***
      βCM A     0.50***    -0.14      -1.16***   -0.42**    -0.85***    -0.71***   -0.82***   -0.70***   0.12       -0.64***   -0.69***   -0.60***   -0.64***   0.27*      0.25       0.33       0.12

                                                                       Panel B: The profitability-based model of Novy-Marx (2013, NM4)
      α         -0.03      0.01       0.07       -0.15      -0.30       -0.10      -0.11      -0.47**    -0.51***   -0.13      -0.06      -0.10      -0.02      0.53***    0.07       0.53       -0.22
      βM KT     -0.23***   0.12**     0.11***    -0.05      0.11***     0.05*      0.09**     0.14***    0.09**     0.10***    0.13***    0.07*      0.33***    0.18***    0.05       0.29***    0.04
      βHML      1.30***    -1.79***   -1.21***   0.00       -0.58***    -0.67***   -0.66***   -0.35***   0.09       -0.70***   -0.77***   -0.77***   -1.17***   -0.23*     1.76***    0.63***    0.42**
      βM OM     -0.06      -0.03      -0.07      -0.21      -0.10       -0.01      -0.11      -0.09      -0.07      -0.05      0.09       -0.03      -0.05      0.31**     -0.27**    -0.05      -0.11
      βP M U    1.02***    0.34**     0.11       -0.21      0.15        -0.14      0.08       0.62***    0.70***    -0.12      -0.54**    -1.09***   -0.67***   -0.99***   0.19       -0.89      1.60***
60




                                                                       Panel C: The q-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015, HXZ4)
      α         0.39***    -0.28      0.10       -0.36*     -0.25*      0.02       0.04       -0.26*     -0.52***   -0.08      -0.10      -0.32**    -0.20      0.20       0.05       0.80***    -0.11
      βM KT     -0.17***   0.12***    0.01       -0.02      0.05        0.00       -0.02      0.04       0.03       0.01       0.04       0.05       0.23***    0.11**     0.04       0.14**     -0.04
      βSM B     -0.32***   -0.34***   -0.11*     0.05       -0.06       -0.15***   0.11**     -0.03      0.28***    0.15***    0.20***    0.16**     0.26***    0.62***    0.55***    0.71***    0.28***
      βIV A     0.98***    -1.16***   -1.36***   0.01       -0.80***    -0.81***   -0.95***   -0.70***   0.01       -0.87***   -0.91***   -0.65***   -1.09***   -0.07      1.24***    0.07       0.21
      βROE      0.03       0.31***    0.16**     -0.04      0.14        -0.04      0.04       0.18*      0.31***    0.02       0.04       -0.28***   -0.15*     -0.02      -0.23      -0.72***   0.58***

                                                              Panel D: The four-factor mispricing model of Stambaugh and Yuan (2017, SY4)
      α         0.09       -0.03      0.25       -0.03      -0.09       0.05       0.02       -0.19      -0.37**    -0.07      -0.00      -0.12      -0.07      0.28**     0.03       0.10       -0.06
      βM KT     -0.03      0.05       -0.06      -0.13***   -0.00       -0.03      -0.05      0.03       0.02       -0.03      -0.03      -0.07**    0.12***    0.07       0.07       0.25***    0.02
      βSM B     -0.18**    -0.53***   -0.27***   0.03       -0.21***    -0.21***   0.03       -0.12*     0.20***    0.08       0.08       0.10       0.20**     0.62***    0.71***    0.92***    0.21*
      βM GM T   0.93***    -0.80***   -0.88***   -0.19**    -0.57***    -0.50***   -0.55***   -0.41***   -0.03      -0.54***   -0.67***   -0.67***   -0.88***   -0.23***   0.82***    0.25**     0.25**
      βP ERF    0.06       0.20***    0.10**     -0.23***   0.08        0.01       0.01       0.10*      0.06       0.01       0.02       -0.21***   -0.06      0.01       -0.32***   -0.16      0.23***

                                                                               Panel E: The three-factor composite model (BF3)
      α         0.11       -0.38*     -0.13      -0.27*     -0.27*      -0.22      -0.09      -0.42**    -0.29*     -0.12      -0.05      -0.11      -0.04      0.47***    0.52*      0.83***    0.08
      βM KT     -0.05*     0.02       0.01       0.01       0.03        -0.00      0.00       0.08*      0.06       0.01       -0.00      -0.06*     0.13***    0.08       0.16*      0.18*      0.04
      βF IN     0.76***    -0.44***   -0.40***   0.07       -0.25***    -0.26***   -0.32***   -0.10      0.05       -0.35***   -0.49***   -0.62***   -0.75***   -0.37***   0.51***    -0.33*     0.27***
      βP EAD    -0.05      0.12       0.04       -0.26*     -0.08       0.06       0.02       0.02       -0.02      0.00       0.08       -0.07      0.02       0.28*      -0.49**    0.06       0.08




                              Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                                         Table 9: Firm-Level Fama-MacBeth Regressions on Behavioral Factor Loadings
     This table reports firm-level Fama-MacBeth regressions of monthly stock returns on factor loadings of FIN and PEAD, while controlling for standard return
     predictors and firm characteristics. βF IN and βP EAD are estimated by monthly rolling regressions of daily stock returns in the previous month on the three-factor
     composite model (BF3), which includes a daily market factor, a daily FIN factor, and a daily PEAD factor, with a minimum of 15 daily returns required. Standard
     return predictors include log(ME) at the end of the previous month, log(B/M) as of the previous fiscal year end, past 1-month return, past 1-year return from
     month t − 12 to t − 2, and past 3-year return from month t − 36 to t − 13. All past returns are on monthly basis. Firm characteristics include all short-horizon and
     long-horizon anomaly characteristics described in Table 4. Intercepts are included in all regressions but not reported here. All regressors are winsorized at top and
     bottom 1% and standardized to have zero mean and unit standard deviation. Newey-West corrected t-statistics are reported in parentheses (with 6 lags). The
     sample period runs from 1972:08 to 2014:12 (507 months), depending on data availability.

                                          (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (5)         (9)         (10)
                   βF IN               0.148**      0.137**    0.146**     0.148***    0.263***    0.144**     0.141**     0.151***     0.114**    0.185***
                                        (2.04)       (2.38)     (2.54)      (2.67)      (3.88)      (2.55)      (2.52)      (2.66)       (2.22)     (3.39)
                   βP EAD               -0.019       0.015      0.016       0.009       -0.003      0.016       0.014       0.014       0.012       -0.010
                                        (-0.33)      (0.34)     (0.36)      (0.21)      (-0.05)     (0.36)      (0.33)      (0.32)      (0.25)      (-0.18)
                   Earnings momentum characteristics
                   ABR                                         0.513***                                                                            0.355***
                                                                (18.37)                                                                             (12.13)
                   SU E                                                    0.452***                                                                0.120***
61




                                                                            (15.49)                                                                  (5.32)
                   RE                                                                  0.203***                                                    0.139***
                                                                                        (5.03)                                                       (3.79)
                   Short-term profitability characteristics
                   ROEQ                                                                            0.612***                                         0.258**
                                                                                                    (8.03)                                           (2.39)
                   ROAQ                                                                                        0.710***                               0.110
                                                                                                                (6.97)                               (1.01)
                   N EI                                                                                                    0.365***                0.110***
                                                                                                                            (10.38)                  (3.76)
                   FP                                                                                                                  -0.362***     -0.163
                                                                                                                                         (-3.65)    (-1.61)

                   log(M E)                         -0.260**    -0.230**    -0.265**     -0.227*   -0.309***   -0.322***   -0.299***   -0.232***   -0.327***
                                                     (-2.44)     (-2.20)     (-2.54)     (-1.95)     (-3.13)     (-3.39)     (-2.88)     (-3.14)     (-3.62)
                   log(B/M )                        0.203**      0.177**     0.198**      0.083     0.191**    0.222***    0.245***    0.208***      0.133*
                                                     (2.50)       (2.19)      (2.49)      (1.06)     (2.45)      (2.87)      (3.06)      (2.80)      (1.74)
                   r(t − 1)                        -0.969***   -1.055***   -0.999***   -0.646***   -0.983***   -0.998***   -0.975***   -0.830***   -0.737***
                                                    (-11.41)    (-12.14)    (-11.09)     (-8.57)    (-11.20)    (-11.32)    (-10.98)     (-9.55)     (-9.97)
                   r(t − 12, t − 2)                  0.168*      0.188*       0.096     0.361***     0.175*       0.159       0.127    0.250***       0.098
                                                     (1.75)       (1.80)      (0.93)      (2.92)     (1.75)      (1.60)      (1.21)      (2.63)      (0.86)
                   r(t − 36, t − 13)               -0.271***   -0.246***   -0.237***    -0.176**   -0.308***   -0.307***   -0.297***   -0.224***   -0.208***
                                                     (-3.64)     (-3.19)     (-2.97)     (-2.33)     (-4.23)     (-4.40)     (-3.86)     (-3.74)     (-3.39)

                   Adj.R2                0.4%        3.8%        4.5%        4.6%        5.1%        4.7%        4.8%        4.5%        4.9%        6.5%
                   N.obs               1,558,118   1,558,118   1,350,525   1,345,932   916,329     1,377,779   1,374,597   1,377,479   1,321,624    848,309

                              Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
     (Continued )
                             (11)        (12)        (13)        (14)        (15)        (16)        (17)        (18)        (19)        (20)        (21)        (22)        (23)        (24)
       βF IN               0.137**      0.100*     0.111**     0.125**     0.135**     0.127**     0.137**     0.132**     0.135**     0.131**     0.132**     0.131**     0.127**      0.103*
                            (2.39)      (1.89)      (1.99)      (2.23)      (2.37)      (2.29)      (2.36)      (2.22)      (2.36)      (2.31)      (2.31)      (2.28)      (2.21)      (1.78)
       βP EAD               0.023       -0.016      -0.012      0.015       0.013       0.011       0.017       -0.003      0.014       0.017       0.017       0.016       0.001       -0.012
                            (0.50)      (-0.38)     (-0.27)     (0.34)      (0.29)      (0.25)      (0.39)      (-0.06)     (0.30)      (0.38)      (0.38)      (0.36)      (0.02)      (-0.26)
       Financing characteristics
       N SI                -0.237***               -0.101***                                                                                                                             -0.041
                             (-6.48)                 (-3.20)                                                                                                                             (-1.07)
       CSI                             -0.194***   -0.149***                                                                                                                           -0.146***
                                         (-3.88)     (-3.13)                                                                                                                             (-2.77)
       Investment characteristics
       AG                                                      -0.273***                                                                                                     -0.070      -0.035
                                                                 (-8.43)                                                                                                     (-1.44)     (-0.62)
       N OA                                                                -0.290***                                                                                       -0.213***    -0.112*
                                                                             (-6.96)                                                                                         (-3.62)     (-1.96)
       IV A                                                                            -0.211***                                                                              0.007      -0.003
                                                                                         (-6.47)                                                                             (0.16)      (-0.06)
       IG                                                                                          -0.135***                                                               -0.071***   -0.083***
                                                                                                     (-6.30)                                                                 (-3.09)     (-2.90)
62




       IvG                                                                                                     -0.160***                                                     -0.033      -0.031
                                                                                                                 (-6.57)                                                     (-1.08)     (-0.92)
       IvC                                                                                                                 -0.140***                                          0.005       0.021
                                                                                                                             (-4.88)                                         (0.15)      (0.55)
       OA                                                                                                                              -0.124***                            -0.072**   -0.126***
                                                                                                                                         (-3.53)                             (-2.19)     (-3.49)
       P OA                                                                                                                                        -0.046**                  -0.002       0.006
                                                                                                                                                    (-2.45)                  (-0.09)     (0.29)
       PTA                                                                                                                                                     -0.064***      0.005       0.013
                                                                                                                                                                 (-3.31)     (0.26)      (0.53)

       log(M E)             -0.256**   -0.291***   -0.270***    -0.247**    -0.226**    -0.249**    -0.271**    -0.233**    -0.264**    -0.262**    -0.262**    -0.260**    -0.213**   -0.243***
                             (-2.46)     (-3.13)     (-2.93)     (-2.32)     (-2.17)     (-2.35)     (-2.55)     (-2.25)     (-2.48)     (-2.49)     (-2.47)     (-2.44)     (-2.13)     (-2.82)
       log(B/M )             0.203**      0.111      0.130*      0.176**   0.249***      0.181**     0.194**     0.202**    0.193**     0.201**      0.199**    0.203**     0.228***    0.180***
                              (2.57)     (1.63)      (1.86)       (2.20)     (3.26)       (2.23)      (2.39)      (2.58)     (2.37)      (2.51)       (2.47)     (2.50)      (3.24)       (2.91)
       r(t − 1)            -0.947***   -0.999***   -0.980***   -0.978***   -0.985***   -0.981***   -0.967***   -0.967***   -0.978***   -0.974***   -0.968***   -0.969***   -0.978***   -0.986***
                            (-11.32)    (-12.23)    (-12.24)    (-11.49)    (-11.62)    (-11.49)    (-11.22)    (-11.17)    (-11.42)    (-11.36)    (-11.34)    (-11.32)    (-11.23)    (-12.04)
       r(t − 12, t − 2)      0.195**      0.162      0.196*       0.152       0.136       0.148       0.172*     0.174*       0.154       0.157      0.166*      0.166*       0.145       0.177*
                              (1.97)     (1.60)      (1.89)       (1.59)     (1.44)       (1.56)      (1.79)      (1.74)     (1.62)      (1.63)       (1.73)     (1.72)      (1.48)       (1.66)
       r(t − 36, t − 13)   -0.226***   -0.247***   -0.215***   -0.202***   -0.222***   -0.236***   -0.246***   -0.234***   -0.245***   -0.250***   -0.267***   -0.262***    -0.171**     -0.125*
                             (-3.04)     (-3.21)     (-2.82)     (-2.73)     (-3.11)     (-3.19)     (-3.31)     (-3.08)     (-3.32)     (-3.45)     (-3.59)     (-3.52)     (-2.31)     (-1.71)

       Adj.R2                4.2%        4.6%        4.9%        3.9%        3.9%        3.9%        3.9%        4.0%        3.9%        3.9%        3.8%        3.8%        4.4%        5.6%
       N.obs               1,360,804   1,176,542   1,047,649   1,558,110   1,555,185   1,534,322   1,525,874   1,341,026   1,540,736   1,535,046   1,534,231   1,533,912   1,308,130   901,523




                              Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
     (Continued )
                               (25)       (26)       (27)        (28)        (29)        (30)        (31)        (32)        (33)        (34)        (35)        (36)        (37)        (38)
       βF IN               0.129**      0.127**    0.122**     0.148**     0.161***    0.132**     0.138**     0.150**     0.127**      0.132*     0.129**     0.125**      0.128       0.134
                            (2.27)       (2.21)     (2.15)      (2.45)      (2.67)      (2.20)      (2.44)      (2.52)      (2.17)      (1.93)      (2.14)      (2.16)      (1.65)      (1.57)
       βP EAD               0.015        0.016      0.014       -0.022      -0.001      0.053       0.006       -0.016      0.010       0.008       0.029       0.012       -0.014      -0.018
                            (0.34)       (0.34)     (0.32)      (-0.45)     (-0.02)     (1.12)      (0.15)      (-0.31)     (0.21)      (0.15)      (0.63)      (0.27)      (-0.25)     (-0.27)
       Long-term profitability characteristics
       GP/A                0.142***                0.110**                                                                                                                             0.254***
                            (2.97)                  (2.16)                                                                                                                              (2.88)
       CbOP                            0.274***    0.219***                                                                                                                             -0.008
                                        (5.95)      (4.72)                                                                                                                              (-0.09)
       Value characteristics
       E/P                                                      0.047                                            -0.107                                                                 -0.140
                                                                (1.24)                                          (-1.60)                                                                 (-0.94)
       CF/P                                                                 0.059                               0.164**                                                                  0.056
                                                                            (1.60)                               (2.54)                                                                 (0.35)
       NP Y                                                                            0.118***                0.104***                                                                  0.027
                                                                                        (3.23)                   (2.79)                                                                 (0.38)
       DU R                                                                                         -0.108*      -0.066                                                                 -0.106
                                                                                                    (-1.70)     (-1.13)                                                                 (-0.76)
63




       Intangibles characteristics
       OC/A                                                                                                                 0.053                                            0.033       0.035
                                                                                                                            (1.56)                                          (0.58)       (0.59)
       AD/M                                                                                                                             -0.034                              -0.003       -0.115
                                                                                                                                        (-0.69)                            (-0.03)      (-0.97)
       RD/M                                                                                                                                        0.242***                0.245**       0.162
                                                                                                                                                    (3.23)                  (2.32)       (1.26)
       OL                                                                                                                                                       0.069       -0.000      -0.174*
                                                                                                                                                                (1.52)     (-0.00)      (-1.71)

       log(M E)             -0.252**   -0.320***   -0.294***    -0.192**    -0.216**    -0.227**    -0.266**    -0.185**    -0.234**    -0.250**    -0.239**    -0.232**    -0.239**     -0.156
                             (-2.34)     (-3.33)     (-3.04)     (-2.25)     (-2.53)     (-2.27)     (-2.52)     (-2.20)     (-2.37)     (-2.43)     (-2.17)     (-2.20)     (-2.00)     (-1.51)
       log(B/M )            0.217***    0.221***    0.235***    0.136**      0.131**     0.188**     0.136**      0.063     0.221***     0.136*     0.209**     0.217***      0.124     0.260**
                             (2.60)      (2.83)      (2.97)      (2.04)       (1.99)      (2.48)      (2.22)     (1.01)      (2.90)      (1.81)      (2.15)      (2.82)      (1.21)      (2.52)
       r(t − 1)            -0.983***   -0.985***   -0.998***   -0.860***   -0.851***   -0.937***   -0.973***   -0.880***   -0.980***   -0.937***   -1.102***   -0.981***   -1.109***   -1.002***
                            (-11.61)    (-11.39)    (-11.51)    (-10.27)    (-10.11)    (-11.14)    (-11.31)    (-10.70)    (-11.37)    (-10.92)    (-12.80)    (-11.20)    (-12.26)    (-10.17)
       r(t − 12, t − 2)       0.148      0.172*       0.147    0.348***     0.324***     0.211**      0.174*    0.348***     0.172*       0.096       0.026      0.166*      -0.087       0.106
                             (1.57)      (1.77)      (1.54)      (3.22)       (3.05)      (2.16)      (1.80)     (3.19)      (1.74)      (0.98)      (0.29)      (1.70)      (-0.90)     (0.93)
       r(t − 36, t − 13)   -0.279***   -0.298***   -0.299***   -0.205***   -0.210***   -0.222***   -0.268***   -0.169***   -0.265***   -0.295***   -0.283***   -0.275***   -0.286***     -0.110
                             (-3.85)     (-4.29)     (-4.41)     (-3.28)     (-3.36)     (-2.94)     (-3.76)     (-2.72)     (-3.65)     (-4.13)     (-4.34)     (-3.90)     (-3.70)     (-1.40)

       Adj.R2                  4.1%      3.9%        4.0%        4.3%        4.3%        4.2%        4.0%        4.9%        3.8%        3.8%        4.4%        3.8%        5.4%        7.6%
       N.obs               1,556,679   1,420,191   1,420,191   1,167,972   1,221,193   1,280,041   1,531,579   991,025     1,353,450   568,073     719,589     1,375,409   271,606     175,928




                                Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
              Table 10: Behavioral Factor Loadings of the Long- and Short-Leg Portfolios
This table reports time-series regressions of the long- and short-leg portfolio returns on the three-factor composite
model. Panel A shows PEAD factor betas of the long- and short-leg portfolios for each of the 12 short-horizon
anomalies, and Panel B shows FIN factor betas for long-horizon anomalies. At the bottom of each panel, we summarize
the average FIN or PEAD betas, and count how many anomalies have larger (in absolute terms) and significant FIN or
PEAD betas in the short legs than in the long legs (highlighted in boldface), and vice versa. The sample period runs
from 1972:07 to 2014:12, depending on data availability.
                                Panel A: βP EAD of short-horizon anomaly portfolios
                             Long legs    Short legs                           Long legs      Short legs
                SUE-1           0.18        -0.31               R11-1            0.68           -0.98
                               (3.73)      (-3.40)                              (6.15)         (-6.05)
                SUE-6           0.15        -0.24               I-MOM            0.50           -0.73
                               (3.24)      (-3.09)                              (4.74)         (-6.31)
                ABR-1           0.59        -0.74               ROEQ             0.14           -0.25
                               (8.57)      (-8.78)                              (1.63)         (-1.95)
                ABR-6           0.17        -0.44               ROAQ             0.26           -0.19
                               (2.87)      (-6.79)                              (4.72)         (-1.69)
                RE-1            0.15        -0.57               NEI              0.18           -0.25
                               (1.40)      (-4.01)                              (3.10)         (-4.38)
                R6-6            0.45        -0.84               FP               0.25           -0.54
                               (4.39)      (-5.02)                              (4.70)         (-3.16)
                Average βP EAD in the long legs:         0.31
                Average βP EAD in the short legs:       -0.51
                N. larger positive and significant βP EAD in the long legs:    1 out of 12
                N. larger negative and significant βP EAD in the short legs:   11 out of 12

                                  Panel B: βF IN of long-horizon anomaly portfolios
                              Long legs    Short legs                          Long legs      Short legs
                GP/A             0.01        -0.07              IvG              -0.07           -0.38
                               (0.16)       (-2.14)                             (-1.30)        (-7.35)
                CbOP            -0.19        -0.41              IvC              -0.13           -0.23
                               (-6.66)      (-8.74)                             (-2.56)        (-4.98)
                B/M             0.25         -0.17              OA               -0.38           -0.34
                               (3.94)       (-4.70)                             (-6.93)         (-8.89)
                E/P              0.23        -0.37              POA               0.00           -0.35
                               (4.06)       (-7.12)                             (0.06)         (-7.58)
                CF/P             0.24        -0.29              PTA               0.03           -0.46
                               (4.10)       (-6.71)                             (0.71)        (-11.01)
                NPY              0.36        -0.40              NSI               0.29           -0.33
                               (5.49)       (-7.36)                             (6.17)         (-8.64)
                DUR             0.23         -0.21              CSI              0.38            -0.37
                               (3.39)       (-5.85)                            (13.09)         (-11.21)
                AG               0.04        -0.36              OC/A             -0.33            0.03
                               (0.83)       (-7.82)                             (-7.54)         (0.51)
                NOA             -0.24        -0.18              AD/M              0.25           -0.26
                               (-7.70)      (-2.52)                             (3.15)         (-5.18)
                IVA              0.06        -0.19              RD/M             -0.31            0.02
                               (1.56)       (-3.62)                             (-2.08)         (0.37)
                IG              -0.22        -0.48              OL                0.07           -0.20
                               (-5.04)     (-14.22)                             (1.25)         (-3.12)
                Average βF IN in the long legs:          0.03
                Average βF IN in the short legs:        -0.27
                N. larger positive and significant βF IN in the long legs:     3 out of 22
                N. larger negative and significant βF IN in the short legs:    15 out of 22
                                                         64

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                   Table 11: Market Frictions and Sensitivity of Beta-Return Relation
Panel A reports returns of double-sorted portfolios by market frictions and FIN factor loadings (βF IN ). At the
beginning of each month, firms are ranked into 25 portfolios by independent sorts on βF IN and market friction proxies
(estimated in the previous month). Value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated for the current month and portfolios
are rebalanced at the beginning of the next month. Panel B reports results of Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regression
of monthly stock returns on βF IN , the quintile ranks of market friction proxies, and the interactions between βF IN and
friction ranks, with standard control variables. Newey-West corrected t-statistics are shown in the parentheses (with 3
lags). We use three friction proxies: the illiquidity measure (ILLIQ) of Amihud (2002), the institutional ownership
defined as shares held by institutions divided by shares outstanding (IO), and the residual institutional ownership
(RIO) of Nagel (2005) controlling for size. All regressors are winsorized at top and bottom 1% and standardized to
have zero mean and unit standard deviation, to make the coefficients comparable.The sample period runs from 1972:08
to 2014:12 (507 months) using ILLIQ, and from 1980:02 to 2014:12 (417 months) using IO and RIO.

                                         Panel A: Double-sorted portfolios
                                                Low β        2         3         4      High β      H−L
             Low ILLIQ (Low frictions)           0.73       0.86      0.81     1.05       1.05       0.32*
                                                (2.71)     (4.18)    (4.36)   (5.81)     (5.44)      (1.73)
             2                                   0.94       1.00      1.19     1.09       1.14        0.20
                                                (3.11)     (4.23)    (5.33)   (5.07)     (4.62)      (1.35)
             3                                   1.08       1.27      1.24     1.25       1.18        0.10
                                                (3.58)     (4.91)    (5.27)   (5.41)     (4.59)      (0.71)
             4                                   1.08       1.18      1.23     1.13       1.18        0.10
                                                (3.43)     (4.33)    (4.70)   (4.32)     (4.05)      (0.67)
             High ILLIQ (High frictions)         0.80       1.24      1.16     1.17       1.23      0.44***
                                                (2.47)     (4.19)    (4.35)   (4.16)     (4.18)      (2.84)


                                                Low β        2         3         4      High β      H−L
             Low IO (High frictions)             0.18       1.01      1.10     0.82       1.18      1.00**
                                                (0.43)     (2.59)    (3.88)   (2.53)     (3.37)     (2.39)
             2                                   0.34       0.94      1.17     0.96       0.95       0.61*
                                                (0.84)     (3.12)    (5.45)   (4.40)     (3.66)      (1.73)
             3                                   1.02       0.84      0.87     1.15       1.48       0.46*
                                                (2.91)     (3.16)    (3.51)   (5.44)     (5.71)      (1.77)
             4                                   0.88       1.15      1.14     1.17       1.27        0.39
                                                (2.62)     (4.11)    (4.62)   (5.09)     (5.33)      (1.59)
             High IO (Low frictions)             1.28       1.21      1.13     1.27       1.24       -0.04
                                                (3.79)     (4.61)    (4.46)   (5.01)     (4.33)     (-0.20)


                                                Low β        2         3         4      High β      H−L
             Low RIO (High frictions)            0.64       1.03      0.95     1.20       1.09        0.45
                                                (1.69)     (3.66)    (4.23)   (5.72)     (4.69)      (1.32)
             2                                   0.91       1.02      1.06     1.12       1.31       0.40*
                                                (2.73)     (3.84)    (4.58)   (5.08)     (5.29)      (1.69)
             3                                   1.14       1.14      1.09     1.22       1.05       -0.09
                                                (3.52)     (4.39)    (4.40)   (5.38)     (4.37)     (-0.39)
             4                                   1.19       1.09      1.17     1.21       1.31        0.11
                                                (3.14)     (3.98)    (4.54)   (4.77)     (4.40)      (0.45)
             High RIO (Low frictions)            1.02       1.02      1.11     1.03       1.27        0.24
                                                (2.82)     (3.46)    (3.68)   (3.34)     (3.75)      (1.11)

                                                           65

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                     Panel B: Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions
                           (1)        (2)             (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
βF IN                     0.200     0.170           0.388***   0.381***    0.407***    0.383***
                          (1.28)    (1.28)           (2.82)     (2.98)      (2.86)      (3.03)

ILLIQ rank               0.074**    -0.080*
                          (1.97)    (-1.87)
βF IN ∗ ILLIQ rank       -0.026     -0.024
                         (-0.80)    (-0.83)

IO rank                                              0.025     0.152***
                                                     (0.64)     (4.19)
βF IN ∗ IO rank                                     -0.093**   -0.091**
                                                     (-2.34)    (-2.46)

RIO rank                                                                   -0.204***   -0.254***
                                                                             (-5.72)     (-9.15)
βF IN ∗ RIO rank                                                           -0.089***   -0.079**
                                                                             (-2.66)    (-2.50)

log(M E)                           -0.248**                    -0.249**                 -0.176*
                                    (-2.17)                     (-2.33)                 (-1.83)
log(B/M )                          0.172***                    0.138**                 0.171***
                                    (2.84)                      (2.22)                  (2.79)
r(t − 1)                           -0.505***                   -0.611***               -0.639***
                                     (-6.77)                     (-7.34)                 (-7.72)
r(t − 12, t − 2)                   0.401***                    0.318***                0.288**
                                    (3.90)                      (2.64)                  (2.38)
r(t − 36, t − 13)                   -0.041                      -0.115                  -0.118
                                    (-0.60)                     (-1.31)                 (-1.35)

Adj.R2                    1.9%       5.6%            1.4%        5.0%        1.1%        5.0%
N.obs                    634,529    634,529         477,847    477,847     477,847     477,847




                                               66

             Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
                                                   Appendix


A      Definition of Anomaly Variables

A.1     Short-horizon anomalies

Standardized unexpected earnings (SUE-1, SUE-6):

Following Foster, Olsen, and Shevlin (1984), SUE is calculated as the change in quarterly earnings per share (Compustat
quarterly item EPSPXQ) from its value four quarters ago divided by the standard deviation of this change over the prior
eight quarters (six quarters minimum). To align quarterly SUE with monthly CRSP stock returns, SUE is used in the
months immediately following the quarterly earnings announcement date (Compustat quarterly item RDQ) but within
6 months from the fiscal quarter end, to exclude stale earnings. To exclude recording errors, we also require the earnings
announcement date to be after the corresponding fiscal quarter end.

At the beginning of each month t, we rank all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles based on their lagged
SUE in month t − 1. Monthly portfolio returns are calculated separately for the current month t (SUE-1) and for the
subsequent six months from t to t + 5 (SUE-6). The portfolios are rebalanced at the beginning of month t + 1. For SUE-6
portfolios, we calculated the monthly portfolio returns following Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). Because of the six-month
holding period, in each month, a given SUE-6 decile has six sub-deciles that are initiated in the prior six-month period.
We then take the simple average of the six sub-deciles returns as the monthly return of each SUE-6 decile.

Cumulative abnormal return around earnings announcements (ABR-1, ABR-6):

Following Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996), ABR is calculated as the four-day cumulative abnormal returns
(t − 2, t + 1) around the latest quarterly earnings announcement date (Compustat quarterly item RDQ):
                 d=1
                 X
       CARi =          (Ri,d − Rm,d )
                 d=−2

where Rid is stock i’s return on day d and Rmd is the market return on day d. To align quarterly ABR with monthly CRSP
stock returns, ABR is used in the months immediately following the quarterly earnings announcement date (Compustat
quarterly item RDQ) but within 6 months from the fiscal quarter end, to exclude stale earnings. To exclude recording
errors, we also require the earnings announcement date to be after the corresponding fiscal quarter end.

At the beginning of each month t, we rank all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles based on their lagged
ABR in month t − 1. Monthly portfolio returns are calculated separately for the current month t (ABR-1) and for the
subsequent six months from t to t+5 (ABR-6). The portfolios are rebalanced at the beginning of month t+1. For ABR-6
portfolios, we calculated the monthly portfolio returns following Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). Because of the six-month
holding period, in each month, a given ABR-6 decile has six sub-deciles that are initiated in the prior six-month period.
We then take the simple average of the six sub-deciles returns as the monthly return of each ABR-6 decile.

Revisions in analysts’ earnings forecasts (RE-1):

Analysts’ earnings forecast data are from the Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System (IBES). Following Chan, Jegadeesh,
and Lakonishok (1996), RE is calculated as the six-month moving average of past changes in analysts’ forecasts:
                 6
                X   fit−j − fit−j−1
       REit =
                j=1
                        pit−j−1

where fit−j is the consensus mean forecast (IBES unadjusted file, item MEANEST) issued in month t − j for firm i’s
current fiscal year earnings (IBES unadjusted file, item FPI (fiscal period indicator) =1), and pit−j−1 is the prior month’s
share price (IBES unadjusted file, item PRICE). A minimum of four monthly forecast changes is required.

At the beginning of month t, we rank all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles based on their lagged RE in
month t − 1. Monthly portfolio returns are calculated for the current month t (RE-1) and the portfolios are rebalanced
at the beginning of month t + 1.



                                                            67

                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
Price momentum (R6-6, R11-1):

Following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), R6 is calculated as a stock’s prior 6-month average returns from month t − 7
to t − 2. At the beginning of each month t, we rank all stocks into deciles based on R6 and calculate monthly decile
returns from month t to t + 5 (R6-6), skipping month t − 1. The deciles are rebalanced at the beginning of month t + 1.
Because of the six-month holding period, in each month, a given R6-6 decile has six sub-deciles that are initiated in the
prior six-month period. Following Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015), we take the simple average of the six sub-deciles returns
as the monthly return of each R6-6 decile.

The R11-1 deciles are constructed similarly. Following Fama and French (1996), R11 is calculated as a stock’s prior
11-month average returns from month t − 12 to t − 2. At the beginning of each month t, we rank all stocks into deciles
based on R11 and calculate monthly decile returns for month t (R11-1), skipping month t − 1. The deciles are rebalanced
at the beginning of month t + 1.

Industry momentum (I-MOM):

We start with the Fama-French 49-industry classification. We exclude financial firms, which leaves 45 industries. For
each industry, we calculate its prior six-month return from month t − 6 to t − 1, by taking a weighted-average of all stocks
returns within the industry. Following Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999), we do not skip month t − 1 when measuring
industry momentum.

At the beginning of each month t, we rank the 45 industries into 9 I-MOM portfolios (each with 5 industries) based on
their prior six-month returns from month t − 6 to t − 1. Monthly portfolio returns are calculated for the subsequent six
months from t to t + 5, by taking the simple average of the 5 industry returns within each portfolio, and the portfolios
are rebalanced at the beginning of month t + 1. Because of the six-month holding period, in each month, a given I-MOM
portfolio has six sub-portfolios that are initiated in the prior six-month period. Following Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015),
we take the simple average of the six sub-portfolios returns as the monthly return of each I-MOM portfolio.

Quarterly ROE and ROA (ROEQ, ROAQ):

ROEQ and ROAQ are calculated using Compustat quarterly files. ROEQ is income before extraordinary items (IBQ)
divided by one-quarter lagged book equity. ROAQ is income before extraordinary items (IBQ) divided by one-quarter
lagged total assets (ATQ). Book equity is shareholders’ equity, plus deferred taxes and investment tax credit (TXDITCQ),
minus book value of preferred stocks. Shareholders’ equity is shareholders’ equity (SEQQ), or common equity (CEQQ)
plus the carrying value of preferred stocks(PSTKQ), or total assets (ATQ) minus total liabilities (LTQ), depending on
data availability. Book value of preferred stocks equal the redemption value (PSTKRQ) if available, or the carrying value
of preferred stocks(PSTKQ).

To align quarterly ROEQ and ROAQ with monthly CRSP stock returns, ROEQ and ROAQ are used in the months
immediately following the quarterly earnings announcement date (RDQ) but within 6 months from the fiscal quarter
end, to exclude stale earnings. To exclude recording errors, we also require the earnings announcement date to be after
the corresponding fiscal quarter end.

At the beginning of each month t, we rank all stocks into deciles based on their lagged ROEQ or ROAQ in month t − 1.
We calculate value-weighted decile returns for month t and rebalance the deciles at the beginning of month t + 1.

Number of consecutive quarters with earnings increases (NEI):

Following Barth, Elliott, and Finn (1999) and Green, Hand, and Zhang (2013), we measure NEI as the number of
consecutive quarters (up to eight quarters) with an increase in earnings (Compustat quarterly item IBQ) over the same
quarter in the prior year. NEI takes values from 0 to 8 quarters. To align quarterly NEI with monthly CRSP stock
returns, NEI is used in the months immediately following the quarterly earnings announcement date (RDQ) but within
6 months from the fiscal quarter end, to exclude stale earnings. To exclude recording errors, we also require the earnings
announcement date to be after the corresponding fiscal quarter end.

At the beginning of each month t, we rank all stocks into nine portfolios, with lagged NEI in month t − 1 equal to 0, 1,
2, ..., and 8, respectively. We calculate value-weighted portfolio returns for month t and rebalance the portfolios at the
beginning of month t + 1.

Failure probability (FP):




                                                            68

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
We calculate failure probability (FP) following Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008),

      F Pt = − 9.164 − 20.264 N IM T AAV Gt + 1.416 T LM T At − 7.129 EXRET AV Gt
              + 1.411 SIGM At − 0.045 RSIZEt − 2.132 CASHM T At + 0.075 M Bt − 0.058 P RICEt

Detailed variable definitions in the above equation follows closely from Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015).

Quarterly FP is aligned with monthly CRSP stock returns with at least four months gap after the fiscal quarter end, but
within six months after the quarterly earnings announcement date (RDQ). We impose the four-month gap between the
fiscal quarter end and portfolio formation to ensure that all quarterly data items in the definition of FP are available to
public.

At the beginning of each month t, we rank stocks into deciles based on their lagged FP in month t − 1. We calculate
value-weighted decile returns for the subsequent six months from month t to t + 5 and rebalance the deciles at the
beginning of month t + 1. Because of the six-month holding period, in each month, a given FP decile has six sub-deciles
that are initiated in the prior six-month period. Following Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015), we take the simple average of
the six sub-decile returns as the monthly return of each FP decile.


A.2     Long-horizon anomalies

Gross profit-to-asset ratio (GP/A):

Following Novy-Marx (2013), we define GP/A as total revenue (Compustat item REVT) minus cost of goods sold (COGS)
for the fiscal year ending in year t − 1, adjusted by current (not lagged) total asset (AT) of fiscal year ending in year
t − 1. At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on GP/A for all fiscal years ending in year
t − 1. Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at
the end of June of year t + 1.

Cash-based operating profitability (CbOP):

Cash-based operating profitability (CbOP) is defined following Ball, Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Nikolaev (2016).
Operating profitability is measured as revenue (REVT) minus cost of goods sold (COGS) minus reported sales, general,
and administrative expenses (XSGA – XRD (zero if missing)). Prior to 1988, we use the balance sheet statement and
measure CbOP as operating profitability minus the change in accounts receivable (RECT) minus the change in
inventory (INVT) minus the change in prepaid expenses (XPP) plus the change in deferred revenues (DRC + DRLT)
plus the change in accounts payable (AP) plus the change in accrued expenses (XACC), deflated by current total
assets. Starting from 1988, we use the cash flow statement and measure CbOP as operating profitability plus decrease
in accounts receivable (– RECCH) plus decrease in inventory (– INVCH) plus increase in accounts payable and accrued
liabilities (APALCH), deflated by current total assets.

At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on CbOP for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1.
Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end
of June of year t + 1.

Book-to-market equity (B/M):

B/M is defined as the book equity for the fiscal year ending in year t − 1 divided by the market equity at the end of
December of t − 1. Following Davis, Fama, and French (2000), book equity is shareholders’ equity, plus balance sheet
deferred taxes and investment tax credit (TXDITC) if available, minus the book value of preferred stocks. Shareholders’
equity is Compustat item SEQ if available, or the book value of common equity (CEQ) plus the carrying value of
preferred stocks(PSTK), or total assets (AT) minus total liabilities (LT), depending on data availability. Book value of
preferred stocks is the redemption value (PSTKRV), or the liquidating value (PSTKL), or the carrying value of preferred
stocks(PSTK), depending on availability.

At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on B/M for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1.
Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end
of June of year t + 1.

Earnings-to-price (E/P):

Following Basu (1983), we measure earnings-to-price (E/P) ratio as income before extraordinary items (IB) for the fiscal
year ending in year t − 1 divided by market equity at the end of December of t − 1. We keep only firms with positive


                                                            69

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
earnings. At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on E/P for all fiscal years ending in year
t − 1. Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at
the end of June of year t + 1.

Cash flow-to-price (CF/P):

We measure cash flow (CF) as income before extraordinary items (IB), plus depreciation and amortization (DP), plus
deferred taxes (TXDI, if available). CF/P is calculated as CF for the fiscal year ending in year t − 1 divided by market
equity at the end of December of t − 1. We keep only firms with positive cash flows. At the end of June of each year t,
we sort stocks into deciles based on CF/P for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1. Monthly decile returns are calculated
from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end of June of year t + 1.

Net payout yield (NPY):

Following Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson, and Roberts (2007), total payout (O) is dividend on common stock (DVC)
plus repurchase, where repurchase is the purchase of common and preferred stock (PRSTKC) plus any reduction (negative
change over the prior year) in the value of the net number of preferred stocks outstanding (PSTKRV). Net payout (NO) is
total payout minus equity issuance, which is the sale of common and preferred stock (SSTK) minus any increase (positive
change over the prior year) in the value of the net number of preferred stocks outstanding (PSTKRV). Net payout yield
(NPY) is calculated as NO for the fiscal year ending in year t − 1 divided by the market equity at the end of December
of year t − 1.

At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on NPY for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1.
Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end
of June of year t + 1.

Equity duration (DUR):

Following Dechow, Sloan, and Soliman (2004), equity duration is calculated as:
              PT                     t                      PT
                t=1 t × CDt /(1 + r)          1 + r M E − t=1 CDt /(1 + r)t
                                                  
       DU R =                          + T+
                        ME                      r                ME
where CDt is the net cash distribution of year t, M E is the market equity calculated as price per share times shares
outstanding of year t (P RCC F × CSHO), T is the length of forecasting period, and r is the cost of equity. The
construction of CDt follows closely from Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). Also, to be consistent with Hou, Xue, and Zhang
(2015), we use a forecasting period of T = 10 and a cost of equity of r = 0.12.

At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on DUR for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1.
Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end
of June of year t + 1.

Asset Growth (AG):

Following Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008), asset growth is defined as the percentage change in total asset (Compustat
item AT) scaled by beginning total asset. At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on AG for
all fiscal years ending in year t − 1. Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and
the deciles are rebalanced at the end of June of year t + 1.

Net operating assets (NOA):

Following Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang (2004), we define net operating assets as NOA = (Operating Assets –
Operating Liabilities)/Lagged Total Assets, where Operating Assets = Total Assets(AT) – Cash and Short-term
Investment (CHE), and Operating Liabilities = Total Assets (AT) – Short-term Debt (DLC) – Long-term Debt (DLTT)
– Minority Interest (MIB) – Preferred Stock (PSTK) – Common Equity (CEQ).

At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on NOA for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1.
Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end
of June of year t + 1.

Investment-to-asset ratio (IVA):

Following Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang (2008), we measure IVA as the annual change in gross property, plant, and equipment
(PPEGT) plus the annual change in inventories (INVT) divided by lagged total assets (AT). At the end of June of each


                                                           70

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on IVA for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1. Monthly decile returns are
calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end of June of year t + 1.

Investment growth (IG):

Following Xing (2008), we measure IG as the percentage change in capital expenditure (CAPX). At the end of June of
each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on IG for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1. Monthly decile returns are
calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end of June of year t + 1.

Net share issuance (NSI):

Following Pontiff and Woodgate (2008), we measure NSI of fiscal year t − 1 as the natural log of the ratio of split-adjusted
shares outstanding of fiscal year t − 1 to split-adjusted shares outstanding of fiscal year t − 2. The split-adjusted shares
outstanding is the common share outstanding (CSHO) times the adjustment factor (AJEX).

At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on NSI for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1. We
notice that about one quarter of our sample observations have negative NSI (repurchasing firms), and three quarters
with positive NSI (issuing firms). We separately sort repurchasing firms (with negative NSI) into two groups and issuing
firms (with positive NSI) into eight groups using NYSE breakpoints. Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of
year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end of June of year t + 1.

Composite share issuance (CSI):

Following Daniel and Titman (2006), we measure CSI as the growth rate in market equity that is not attributable to the
stock returns, CSIt = log(M Et /M Et−5 ) − r(t − 5, t). Specifically, for CSI in June of year t, M Et is the market equity at
the end of June in year t, M Et−5 is the market equity at the end of June in year t − 5, and r(t − 5, t) is the cumulative
log return on the stock from end of June in year t − 5 to end of June in year t.

At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on CSI measured in June of year t. Monthly decile
returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end of June of year
t + 1.

Inventory growth (IvG):

Following Belo and Lin (2012), we measure IvG of fiscal year t − 1 as the ratio of inventory (INVT) of fiscal year ending
in year t − 1 over inventory of the fiscal year ending in t − 2. At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles
based on IvG for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1. Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June
of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end of June of year t + 1.

Inventory changes (IvC):

Following Thomas and Zhang (2002), we measure IvC of fiscal year t − 1 as the change in inventory (INVT) from the
fiscal year of t − 2 to the fiscal year of t − 1, scaled by average total assets (AT) of fiscal years t − 2 and t − 1. At the end
of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on IvC for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1. Monthly decile
returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end of June of year
t + 1.

Operating accruals (OA):

We define operating accruals in a way consistent with Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). Prior to 1988, we use the balance
sheet approach of Sloan (1996) and measure operating accruals as OA = [(∆Current Assets – ∆Cash) – (∆Current
Liabilities – ∆Short-term Debt – ∆Taxes Payable) – Depreciation and Amortization Expense]/Lagged Total Assets,
where Current Assets is Compustat annual item ACT, Cash is CHE, Current Liabilities is LCT, Short-term Debt is
DLC (zero if missing), Taxes Payable is TXP (zero if missing), Depreciation and Amortization Expense is DP (zero if
missing), and Total Assets is AT.

Starting from 1988, we use the cash flow approach following Hribar and Collins (2002) and measure operating accruals
as OA = [Net Income – Net Cash Flow from Operations]/Lagged Total Assets, where Net Income is NI and Net Cash
Flow from Operations is OANCF. Data from the statement of cash flows are only available since 1988.

At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on OA for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1. Monthly
decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end of June
of year t + 1.

Percent operating accruals (POA):


                                                               71

                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
Following Hafzalla, Lundholm, and Van Winkle (2011), we measure POA as operating accruals (OA) scaled by the
absolute value of net income (Compustat item NI) for the fiscal year ending in year t − 1. At the end of June of each year
t, we sort stocks into deciles based on POA for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1. Monthly decile returns are calculated
from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end of June of year t + 1.

Percent total accruals (PTA):

We first define total accruals (TA) in a way consistent with Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). Prior to 1988, we use the
balance-sheet approach of Richardson, Sloan, Soliman, and Tuna (2005) and measure TA as ∆WC + ∆NCO + ∆FIN.
∆WC is the change in net non-cash working capital (WC). WC is current operating asset (COA) minus current operating
liabilities (COL), with COA = current assets (ACT) minus cash and short-term investments (CHE) and COL = current
liabilities (LCT) minus debt in current liabilities (DLC, zero if missing). ∆NCO is the change in net non-current
operating assets (NCO). NCO is non-current operating assets (NCOA) minus non-current operating liabilities (NCOL),
with NCOA = total assets (AT) minus current assets (ACT) minus investments and advances (IVAO, zero if missing),
and NCOL = total liabilities (LT) minus current liabilities (LCT) minus long-term debt (DLTT, zero if missing). ∆FIN
is the change in net financial assets (FIN). FIN is financial assets (FINA) minus financial liabilities (FINL), with FINA =
short-term investments (IVST, zero if missing) plus long-term investments (IVAO, zero if missing), and FINL= long-term
debt (DLTT, zero if missing) plus debt in current liabilities (DLC, zero if missing) plus preferred stock (PSTK, zero if
missing).

Starting from 1988, we use the cash flow approach following Hribar and Collins (2002) and measure TA as net income (NI)
minus total operating, investing, and financing cash flows (OANCF, IVNCF, and FINCF) plus sales of stocks (SSTK,
zero if missing) minus stock repurchases and dividends (PRSTKC and DV, zero if missing). Data from the statement of
cash flows are only available since 1988.

Following Hafzalla, Lundholm, and Van Winkle (2011), we measure PTA as total accruals (TA) scaled by the absolute
value of net income (NI) for the fiscal year ending in year t − 1. At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into
deciles based on PTA for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1. Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t
to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end of June of year t + 1.

Organizational capital-to-assets (OC/A):

Following Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013), OC/A is measured using the perpetual inventory method:

       OCit = (1 − δ)OCit−1 + SG&Ait /CP It

where SG&A is Selling, General, and Administrative expenses (Compustat item XSGA), CPI is the consumer price index
during year t, and δ is the annual depreciation rate of OC. For detailed definition of each variable, we follow closely Hou,
Xue, and Zhang (2015).

At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on OC/A for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1.
Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles are rebalanced at the end
of June of year t + 1.

Advertisement expense-to-market (AD/M):

Following Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis (2001), we measure AD/M as advertising expenses (Compustat item XAD)
for the fiscal year ending in year t − 1 divided by the market equity at the end of December of year t − 1. We keep only
firms with positive advertising expenses. At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on AD/M
for all fiscal years ending in year t − 1. Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1
and the deciles are rebalanced at the end of June of year t + 1.

R&D-to-market (RD/M):

Following Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis (2001), we measure RD/M as R&D expenses (Compustat item XRD) for
the fiscal year ending in year t − 1 divided by the market equity at the end of December of year t − 1. We keep only
firms with positive R&D expenses. At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on RD/M for all
fiscal years ending in year t − 1. Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the
deciles are rebalanced at the end of June of year t + 1.

Operating leverage (OL):

Following Novy-Marx (2011), OL is measured as cost of goods sold (Compustat item COGS) plus selling, general, and
administrative expenses (Compustat item XSGA) for the fiscal year ending in year t − 1, adjusted by current (not lagged)


                                                            72

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
total assets (Compustat item AT). At the end of June of each year t, we sort stocks into deciles based on OL for all fiscal
years ending in year t − 1. Monthly decile returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1 and the deciles
are rebalanced at the end of June of year t + 1.




                                                            73

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3086063
