                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INFERRING INEQUALITY WITH HOME PRODUCTION

                                           Job Boerma
                                       Loukas Karabarbounis

                                        Working Paper 24166
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w24166


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2017




We are grateful to Mark Aguiar, Anmol Bhandari, Jonathan Heathcote, Erik Hurst, Richard Rogerson,
Kjetil Storesletten, Gianluca Violante, three anonymous referees, and various seminar participants
for useful comments. Karabarbounis thanks the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for generous financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24166.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Job Boerma and Loukas Karabarbounis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Inferring Inequality with Home Production
Job Boerma and Loukas Karabarbounis
NBER Working Paper No. 24166
December 2017, Revised April 2020
JEL No. D10,D60,E21,J22

                                             ABSTRACT

We revisit the causes, welfare consequences, and policy implications of the dispersion in households'
labor market outcomes using a model with uninsurable risk, incomplete asset markets, and home production.
Accounting for home production amplifies welfare-based differences across households meaning that
inequality in standards of living is larger than we thought. Home production does not offset differences
that originate in the market sector because hours working at home do not covary with consumption
and wages in the cross section of households and there are significant production efficiency differences
in the home sector. The optimal tax system should feature more progressivity taking into account home
production.


Job Boerma
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
United States
boerm002@umn.edu

Loukas Karabarbounis
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
Hanson Hall
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
loukas@umn.edu
1         Introduction

A substantial body of research examines the causes, welfare consequences, and policy implications

of the pervasive dispersion across households in their labor market outcomes.1 The literature
trying to understand the dispersion in wages, hours worked, and consumption across households
typically abstracts from the possibility that households can produce goods and services outside of

the market sector. It is well known, however, that households spend roughly half as much time in
home production activities such as child care, shopping, and cooking as in the market.
        While it is understood that home production of goods and services introduces, on average, a

gap between household consumption recorded in official statistics and standards of living, little is

known about how differences in home production across households affect inequality in standards of

living. A priori there are good reasons why home production can change the inferences economists

draw from observing dispersion in labor market outcomes. To the extent that households are

willing to substitute between market expenditures and time in the production of goods and services,

home production will tend to compress welfare differences that originate in the market sector.

However, to the extent that household differences in the home sector remain uninsurable and are

large relative to the market sector, the home sector itself may emerge as an additional source of

welfare differences across households.

        We show that incorporating home production in a model with uninsurable risk and incomplete
asset markets changes the inferred sources of heterogeneity across households, alters meaningfully

the welfare consequences of dispersion, and leads to different policy conclusions. Surprisingly, we
infer that inequality across households is larger than what one would infer without incorporating
home production.2 We reach this conclusion because, for households of all ages, the time input

in home production does not covary negatively with consumption and wages in the cross section
of households and production efficiency differences in the home sector are large. Thus, home
    1
     See Heathcote, Perri, and Violante (2010) and Attanasio and Pistaferri (2016) for empirical regularities on
household heterogeneity in labor market outcomes.
   2
     We use the term dispersion to refer to the variation in observed outcomes (such as time allocation, consumption
expenditures, and wages) or inferred sources of heterogeneity (such as permanent or transitory productivity and
taste shifters). We use the term inequality to refer to the mapping from dispersion to measures which capture
welfare differences across households.




                                                         1
production does not offset differences that originate in the market sector. Rather, home production

amplifies these differences.
   We develop our findings using a general equilibrium model with home production, heteroge-
neous households facing idiosyncratic risk, and incomplete asset markets. In the spirit of Ghez

and Becker (1975), households produce goods with a technology which uses as inputs both expen-
ditures and time. In the home sector, households are heterogeneous with respect to their disutility
of work and their production efficiency. Home production is not tradeable and there are no assets

households can purchase to explicitly insure against differences that originate in the home sector.
In the market sector, households are also heterogeneous with respect to their disutility of work and

their productivity. The structure of asset markets allows households to insure against transitory

shocks in their market productivity but not against permanent productivity differences. We retain

tractability and prove identification by extending the no-trade result with respect to certain assets

for the one-sector model of Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014) to our model embedding

multiple sectors. Therefore, we can characterize the allocations of time and consumption goods in

closed form without simultaneously solving for the wealth distribution.

   At the core of our approach lies an observational equivalence theorem which allows us to

compare our model with home production to a nested model without home production. The

observational equivalence theorem states that both models account perfectly for any given cross-

sectional data on three observables: consumption expenditures, time spent working in the market,

and market productivity (wages). However, the inferred sources of heterogeneity generating these
data and inequality will in general differ between the two models. It is essential for our purposes
that the two models are observationally equivalent because any differences between the two models

is exclusively driven by structural factors and not by their ability to account for cross-sectional
data on labor market outcomes.
   We infer heterogeneity in market productivity and disutility of market work such that the allo-

cations generated by the standard model without home production match the cross-sectional data
on the three observables. Then, we infer the sources of heterogeneity such that the allocations
generated by the model with home production match the same cross-sectional data and, addi-



                                                 2
tionally, time spent on home production activities. Separating disutility of work from production

efficiency at home presents a challenge for home production models because, unlike expenditures
and time inputs, the output of the home sector is not directly observable. Our solution to this
identification problem is to pose that some of the cross-sectional differences in time spent working

at home are driven by heterogeneity in production efficiency and the remaining differences are
driven by heterogeneity in the disutility of work.
   To quantify the role of home production for inequality, we use U.S. data between 1995 and

2016 on consumption expenditures, time spent on the market sector, and market productivity
from the Consumption Expenditure Survey (CEX). The CEX does not contain information on

time spent on home production. To overcome this problem, we use data from the American Time

Use Survey (ATUS) to impute individuals’ time spent on home production based on observables

which are common between the two surveys. For our identification, we allow households to have

different work disutility over some time activities such as cooking and cleaning because we find

that these activities map closest to occupations which are intensive in manual skills. By contrast,

other time activities such as child care and nursing are less intensive in manual skills and, so, we

allow households to have different production efficiencies in them.

   The key result of our analysis is that the world is more unequal than we thought when we take

into account home production. We arrive at our conclusion using four ways to map dispersion

in labor market outcomes into welfare-based measures of inequality. First, the standard devia-

tion of equivalent variation across households is roughly 15 percent larger when we incorporate
home production. Second, equalizing marginal utilities across households requires transfers with
a standard deviation roughly 30 percent higher in the model with home production than in the

model without home production. Third, an unborn household is willing to sacrifice 12 percent of
lifetime consumption in order to eliminate heterogeneity in an environment with home produc-
tion, compared to 6 percent in an environment without home production. Finally, taking into

account home production, a utilitarian government would choose a more progressive tax system.
For example, a household earning 200,000 dollars would face an average tax rate of 19 percent with
home production, compared to 12 percent without home production. One way to understand our



                                                 3
inequality result is in terms of the distinction between consumption and expenditures emphasized

by Aguiar and Hurst (2005). We find that expenditures are less dispersed than the market value
of total consumption which, in addition to expenditures, includes the market value of time spent
on home production.

   Heterogeneity in home production efficiency rather than disutility of work is essential in am-
plifying inequality across households. If there was only heterogeneity in the disutility of home
work, then there would be no significant inequality gap between the model with and the model

without home production. Our inference of home production efficiency is based on an intra-period
optimality condition which requires households to consume more in their more efficient sector

and implies a log-linear relationship between production efficiency and three observables (market

expenditures, time spent on home production, and market productivity). Home production effi-

ciency is dispersed as it cumulates the variances of these three observables while the covariation

between them is small.

   Our results are robust to a battery of sensitivity checks. First, our conclusions are robust to

the estimated values of the elasticity of substitution across sectors, the parameter which governs

the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, and the progressivity of the tax system. Second, our results

apply separately within subgroups of households defined by their age, marital status, number of

children, age of youngest child, the presence of a working spouse, and education levels. Third, our

conclusions are robust to measures of expenditures that range from narrow (food) to broad (total

spending including durables). Fourth, the inequality differences between the model with and the
model without home production are robust to even large amounts of measurement error that may
impact the dispersion in observables. Fifth, we examine four alternative datasets in which we do

not need to impute home production time because they contain information on both expenditures
and time use. We confirm our results in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) with food
expenditures, in a version of the PSID with expanded consumption categories, in a dataset from

Japan, and in a dataset from the Netherlands.
   There is an extensive literature which examines how non-separabilities and home production
affect consumption and labor supply either over the business cycle (Benhabib, Rogerson, and



                                                4
Wright, 1991; Greenwood and Hercowitz, 1991; McGrattan, Rogerson, and Wright, 1997; Baxter

and Jermann, 1999; Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis, 2013) or over the life cycle (Rios-Rull,
1993; Aguiar and Hurst, 2005, 2007; Dotsey, Li, and Yang, 2014). In these papers, home pro-
duction provides a smoothing mechanism against differences that originate in the market sector

if households are sufficiently willing to substitute expenditures with time. Our conclusions for
the role of home production in understanding cross-sectional patterns differ from this literature
because we find that time in home production is not negatively correlated with wages and expen-

ditures in the cross section of households. By contrast, an assumption underlying the business
cycle and life-cycle literatures is that decreases in the opportunity cost of time and in expenditures

are associated with substantial increases in time spent on home production.

   Even though the home production literature has emphasized shocks in the home sector in order

to generate higher volatility in labor markets and labor wedges (Benhabib, Rogerson, and Wright,

1991; Greenwood and Hercowitz, 1991; Karabarbounis, 2014), little is known about cross-sectional

differences in shocks in the home sector. We develop a methodology to infer production efficiency

and disutility of work heterogeneity in the home sector. Our conclusion is that these sources

of heterogeneity are important in terms of generating cross-sectional and life-cycle patterns of

expenditures and time allocation.

   The literature on incomplete markets has started to incorporate home production and non-

separabilities into models. Kaplan (2012) argues that involuntary unemployment and non-separable

preferences allow an otherwise standard model with self-insurance to account for the variation of
market hours over the life cycle. Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016) examine consump-
tion inequality in a model in which shocks can also be insured within the family and preferences for

hours are non-separable across spouses. Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2018) incorpo-
rate child care into a life-cycle partial equilibrium model of consumption and family labor supply.
Their paper aims to understand the responsiveness of consumption and time use to transitory

and permanent wage shocks and, unlike our paper, it does not quantify the extent to which home
production affects inequality.
   Another related literature addresses consumption inequality. Earlier work (Deaton and Pax-



                                                  5
son, 1994; Gourinchas and Parker, 2002; Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron, 2004; Aguiar and Hurst,

2013) has examined the drivers of life-cycle consumption inequality and their welfare consequences.
More recent work focuses on the increase in consumption inequality (Krueger and Perri, 2006;
Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston, 2008; Aguiar and Bils, 2015) and the decline in leisure inequal-

ity (Attanasio, Hurst, and Pistaferri, 2015) over time. Our contribution is to introduce home
production data into the inequality literature and show that they change the inferences we draw
about welfare. Closest to the spirit of our exercise, Jones and Klenow (2016) map differences

in consumption levels and dispersion, market hours, and mortality into welfare differences across
countries and find that in some cases GDP per capita does not track welfare closely.

    Finally, our paper relates to a strand of literature which uses no-trade theorems to derive

analytical solutions for a certain class of models with incomplete markets and heterogeneous agents.

Constantinides and Duffie (1996) first derived a no-trade theorem in an endowment economy.

Krebs (2003) extends the theorem to an environment with capital, in which households invest

a constant share of wealth in physical and human capital and total income follows a random

walk in logs. Most relevant for us, Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014) extend the no-

trade theorem by allowing for partial insurance of wage shocks and flexible labor supply. Our

contribution is to extend the theorem when households can also direct their time to multiple

sectors and face heterogeneity in both their home production efficiency and disutility of work.


2     Model

We first present the model and characterize its equilibrium in closed form. We then discuss the
identification of the sources of heterogeneity across households.

2.1    Environment

Demographics. The economy features perpetual youth demographics. We denote by t the

calendar year and by j the birth year of a household. Households face a constant probability of

survival δ in each period. Each period a cohort of mass 1 − δ is born, keeping the population size
constant with a mass of one.



                                                 6
Technologies. We denote the good purchased in the market by cM and the various goods
produced at home by cK where K = 1, ..., K indexes home produced goods. All goods are produced

with labor. Hours worked in the market are hM and hours worked in each home sector are hK .
       A household’s technology in the market sector is characterized by its (pre-tax) earnings y =

zM hM , where zM denotes market productivity (wage) which varies across households and over
                                                      R
time. Aggregate production of market goods is given by ι zM (ι)hM (ι)dΦ(ι), where ι identifies
households and Φ denotes the cumulative distribution function of households. Goods and labor

markets are perfectly competitive and the wage per efficiency unit of labor is one.
       The government taxes labor income to finance (wasteful) public expenditures G of the market
                                                            1−τ1
good. If y = zM hM is pre-tax earnings, then ỹ = (1 − τ0 )zM    hM is after-tax earnings, where τ0

determines the level of taxes and τ1 governs the progressivity of the tax system. When τ1 = 0

there is a flat tax rate. A higher τ1 introduces a larger degree of progressivity into the tax system

because it compresses after-tax earnings relative to pre-tax earnings.3

       Households have access to K technologies in the home sector. Production of home goods is

given by cK = zK hK , where zK denotes home productivity which varies across households and

over time. Home production is not tradeable and not storable, meaning that in every instance

home production must be consumed.
                                                                                   ∞
                                                                                         (βδ)t−j Ut ct , hM,t , hK,t ,
                                                                                   P                                
Preferences. Households order sequences of goods and time by Ej
                                                                                   t=j
where c is the consumption aggregator and β is the discount factor. The period utility function is

given by:
                                        1
    c1−γ − 1 (exp(B)hM + exp(DK )hK )1+ η
                        P
 U=         −                             .                                                                       (1)
      1−γ               1 + η1

The curvature of the utility function with respect to consumption c is given by parameter γ ≥ 0
and the curvature with respect to total effective hours by parameter η > 0. Hours are perfect
   3
     Our tax schedule modifies the tax schedule considered, among others, by Guner, Kaygusuz, and Ventura (2014)
and Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014) in that τ1 is applied to market productivity zM instead of earnings
                                                                         1−τ1                                      1−τ
zM hM . We adopt the specification of after-tax earnings ỹ = (1 − τ0 )zM     hM instead of ỹ = (1 − τ0 ) (zM hM ) 1
because we can only prove the no-trade result in the home production model under the former specification. We
argue that this modification does not matter for our results because market productivity zM and hours hM are
relatively uncorrelated in the cross section of households and most of the cross-sectional variation in earnings zM hM
is accounted for by zM . For this reason, our estimate of τ1 in Section 3.2 is close to the estimates found in Guner,
Kaygusuz, and Ventura (2014) and Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014).


                                                          7
substitutes across sectors. The disutility of work in the market sector is B and the disutility of

work in each home sector is DK . We allow B and DK to vary across households and over time.4
       Consumption is given by a CES aggregator of market and home goods, with an elasticity of
substitution between any goods equal to φ > 0:
       φ−1 X                    φ
                               φ−1
                          φ−1
  c = cM   φ  +    ωK c K  φ        ,                                                                               (2)

where ωK denotes the consumption weight of home good K relative to market consumption.

Similar to productivity zK and disutility of work DK , we allow ωK to vary across households and
over time.5

       Our specification of preferences and technologies nests the standard model without home pro-

duction when ωK = 0 for all K. For ωK > 0 our multi-sector model is a special case of the

Beckerian model of home production in which expenditures and time combine to produce final

utility (Becker, 1965; Ghez and Becker, 1975; Gronau, 1986).6

Home Production Efficiencies. In home production models it is essential to distinguish be-

tween consumption weights, ωK , which transform consumption outputs cK into utility and what

we label production efficiencies, θK , which transform time inputs hK into utility. To see where

production efficiencies arise in households’ problem, we substitute the consumption aggregator (2)

and the technologies cK = zK hK into the utility function (1) to obtain the derived utility:
                                 φ 1−γ
            φ−1   P         φ−1
                                 φ−1                                         1+ η1
         cM  φ  + (θK hK )   φ            −1                    P
                                                   exp(B)hM + exp(DK )hK
 V =                                          −                                       ,                             (3)
                       1−γ                                      1 + η1
                    φ
            φ−1
where θK ≡ ωK   zK is the production efficiency of hours in each sector, a convolution of the

consumption weight, ωK , and home productivity, zK . Identifying separately ωK from zK is not
   4
     Our model features a single decision maker within each household. We model hours worked across spouses as
perfect substitutes and in our quantitative results we define hM and hK as the sum of the respective hours worked
across spouses. The perfect substitutability of hours (across sectors and spouses) is essential for the no-trade result.
We can extend the model for separate disutility of work by spouse.
   5
     We normalize to unity an inessential constant multiplying cM in equation (2). In our quantitative results with
γ = 1, this constant becomes an additive term in utility which does not enter equilibrium allocations and, therefore,
cannot be identified from data.
   6
     We use the more common formulation of the home production model as in Gronau (1986) in which time spent
working in the market and at home generate disutility. As we show in Boerma and Karabarbounis (2020), this
version shares many predictions with the Beckerian framework in which expenditures and home time are inputs
in the production of goods which enter into utility. Further, the no-trade result can be extended in the Beckerian
version of the home production model with imperfect substitutability of hours.

                                                           8
feasible because home output cK data are unavailable in common datasets. However, this lack
of identification does not pose a challenge for our analyses. As we show below, all equilibrium

allocations depend directly only on θK and not on its split between ωK and zK . Additionally,
since equilibrium allocations and derived utility depend only on θK , this split does not affect any

of our inequality results. In other words, even if one could separate ωK from zK , this split would
not be informative for equilibrium allocations and welfare analyses. For this reason, henceforth
we focus our analysis on θK rather than ωK and zK .

Sources of Heterogeneity. Households are heterogeneous with respect to the disutilities of
work B and DK and efficiencies zM and θK . For B and zM we impose a random walk structure

which is important for obtaining the no-trade result. Under certain parametric restrictions which

we discuss below, we are able to obtain the no-trade result with minimal structure on the process

governing home production efficiency θK and disutility of home work DK .

   Households’ disutility of market work is described by a random walk process:

        j
 Btj = Bt−1 + υtB .                                                                               (4)


Households’ log market productivity log zM is the sum of a permanent component α and a more

transitory component ε:

      j
 log zM,t = αtj + εjt .                                                                           (5)


The permanent component follows a random walk, αtj = αt−1
                                                      j
                                                          + υtα . The more transitory compo-

nent, εjt = κjt + υtε , is the sum of a random walk component, κjt = κjt−1 + υtκ , and an innovation
                                                                                                 j
υtε . Finally, households are heterogeneous with respect to their production efficiency at home θK,t
                                j
and disutility of work at home DK,t . Our identification theorem below is based on cross-sectional

data and does not restrict θK and DK to a particular class of stochastic processes. We identify a
                            j    j
household ι by a sequence {θK , DK , B j , αj , κj , υ ε }.

   For any random walk, we use υ to denote innovations and Φυt to denote distributions of
                                                                                        j
innovations. We allow distributions of innovations to vary over time t. We assume that θK,t
     j
and DK,t are orthogonal to the innovations {υtB , υtα , υtκ , υtε } and that all innovations are drawn


                                                       9
                                                                        j      j
independently from each other. The distribution of initial conditions (θK,j , DK,j , Bjj , αjj , κjj ) can
be non-degenerate across households born at j and can vary by birth year j.

Asset Markets. It is convenient to describe the restrictions on asset markets using the definition
of an island in the spirit of Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014). Islands are capturing
insurance mechanisms available to households for smoothing more transitory shocks in the market

sector. Households are partitioned into islands, with each island consisting of a continuum of
households who are identical in terms of their production efficiency at home θK , disutilities of
work DK and B, permanent component of market productivity α, and the initial condition of
                                  j    j
κ. More formally, household ι = {θK , DK , B j , αj , κj , υ ε } lives on island ` consisting of ι’s with
                       j      j
common initial state (θK,j , DK,j , Bjj , αjj , κjj ) and sequences {θK,t
                                                                      j      j
                                                                          , DK,t , Btj , αtj }∞
                                                                                              t=j+1 .

       We now summarize the structure of asset markets. First, households cannot trade assets
               j        j
contingent on θK,t and DK,t . Second, households can trade one-period bonds b` (sjt+1 ) which pay

one unit of market consumption contingent on sjt ≡ (Btj , αtj , κjt , υtε ) with households who live on
                                                                             j
their island `. Third, households can trade economy-wide one-period bonds x(ζt+1 ) which pay one

unit of market consumption contingent on ζtj ≡ (κjt , υtε ) with households who live on either their
island or any other island.

       To preview the implications of these assumptions, differences in (θK , DK , B, α) across house-
                                                                                     j
holds remain uninsurable by the no-trade result we will discuss below that yields x(ζt+1 ) = 0 in
equilibrium.7 The more transitory component of productivity εjt = κjt +υtε becomes fully insurable

because households on an island are only heterogeneous with respect to ζtj and can trade bonds
     j
b` (ζt+1 ). As a result, the island structure generates partial insurance with respect to market pro-
ductivity differences. Anticipating these results, henceforth we call α the uninsurable permanent

component of market productivity and ε = κ + υ ε the insurable transitory component of market

productivity. We offer some examples of the type of wage shocks accommodated by the framework.
Aggregate changes in wages which load differently across households, such as the skill premium,

may be more difficult to insure and are captured by α. By contrast, κ may be capturing persistent
   7
     Households still obtain implicit insurance by substituting time across sectors. A realization of θK which leads
to low home-produced cK can be offset by higher purchases in the market cM if a household desires so. Similarly,
households can offset realizations of α by reallocating their time across sectors.



                                                        10
shocks such as disability and υ ε may be capturing transitory shocks such as unemployment which

are easier to insure using asset markets, family transfers, or government transfers.8

Household Optimization. We now describe the optimization problem of a particular household
ι born in period j. The household chooses {cM,t , hM,t , hK,t , b` (sjt+1 ), x(ζt+1
                                                                                j
                                                                                    )}∞
                                                                                      t=j to maximize the

expected value of discounted flows of derived utilities in equation (3), subject to the sequential

budget constraints:
                 Z                                             Z
 cM,t +                    qb` (sjt+1 )b` (sjt+1 )dsjt+1   +               j
                                                                      qx (ζt+1     j
                                                                               )x(ζt+1    j
                                                                                       )dζt+1 = ỹtj + b` (sjt ) + x(ζtj ) .              (6)
                   sjt+1                                        j
                                                               ζt+1

The expenditure side of the budget constraint consists of market consumption cM,t , island-level

bonds b` (sjt+1 ) at prices qb` (sjt+1 ), and economy-wide bonds x(ζt+1
                                                                    j                    j
                                                                        ) at prices qx (ζt+1 ). The income

side of the budget constraint consists of after-tax labor income ỹtj and bond payouts.

Equilibrium. Given tax parameters (τ0 , τ1 ), an equilibrium consists of a sequence of allocations

{cM,t , hM,t , hK,t , b` (sjt+1 ), x(ζt+1
                                      j
                                          )}ι,t and a sequence of prices {qb` (sjt+1 )}`,t , {qx (ζt+1
                                                                                                   j
                                                                                                       )}t such that:

(i) the allocations solve households’ problems; (ii) asset markets clear:
 Z                                                                      Z
         b   `
                 (sjt+1 ; ι)dΦ(ι)     =0        ∀`, sjt+1 ,    and               j
                                                                              x(ζt+1                 j
                                                                                     ; ι)dΦ(ι) = 0 ∀ζt+1 ;                                (7)
   ι∈`                                                                    ι

and (iii) the goods market clears:
 Z                                       Z
       cM,t (ι)dΦ(ι) + G =                     zM,t (ι)hM,t (ι)dΦ(ι),                                                                     (8)
   ι                                       ι
                                                                                   R h                              1−τ1
                                                                                                                           i
where government expenditures are given by G =                                      ι    zM,t (ι) − (1 − τ0 )zM,t (ι)          hM,t (ι)dΦ(ι).

2.2          Equilibrium Allocations

The model retains tractability because, under certain parametric restrictions, it features a no-trade

result which allows us to solve equilibrium allocations in closed form. This section explains the

logic underlying this result and Appendix A presents the proof. Our proof follows very closely the
proof presented in Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014). We extend their analysis along
   8
    We refer the reader to Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2008) for a more detailed discussion of how the
partial insurance framework relates to frameworks with exogenously imposed incomplete markets or to frameworks
in which incompleteness arises endogenously from informational frictions or limited commitment.


                                                                              11
two dimensions. First, we prove the no-trade result in an environment with multiple sectors and

heterogeneity in home production efficiency and disutility of home work. Second, we allow the
disutility of market work B to be a random walk instead of a fixed effect.
                                                                                          j
   We begin by guessing that the equilibrium features no trade across islands, that is x(ζt+1 ; ι) =
        j
0, ∀ι, ζt+1 . Further, we postulate that equilibrium allocations {cM,t (ι), hM,t (ι), hK,t (ι)} solve a
sequence of static island-level planning problems which maximize average utility within island,
R                                            j
  ζtj V cM,t (ι), hM,t (ι), hK,t (ι); ι dΦt (ζt ), subject to island-level constraints equating aggregate

market consumption to aggregate after-tax earnings ζ j cM,t (ι)dΦt (ζtj ) = ζ j ỹt (ι)dΦt (ζtj ). We
                                                               R                     R
                                                             t                      t

verify our guess by demonstrating that, at the postulated allocations, households solve their opti-

mization problems and all asset and goods markets clear.

   We obtain the no-trade result in two nested versions of the model. The first nested model sets

consumption weights in the home sector to ωK = 0 as in Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante

(2014). The second nested model sets the curvature of utility with respect to consumption to

γ = 1 for any value of ωK > 0. The home production model nests the model without home

production when γ = 1, which is the case we consider below in our quantitative results.

   To understand the no-trade result, we begin with the observation that households on each

island ` have the same marginal utility of market consumption because they are identical in terms

of (θK , DK , B, α) and trade in state-contingent bonds allows them to perfectly insure against

(κ, υ ε ). Considering first the model without home production (ωK = 0), the common marginal

utility of market consumption µ(`) at the no-trade equilibrium is:
                                                                   γ
                                                               ! 1+ηγ
           1      exp ((1 + η)(B − log(1 − τ0 ) − (1 − τ1 )α))
 µ(`) = γ =         R
                                                   ε
                                                                      ,                              (9)
          cM          ζ exp ((1 + η)(1 − τ1 )(κ + υ )) dΦ(ζ)

where for simplicity we have dropped the time subscript from all variables. The no-trade result
                                                             j
states that households do not trade bonds across islands, x(ζt+1 ) = 0. Owing to the random

walk assumptions on B and α, we see from equation (9) that the growth in marginal utility,

µt+1 /µt , does not depend on the state vector (Btj , αtj ) which differentiates islands `. As a result,
all households value bonds traded across islands identically in equilibrium and there are no mutual
                         j
benefits from trading x(ζt+1 ).

   For the economy with home production and γ = 1, we obtain a marginal utility of market

                                                   12
                                                   Table 1: Equilibrium Allocations


      Variable             No Home Production: ωK = 0                          Home Production: γ = 1
                                  1+η                      1                                      1
                            exp( 1+ηγ (1−τ1 )α)                                 1 exp((1−τ1 )α) 1+η
      1.       cM              exp(    1+η          Ca1+ηγ                                      Ca
                                      1+ηγ
                                           B   )                                R    exp(B)
                                                                                 φ−1 exp(B)/z̃M φ
                                                                                                
                                                                                θK                                  1
                                                                                       exp(DK )    exp((1−τ1 )α) 1+η
      2.       hK                                                                       R             exp(B)
                                                                                                                C a

                                          1+η                      ηγ                                    η
                             η   exp(−ηγ 1+ηγ (1−τ1 )α)         − 1+ηγ           η exp(−η(1−τ1 )α)    − 1+η       P exp(DK )
      3.       hM          z̃M         exp(    1+η             Ca              z̃M                 Ca         −                hK
                                              1+ηγ
                                                   B   )                               exp(B)                         exp(B)

                                                                                                                R
Table 1 presents the equilibrium allocation in the two models. Parameters γ, η, and φ and the constant Ca ≡ (1 −
τ0 )1+η exp((1 + η)(1 − τ1 )ε)dΦζ (ζ) are the same across households. We define market productivity zM = exp(α + ε),
                                                 1−τ1                                          P  θK exp(B) φ−1
after-tax market productivity z̃M = (1 − τ0 )zM       , and the rate of transformation R ≡ 1 +     z̃M exp(DK )   .


consumption:
                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                              ! 1+η
                            1                              exp ((1 + η)(B − log(1 − τ0 ) − (1 − τ1 )α))
    µ(`) =                 P exp(DK )              =         R
                                                                                            ε
                                                                                                                      .         (10)
                cM + z̃M         exp(B)   hK                   ζ exp ((1 + η)(1 − τ1 )(κ + υ )) dΦ(ζ)


The marginal utility in equation (10) has the same form as the marginal utility in equation (9)
                                                                         j      j
for γ = 1. Marginal utility growth does not depend on the state vector (θK,t , DK,t , Btj , αtj ) which

differentiates islands and the same logic explains why we obtain the no-trade result in the home

production model. For this result, we note the importance of log preferences with respect to the

consumption aggregator. Log preferences generate a separability between the marginal utility of
market consumption and θK and DK and, thus, the no-trade result holds irrespective of the value

of the elasticity of substitution across sectors φ and further stochastic properties of θK and DK .
         The no-trade result allows us to derive equilibrium allocations for consumption and time using
the sequence of planning problems described previously without solving simultaneously for the

wealth distribution.9 We summarize the equilibrium allocations for both models in Table 1.
For convenience, we have dropped the household index ι from the table. The constant Ca is
common across households and is proportional to a moment of the insurable component of market

productivity ε. All sources of heterogeneity (θK , DK , B, α, ε) and allocations are ι-specific.
     9                                                                 j
    The no-trade result applies to the bonds traded across islands x(ζt+1 ) = 0 and not to the within-islands bonds
`
b   (sjt+1 )                                                    ` j
         which are traded in equilibrium. However, the bonds b (st+1 ) are state-contingent within each island and,
therefore, solving for the equilibrium allocations amounts to solving a sequence of static planning problems.


                                                                         13
   Starting with the model without home production, market consumption cM depends positively
on the tax-adjusted uninsurable permanent productivity component (1 − τ1 )α and negatively on

the disutility of market work B. By contrast, cM does not depend on the insurable component of
market productivity ε because state-contingent assets insure against variation in ε. The final row
                                                                                       1−τ1
shows that market hours hM increase in the after-tax market productivity z̃M = (1−τ0 )zM    with
an elasticity η. This reflects the substitution effect on labor supply from variations in after-tax
market productivity. Conditional on z̃M , hM decreases in (1−τ1 )α which reflects the income effect

from changes in the permanent component of market productivity. When γ = 1, substitution and
income effects from variations in α cancel out and hM depends positively only on the insurable

component ε. Finally, hM decreases in the disutility of market work B.

   To understand the solutions in the home production model, households maximize their utility

when the relative marginal rate of substitution between work and consumption across any two
                                    1/φ
           MRSM        exp(B) ωK cM                                                         z̃M
sectors,   MRSK   =   exp(DK ) c1/φ       , equals the ratio of after-tax productivities,   zK .   Rearranging this
                                K

optimality condition, we obtain:
                         φ
  hK     φ−1 exp(B)/z̃M
     = θK                     .                                                                                (11)
  cM            exp(DK )

The solution for cM in the second column of Table 1 uses equation (11) to substitute out hK

from the marginal utility in equation (10). The solution for cM has the same form as the solution

in the model without home production under γ = 1 up to the rate of transformation R ≡ 1 +
P  θK exp(B) φ−1
     z̃M exp(DK )  . This rate describes the incentives of households to shift hours across sectors
as a function of relative efficiencies and disutilities of work.
   The second row shows that home hours hK increase in home production efficiency θK when

φ > 1, in which case substitution effects from changes in θK dominate income effects. Hours hK
decrease in disutility of home work DK for any value of φ. In the final row, we present the solution
for hours in the market sector hM . To understand this expression, we define effective total hours
               P exp(DK )
as hT = hM +      exp(B) hK and note that the solutions for hT coincide in the two models under

γ = 1. The expression for hT shows that it does not depend on α because under γ = 1 substitution

and income effects from permanent changes in wages cancel out. It also shows that hT increases

in ε with a Frisch elasticity of (1 − τ1 )η.

                                                           14
2.3    Identification of Sources of Heterogeneity

We begin by explaining a fundamental identification challenge for home production models and
then provide a solution to it. As seen in equation (11), home hours relative to market consumption
hK /cM depend on both production efficiency θK and the disutility of work DK . As a result, data

on hK /cM are informative only for a combination of θK and DK . More formally, the solutions
for the home production model in Table 1 reveal that we have 3 + K observed variables in the
data (cM , hM , zM , hK ) to inform 3 + 2 × K sources of heterogeneity (α, ε, B, DK , θK ). The gap

between observed variables and sources of heterogeneity, equal to K, reflects the fact that both θK
and DK can equally well account for the behavior of hK . This identification challenge is special to

home production models and does not arise in the standard model without home production. As

evidenced in Table 1, in the latter we have 3 observed variables (cM , hM , zM ) to inform 3 sources

of heterogeneity (α, ε, B). The challenge for home production models arises because in common

datasets we observe home inputs hK but not home outputs cK .

   Our solution to the identification challenge is to impose additional structure on θK and DK .

We assume that home production can be disaggregated into two sectors, N and P . In sector N ,

households are heterogeneous in their production efficiency θN and their disutility of home work

equals that in the market DN = B. In sector P , households are identical in their production

efficiency θP and heterogeneous in their disutility of work DP which may differ from B. These

assumptions reduce the number of sources of heterogeneity to 5 (α, ε, B, DP , θN ) which, as we

show below, can be identified from 5 observed variables (cM , hM , zM , hN , hP ).
   This identification assumption balances two polar views on the origins of household differences
in home work time. It allows the model to attribute some of the observed differences to hetero-

geneity in home production efficiency while other differences to heterogeneity in the disutility of
home work. To give some concrete examples from our quantitative results below, we think of time
spent on activities such as child care and nursing as belonging to hN because these activities are

relatively less intensive in manual skills and efficiency differences across households are likely to
be a significant source of dispersion in hours. We think of time spent on activities such as cooking
and cleaning as belonging to hP because these activities are more intensive in manual skills and


                                                 15
differences in their disutility of work across households are likely to be more important than effi-

ciency differences. Because the welfare consequences of home production depend on the origins of
heterogeneity, we will also discuss below the two polar cases of all home time hN + hP belonging
either to the sector with heterogeneity in production efficiency or to the sector with heterogeneity

in disutility of work.
   We now demonstrate how to infer the sources of heterogeneity, {α, ε, B, DP , θN }ι , such that
the models with and without home production both account perfectly for given cross-sectional

data on consumption expenditures, hours, and wages.

Observational Equivalence Theorem. Let {c̄M , h̄M , z̄M , h̄N , h̄P }ι be some cross-sectional

data. Then, for any given parameters (η, φ, τ0 , τ1 ):

1. There exists unique {α, ε, B}ι such that {cM , hM , zM }ι = {c̄M , h̄M , z̄M }ι under ωK = 0 for

      any γ.

2. There exists unique {α, ε, B, DP , θN }ι such that {cM , hM , zM , hN , hP }ι = {c̄M , h̄M , z̄M , h̄N , h̄P }ι

      under γ = 1 for any ωK > 0.

The theorem uses the fact that, in each model, the equilibrium allocations presented in Table 1

can be uniquely inverted to obtain, up to a constant, the sources of heterogeneity which generate

these allocations. The formal proof is presented in Appendix A.5.

   Table 2 presents the identified sources of heterogeneity which allow the model without home

production to generate the cross-sectional data {c̄M , h̄M , z̄M }ι and the model with home produc-

tion to generate the cross-sectional data {c̄M , h̄M , z̄M , h̄N , h̄P }ι . Henceforth, we drop the bar to
indicate variables observed in the data since, by appropriate choices of the sources of heterogeneity,
both models generate perfectly these data.

   To understand how observables inform the sources of heterogeneity, in Table 2 we define effec-
tive total hours as:
                                   φ1
                            cM            θP                 exp(DP )
 hT ≡ hM + hN +                               hP = hM + hN +          hP ,                                 (12)
                           θP hP          z̃M                 exp(B)
and the market value of total consumption as:
                                φ1       !                          
                           cM        θP                     exp(DP )
 cT ≡ cM + z̃M hN +                      hP = cM + z̃M hN +          hP .                                  (13)
                         θP hP       z̃M                     exp(B)

                                                         16
                                Table 2: Identified Sources of Heterogeneity


                                          No Home Production: ωK = 0
                                              h                                  i
                                      1             cM
              1.   α             (1−τ1 )(1+η)
                                               log hM + η(1 − τ1 ) log zM − log Cs
                                                       h                                 i
                                                  1        cM
              2.   ε             log zM − (1−τ1 )(1+η) log hM + η(1 − τ1 ) log zM − log Cs
                                  η                     η(1−τ1 )               ηγ               1
              3.   B             1+η
                                       log(1 − τ0 ) +     1+η
                                                                   log zM −   1+η
                                                                                    log cM −   1+η
                                                                                                     log hM

                                             Home Production: γ = 1
                                              h                                       i
                                      1            cT
              4.   α             (1−τ1 )(1+η)
                                               log hT
                                                       +  η (1 − τ 1 ) log zM − log C s
                                                      h                                     i
              5.   ε             log zM − (1−τ11)(1+η) log hcTT + η (1 − τ1 ) log zM − log Cs

              6.   B              η
                                 1+η
                                     log(1 − τ0 ) + η(1−τ1+η
                                                             1)            η
                                                                log zM − 1+η log cT − 1+η1
                                                                                           log hT
                                               
              7.   DP            B + φ1 log chMP + φ−1    φ
                                                              log θP − log(1 − τ0 ) − (1 − τ1 ) log zM
                                            φ
                                                (1−τ1 )φ       1
                                                           hN φ−1
              8.   θN            (1 − τ0 ) φ−1 zMφ−1       cM


Table 2 presents the inferred sources of heterogeneity for the economy without home production (upper panel)
and for the economy   with home production        (lower panel). We define the market value of total consumption
                            φ1                                                        φ1
                         cM       θP                                                cM         θP
cT ≡ cM + z̃M hN + θP hP             h
                                  z̃M P   , effective total hours hT ≡ hM + hN +   θP h P      z̃M hP , and the constant
     R
Cs ≡ (1 − τ0 ) exp((1 + η)(1 − τ1 )ε)dΦζ (ζ).


These expressions first define total hours and consumption only in terms of observables and pa-

rameters. The equality uses the inferred sources of heterogeneity to express total hours and

consumption in a more intuitive way. Specifically, total hours hT are the sum of hours in the three
sectors, adjusted for disutility differences across sectors. The market value of total consumption

cT is the sum of market consumption, consumption in sector N valued in terms of market goods
                              z̃M
with the exchange rate        zN ,   and consumption in sector P valued in terms of market goods with
                        z̃M exp(DP )
the exchange rate       zP exp(B) .

    Rows 1 to 6 show that, for γ = 1, the inferred α, ε, and B have the same functional forms

between the two models. The difference is that the hours and consumption informative for the
sources of heterogeneity in the home production model are hT in equation (12) and cT in equation

(13), whereas in the model without home production hT = hM and cT = cM . The inferred α

                                                            17
                                       Table 3: Numerical Example

         Household zM           cM     hM   hN    hP         α         ε        B         DP       θN    T
              1         20     1,000   60                   2.90      0.09     -4.00                     0
              2         20     600     40                   2.85      0.14     -3.54                     399
              1         20     1,000   60   10    50        2.95      0.04     -4.74      -4.74   6.07   0
              2         20     600     40   50    30        2.95      0.04     -4.74      -4.74   29.20 -765

Table 3 presents an example with parameters τ0 = τ1 = 0 and γ = η = 1. The upper panel shows inference
based on the model without home production and the lower panel shows inference based on the model with home
production. For the home production model we use θP = 20 and φ = 2.35. The last column, labeled T , shows the
equivalent variation to achieve the utility level of household 1.


depends positively on the consumption-hours ratio cT /hT and market productivity zM and the

inferred ε is the difference between log zM and α. The inferred B depends on the gap between

market productivity log zM and a combination of consumption log cT and hours log hT .

   The new sources of heterogeneity in the home production model are presented in rows 7 and

8. These are inferred by rearranging the optimality conditions (11) for K = {P, N } and solving

for DP and θN respectively:
               φ−1            φ1                                            1
                                                                               φ−1
  exp(DP )    θP    φ
                           cM                       θN               z̃M hN
           =                         ,      and         =                             .                        (14)
   exp(B)     z̃M        z̃M hP                     z̃M                cM
These expressions show how relative disutilities and efficiencies are inferred from the market value

of sectoral consumptions. Holding constant relative efficiencies θP /z̃M , higher market expenditures

relative to the market value of producing at home cM /z̃M hP leads to higher inferred relative
disutility at home exp(DP )/ exp(B). When sectors are substitutes (φ > 1), higher market value
of producing at home relative to market expenditures z̃M hN /cM leads to higher inferred relative

efficiency at home θN /z̃M .
   A numerical example in Table 3 provides some insights for the mechanisms of the model and
draws lessons from the observational equivalence theorem. The economy is populated by two

households, there are no taxes, and preference parameters satisfy γ = η = 1. In the upper panel,
the economist uses the model without home production to infer the sources of heterogeneity.
Household 1 earns a wage zM = 20, spends cM = 1, 000, and works hM = 60. Household 2 also

earns zM = 20, but spends cM = 600 and works hM = 40. The analytical solutions in Table 2 show

                                                       18
that households with a higher expenditures to hours ratio, cM /hM , or higher market productivity,
zM , have a higher uninsurable productivity component α. In Table 3 we thus infer that α is higher

for household 1 than for household 2 (2.90 versus 2.85). Since both households have the same
market productivity and α + ε add up to (log) market productivity, we infer that household 2 has
a higher insurable productivity component ε than household 1. Finally, we infer that household

2 has a higher B because it spends less and works less than household 1 despite having the same
market productivity.

   In the lower panel the economist uses the home production model to infer the sources of
heterogeneity. In addition to the same data on (cM , hM , zM ), now the economist observes that

the first household works hN = 10 and hP = 50 hours and the second household works hN = 50

and hP = 30 hours in the two sectors. The inferred α now depends on the ratio of the market

value of total consumption to total hours, cT /hT , rather than on the ratio of market expenditures

to market hours cM /hM . Since both households have the same market value of total consumption,

cT = 2, 200, and the same total hours, hT = 120, the α’s are equalized across households. Given

the same market productivity, the ε’s are also equalized. Given that the two households consume

and work the same, the B’s are also equalized. Equation (14) shows that DP is also the same

between the two households because they have the same value of home production in sector P

relative to market expenditures zM hP /cM . As Table 3 shows, all differences in observables between

the two households are loaded into home production efficiency θN . We infer that θN is higher for

household 2 because it has a higher value of production in sector N relative to market expenditures
zM hN /cM and the sectors are substitutes (φ > 1).
   There are two lessons we draw from this example. First, home production efficiency θN is

dispersed across households and absorbs dispersion one would attribute to (α, ε, B) in the absence
of home production. This result generalizes in our quantitative application using U.S. data below
in which we find that θN is significantly more dispersed than zM and the dispersion in (α, ε, B) is

smaller in the home production model.
   The second lesson we draw is that a household’s welfare ranking depends on whether the data
has been generated by a model with or without home production. The last column of Table 3



                                                19
shows equivalent variations T , equal to the transfers required for households to achieve a given

level of utility if they re-optimize their consumption and hours choices. The reference utility level
in Table 3 is the utility of household 1 and, thus, T for household 1 is always equal to zero. In the
model without home production, T for household 2 equals 399. In the home production model,

the two households are identical in terms of their (α, ε, B, DP ), but household 2 has a higher home
production efficiency θN . Therefore, the welfare ranking changes and T becomes -765.

2.4       Discussion

Before proceeding to the quantitative results, we pause to make three comments. First, we

emphasize the importance of developing an equilibrium model which expresses the arguments

(cM , hM , hN , hP ) of the utility function in terms of productivity and preference shifters and policy

parameters. An alternative approach, followed by Krueger and Perri (2003) in their study of the

welfare effects of increasing inequality in the United States and Jones and Klenow (2016) in their

study of welfare and GDP differences across countries, is to plug what are endogenous variables

in our framework into the utility function and conduct welfare experiments by essentially vary-

ing these variables. While our approach comes with additional complexity, it has the conceptual

advantage of taking into account equilibrium responses when conducting welfare analyses with

respect to changes in more primitive sources of heterogeneity and policies.

       Second, we wish to highlight the merits of the Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014)

framework used in our analysis compared to alternative frameworks. Standard general equilibrium

models with uninsurable risk following Huggett (1993) and Aiyagari (1994) feature self-insurance
via a risk-free bond. Solutions to these models are obtained computationally. While the present

model also allows households to trade a risk-free bond (by setting x(ζtj ) = 1 for all states ζtj ), the

assumptions on asset markets, stochastic processes, and preferences allow us to derive a no-trade
result and characterize equilibrium allocations in closed form. Owing to the analytical results, a

major advantage of the framework is the transparency and generality of the identification.10
  10
     Despite the wealth distribution not being an object of interest within this framework, a dynamic structure with
non-labor income is still essential. In a framework without non-labor income, households would maximize derived
utility subject to the budget constraint cM = zM hM . Since market consumption to hours cM /hM equals market
productivity zM , any choice of (zM , B, DP , θN ) is not sufficient to match data on (cM , zM , hM , hN , hP ).



                                                        20
    Third, our non-parametric approach to identifying the sources of heterogeneity is such that

the model accounts perfectly for any given cross-sectional data on market consumption, hours,
and wages. Conceptually, our approach is similar to Hsieh and Klenow (2009) who infer wedges in
first-order conditions such that firm-level outcomes generated by their model match data analogs.

Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014) also do not impose distributional assumptions on the
sources of heterogeneity when estimating their model. A difference with Heathcote, Storesletten,
and Violante (2014) is that they select moments in order to estimate parameters using the method

of moments. Our approach, instead, does not require restrictions on which moments are more
informative for the identification of the sources of heterogeneity.


3     Quantitative Results

We begin by describing the data sources and the parameterization of the model. We then present

the inferred sources of heterogeneity.

3.1    Data Sources

For the baseline analyses we use data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) and the

American Time Use Survey (ATUS). We consider married and cohabiting households with heads

between 25 and 65 years old who are not students. We drop observations for households with

market productivity below 3 dollars per hour in 2010 dollars, working less than 20 hours per week

with market productivity above 300 dollars, with expenditures in the top and bottom one percent,
and with respondents who indicated working more than 92 hours in the market or at home. In
the ATUS we drop respondents during weekends and in the CEX we keep only households who

completed all four interviews. The final sample from CEX/ATUS includes 32,993 households
between 1995 and 2016. In all our results, we use sample weights provided by the surveys.
    Data for market expenditures cM , market productivity zM , and market hours hM come from

CEX interview surveys collected between 1996 and 2017. Closest to the definition of Aguiar
and Hurst (2013), for our baseline analyses cM is annual non-durable consumption expenditures
which include food and beverages, tobacco, personal care, apparel, utilities, household operations



                                                 21
(including child care), public transportation, gasoline, reading material, and personal care. Non-

durable consumption expenditures exclude health and education. We adjust consumption for
household composition and size.
       Our measure of income is the amount of wage and salary income before deductions earned

over the past 12 months. Individual wages are defined as income divided by hours usually worked
in a year, which is the product of weeks worked with usual hours worked per week. We define
household market hours hM as the sum of hours worked by spouses and market productivity zM

as the average of wages of individual members weighted by their market hours.
       Data for home hours hN and hP come from the ATUS waves between 2003 and 2017. Ran-

domly selected individuals from a group of households who completed their eight and final month

interview for the Current Population Survey report their activities on a 24-hour time diary of the

previous day. Similar to Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2013), total time spent on home pro-

duction, hN + hP , includes housework, cooking, shopping, home and car maintenance, gardening,

child care, and care for other household members.

       To separate total home production time between hN and hP , we map disaggregated time uses

into occupations and then classify in hN all the time uses mapped into occupations performing

tasks with low manual content and in hP all time uses mapped into occupations performing tasks

with high manual content. The logic underlying our approach is that time activities using the same

skills as occupations with high manual content are less likely to display significant heterogeneity

in terms of production efficiency. We use the mapping from time uses to occupations together
with Occupational Information Network (O*NET) task measures for various activities described
in Acemoglu and Autor (2011) to create an index of manual content for each disaggregated time

use.11 We classify activities in hN if they have a manual skill index below the median and classify
activities in hP if they have an index above the median.
  11
    Because there are many such indices, we standardize the task measures to have mean zero and standard
deviation of one and take the average across all manual tasks to create a single manual skill index. We list the
mapping for the seven largest time use categories. Child care time is mapped to preschool teachers and child care
workers; shopping time is mapped to cashiers; nursing time is mapped to registered nurses and nursing assistants;
cooking is mapped to food preparation and serving workers; cleaning is mapped to maids and housekeeping cleaners;
gardening is mapped to landscaping and groundskeeping workers; laundry is mapped to laundry and dry-cleaning
workers.




                                                       22
   The CEX does not contain information on time spent on home production. To overcome this

difficulty, we impute time use data from the ATUS into the CEX. Our imputation is based on
an iterative procedure in which individuals in the CEX are allocated the mean home hours hN
and hP of matched individuals from the ATUS based on group characteristics. We begin by

matching individuals based on work status, race, gender, and age. We then proceed to improve
these estimates by adding a host of additional characteristics, such as family status, education,
disability status, geography, hours worked, and wages, and matching individuals based on these

characteristics whenever possible. We first impute home hours to individuals and, similarly to
market hours, then sum up these hours at the household level.

   Our imputation accounts for approximately two-thirds of the variation in home hours hN

and hP . In Appendix Table A.1 we confirm that our imputation does not introduce spurious

correlations in the merged CEX/ATUS data by showing that the correlation of home hours with

market hours and wages conditional on age is of similar magnitude between the ATUS sample

of individuals and the merged CEX/ATUS sample of households. In Appendix Tables A.2 and

A.3 we show that, conditional on age, married men, women, less educated, and more educated

exhibit similar correlations between wages, market hours, and home hours in the ATUS. Further,

in Appendix Tables A.4 and A.5 we show that the correlation of total home hours with market

expenditures, market hours, and wages conditional on age is of similar magnitude between the

CEX/ATUS and two PSID samples of households which do not require imputations since they

contain information on home hours, market expenditures, market hours, and wages.
   Table 4 presents summary statistics of the time allocation of married households in the
CEX/ATUS sample along with the value of the manual skill index of occupations mapped to

home production activities. Beginning with market hours hM , we note a small decline over the
life cycle. The three largest time uses classified in hN are child care, shopping, and nursing. These
are activities with lower manual content (and typically higher cognitive content) than activities

such as cooking, cleaning, gardening, and laundry which we classify as hP . The allocation of
time between the two types of home production is relatively balanced, but there are noticeable
differences over the life cycle. As expected, child care time declines significantly in the second



                                                 23
               Table 4: Summary Statistics of Time Allocation of Married Households

                                           Manual Skill Index            Hours per week
                                                                      All     25-44      45-65
                   Market hours hM                                   66.1      66.8       65.5
                   Home hours hN                                     21.3      25.4       17.3
                   Child care                       -0.73            10.8      14.9        6.7
                   Shopping                         0.08              6.4       6.5        6.3
                   Nursing                          -0.12             1.9       1.8        2.0
                   Home hours hP                                     16.7      16.4       17.0
                   Cooking                          0.41              7.5       7.4        7.5
                   Cleaning                         0.43              3.7       3.7        3.6
                   Gardening                        1.27              2.1       1.7        2.5
                   Laundry                          0.89              2.0       2.1        1.9

Table 4 presents summary statistics of the time allocation of married households in the merged CEX/ATUS sample.


half of working life which generates a decline in hN over the life cycle. By contrast, hP increases

moderately over the life cycle.12

3.2     Parameterization

Table 5 presents parameter values for our baseline analyses. We estimate the progressivity param-

eter τ1 using data from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the Current Population
Survey between 2005 and 2015. We use information on pre-tax personal income, tax liabilities at

the federal and state level, Social Security payroll deductions, as well as usual hours and weeks
worked. Our estimate of τ1 comes from a regression of log after-tax market productivity on log
market productivity before taxes. We estimate τ1 = 0.12 with a standard error below 0.01.13 We

choose τ0 = −0.36 to match an average tax rate on labor income equal to 0.10, which equals the
  12
     Our life-cycle profiles are consistent with those reported in Cardia and Gomme (2018), who also embrace the
view that child care has a different technology from other home production.
  13
     Our definitions of income and wage include the child care and earned income tax credits but exclude government
transfers such as unemployment benefits, welfare, and food stamps because we think of fully insurable shocks ε as
subsuming these transfers. Our estimated tax parameter is close to the estimate of 0.19 in Heathcote, Storesletten,
and Violante (2014). Using their tax function log ỹ = constant+(1−τ1 ) log y, we estimate τ1 = 0.15. We, therefore,
argue that it is relatively inconsequential whether we apply the progressivity parameter (1 − τ1 ) to after-tax wages
or after-tax labor income.




                                                         24
                                          Table 5: Parameter Values

          Parameter          ωK = 0           ωK > 0                                     Rationale
                                                                              
                                                                          ỹ
              τ1               0.12              0.12          log       hM
                                                                                   = Cτ + (1 − τ1 ) log zM .
              τ0              -0.36              -0.36         Match G/Y = 0.10.
              γ                 1                  1           Nesting of models.
              η                0.90              0.50          Match β = 0.54 in log hM = Cη + β(η)ε.
                                                                                     φ
                                                                            φ1  1−φ
                                                                         cM
              θP                —                4.64          θP = E z̃φ h             .
                                                                                     M   P

                                                                ∆65−25 log(cM /hN )
              φ                 —                2.35             ∆65−25 log zM
                                                                                             = φ(1 − τ1 ) = 2.07.

Table 5 presents parameter values for the models without home production (ωK = 0) and with home production
(ωK > 0).


average ratio of personal current taxes to income from the national income and product accounts.

       For the home production model, we obtained the equilibrium allocations in closed form only

under a curvature of the utility function with respect to consumption equal to γ = 1. We choose

γ = 1 also for the model without home production. It is essential to nest the model without home

production, so that welfare differences across the two models do not arise from different curvatures

of the utility function with respect to consumption.14

       Next, we estimate the parameter η for the curvature of the utility function with respect to

hours. Our strategy is to choose η in each model such that a regression of log market hours

log hM on the insurable transitory component of market productivity ε yields a coefficient of 0.54.

The target value of 0.54 comes from the meta analysis of estimates of the intensive margin Frisch
elasticity from micro variation found in Chetty, Guren, Manoli, and Weber (2012). Consistent
with the logic of Rupert, Rogerson, and Wright (2000) who argue that estimates of the Frisch

elasticities are downward biased in the presence of home production, we estimate η = 0.90 in the
model without home production and η = 0.50 in the model with home production.15
  14
     While welfare effects are sensitive to the value of γ in the model without home production, our inference of α
and ε does not depend on γ as seen in Table 2.
  15
     The Frisch elasticity for effective total hours hT is (1 − τ1 )η in both models. There are three reasons why η
deviates from the targeted elasticity of 0.54. First, the progressivity of the tax system introduces the wedge 1 − τ1
between η and the Frisch elasticity for total hours hT . Second, disutilities of work and home production efficiency
are correlated with market wages. Third, even without such a correlation, the elasticities of market hours hM
differ between the two models because hM = hT without home production whereas with home production hM is



                                                         25
    We now describe parameters specific to the home production model. To calibrate the constant

level of production efficiency θP we use the optimality conditions (11) and take means over the
population.16 To estimate the elasticity of substitution φ, we again use the optimality conditions
(11) to derive the regression:
               
           cM
 log                = φ log(1 − τ0 ) + φ(1 − τ1 ) log zM − (φ − 1) log θN .                                     (15)
           hN

Estimation of φ using data on cM /hN and zM would lead to biased estimates if zM and θN are

correlated. For this reason, we take changes over time in equation (15) and use a synthetic panel
approach to estimate φ based on changes in cM /hN and changes in zM between the beginning and

the end of the life cycle. The identifying assumption is that changes in θN are uncorrelated with

changes in zM between the beginning and the end of the life cycle. This assumption is consistent

with the assumptions underlying the no-trade result which requires θN,t+1 to be independent of

innovations to zM,t+1 . Both our estimation strategy and the no-trade theorem are consistent with

a correlation of efficiency across sectors in levels.

    We estimate that market and home goods are substitutes with an elasticity of φ = 2.35. Our

estimate of the elasticity of substitution is consistent with those found in the literature. For

example, most estimates of Rupert, Rogerson, and Wright (1995) for couples fall between roughly

2 and 4 and Aguiar and Hurst (2007) obtain estimates of around 2.

3.3        Inferred Sources of Heterogeneity

We extract the sources of heterogeneity using CEX/ATUS data on (cM , hM , zM , hN , hP ) and our
parameter values into the solutions of Table 2 for each household. In Figure 1 we present the

age profiles of the means of (α, ε, B, DP , log θN ). To obtain these age profiles, we regress each
source of heterogeneity on age dummies, cohort dummies, and normalized year dummies as in
negatively correlated to hN and hP . Our strategy is conservative in the sense that the inequality difference between
the two models becomes larger when we set η to be equal between the two models.
                                                                                  φ
                                                          φ1              1−φ
  16                                                   cM            exp(DP )
     Rearranging this condition we obtain θP = E z̃φ h           E exp(B)            . The level of θP is pinned down
                                                   M P
only relative to DP /B. We normalize E exp(D    P)
                                           exp(B)    = 1 because it standardizes the mean of θP in symmetric way
to the mean of θN .




                                                         26
                                 .8




                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                              -.05
                                 .6
         Mean of α




                                                                                                       Mean of ε
                                                                                                                              -.1
                                 .4




                                                                                                                              -.15
                                 .2




                                                                                                                              -.2
                                                                                                                              -.25
                                 0




                                       25        35             45             55            65                                      25   35          45             55   65

                                                         ωK=0               ωK>0                                                               ωK=0               ωK>0
                                 .4




                                                                                                                              .4
          Mean of B and DP




                                                                                                        Mean of log(θN)
                                                                                                                              .3
                                 .2




                                                                                                                              .2
                                 0




                                                                                                                              .1
                                 -.2




                                                                                                                              0
                                       25        35             45             55            65                                      25   35          45             55   65

                                            B in ωK=0           B in ωK>0           DP in ωK>0                                                             ωK>0




                                                         Figure 1: Means of Sources of Heterogeneity
Figure 1 plots the age means of uninsurable component of market productivity α, insurable component of market
productivity ε, disutilities of work B and DP , and home production efficiency log θN for the economy with (ωK > 0,
black dotted lines) and without home production (ωK = 0, blue dashed lines).
                                 .5




                                                                                                                              .35
                                                                                                                              .3
                                 .4
         Variance of α




                                                                                                       Variance of ε
                                                                                                                              .25
                                                                                                                              .2
                                 .3




                                                                                                                              .15
                                 .2




                                                                                                                              .1




                                       25        35             45             55            65                                      25   35          45             55   65

                                                         ωK=0               ωK>0                                                               ωK=0               ωK>0
                                                                                                                              1.4
                                 .3
          Variance of B and DP




                                                                                                                              1.35
                                                                                                        Variance of log(θN)
                                 .25
                                 .2




                                                                                                                              1.3
                                 .15




                                                                                                                              1.25
                                 .1
                                 .05




                                                                                                                              1.2




                                       25        35             45             55            65                                      25   35          45             55   65

                                            B in ωK=0           B in ωK>0           DP in ωK>0                                                             ωK>0




                                                        Figure 2: Variances of Sources of Heterogeneity
Figure 2 plots the age variances of uninsurable component of market productivity α, insurable component of market
productivity ε, disutilities of work B and DP , and home production efficiency log θN for the economy with (ωK > 0,
black dotted lines) and without home production (ωK = 0, blue dashed lines).

                                                                                                  27
Deaton (1997).17 We plot the coefficients on age dummies which give the mean of each source of

heterogeneity by age relative to 25. To reduce noise in the figures, we present the fitted values
from locally weighted regressions of the age dummies coefficients on age.
       Recall from Table 2 that the insurable component of market productivity α grows over the life

cycle when either the ratio of consumption to hours cT /hT grows or when wages zM grow. The
insurable component ε falls when the increase in cT /hT is large relative to the increase in zM . The
upper panels of Figure 1 show that the means of α and ε grow similarly until roughly 45 between

the two models and diverge after that. The slower growth of α and the smaller decline in ε in the
model with home production reflect the significant decline in home hours hN in the later part of

the life cycle which implies that cT /hT grows by less than cM /hM . In the lower panels we see that

both models generate a relatively similar increase in the disutility of market work B, an increase

reflecting the faster growth of zM relative to cT and hT over the life cycle.18
       The home production model generates a U-shaped profile of home disutility DP which contrasts

with the increasing profile of B. To understand this difference, recall from equation (14) that
exp(DP )   cM 1/φ 1
              
 exp(B)  ∝ hP      z̃M . To rationalize the faster growth of zM relative to cM /hP during the earlier

stages of the life cycle, the model requires a decline in DP relative to B. As zM and cM /hP

comove more closely during the later stages of the life cycle, the profile of DP slopes upward like

the profile of B.

    The model with home production generates a hump-shaped profile of home production effi-
                                                                               φ      1
                                                                              φ−1 hN φ−1
ciency θN . To understand this pattern, recall from equation (14) that θN = z̃M   cM     . Until
roughly 40, θN tracks market productivity zM since φ > 1. Despite zM still rising, θN starts to
decline after 40 and returns to its initial value by 65. This pattern is generated by the strong
  17
     Results are similar when we extract the age effect in regressions which either control only for cohort dummies
or only for year dummies.
  18
     The flexibility in terms of initial conditions allows the model to generate arbitrary inferred life-cycle profiles of
heterogeneity without violating the random walk assumptions on the sourcesP           of heterogeneity which are essential
                                                                                        t
for the no-trade result. For example, the mean of αtj is given by Eαtj = Eαjj + s=j+1 Eυsα , so the difference in the
mean of αt by age is Eαtj−1 − Eαtj = [Eαj−1  j−1
                                                 − Eαjj ] + Eυjα , where the term in brackets is a cohort effect and the
last term is a time effect. As a result, the inferred mean of αt by age can appear to deviate from the mean of a
random walk process with an innovation which grows constantly over the life cycle due to a combination of cohort
and time effects which cannot be identified separately relative to age. Similarly, the change in the inferred variance
of αt is given by Var(αtj−1 ) − Var(αtj ) = [Var(αj−1
                                                    j−1
                                                        ) − Var(αjj )] + Var(υjα ) and can deviate from the change in the
variance of a random walk process.



                                                           28
decline in hours hN after 40. As shown in Table 4, child care is the subcategory of hN responsible
for this decline.

       In Figure 2 we present the age profiles of cross-sectional variances of (α, ε, B, DP , log θN ), which
equal the variances of the residuals for each age from a regression of each source of heterogeneity

on age dummies, cohort dummies, and normalized year dummies. The home production model
infers significantly smaller variances of α, ε, and B than the model without home production.
From the solutions in Table 2, we observe that the increasing variance of α over the life cycle is

driven by the increase in the variance of the consumption-hours ratio log(cT /hT ) and the increase
in the variance of wages log zM .19 Because the variance of log(cT /hT ) is lower than the variance of

log(cM /hM ), the home production model generates a lower variance of α. Given that both models

match the same variance of log zM but the home production model displays a larger covariance

between α and ε than the model without home production (see Appendix Table A.6), ε turns out

to be less dispersed in the home production model. The variance of B is also smaller in the home

production model which reflects the smaller variance of a combination of log cT and log hT than a

combination of log cM and log hM .

       In the lower panels we observe that the dispersion in the disutility of home work DP is lower

than the dispersion in the disutility of market work B but that home production efficiency log θN

is significantly more dispersed than any other source of heterogeneity. To set a benchmark for

log θN , we note that the variance of log zM is 0.33 in the data. What explains the almost four

times as large dispersion in log θN ? From equation (14), inferred home production efficiency is:
                                    
                                1
 log θN = constant +                     (φ log z̃M + log hN − log cM ) .                                         (16)
                               φ−1

Our result that home production efficiency is more dispersed than market productivity reflects
the fact that log θN cumulates the dispersions of three observables, log z̃M , log hN , and log cM ,
which are relatively uncorrelated with each other.20 When φ tends to zero and the goods tend
  19
    To derive analytical solutions, we have not allowed for borrowing constraints which are important when thinking
about the comovement of income with consumption at the bottom of the asset distribution. While the transmission
mechanism is different than in our model, the presence of borrowing constraints generates comovement between
income and consumption in a similar way to α.
                                                                                                              φ
  20
    Recall that home production efficiency is a convolution of productivity and consumption weights, θN = ωNφ−1 zN .
As a result, its dispersion reflects dispersion in both home productivity and consumption weight as well as their


                                                         29
                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                             1
             5




                                                                  Correlation(logzM,logθN)
             4




                                                                                                                                                         .15
                                                                                             .5
 Variances




                                                                                                                                               Density
                                                                                                                                                                                            zM
             3




                                                          logzM                                                                                                                             θH




                                                                                                                                                         .1
                                                          logθN                                                                                                                             θN
             2




                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                         .05
             1




                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                             -.5
             0




                                                                                                                                                               0   20       40         60   80
                 0   1         2           3          4      5                                     0   1                2              3   4
                         Elasticity of substitution φ                                                      Elasticity of substitution φ                                 2010 dollars


                                                          Figure 3: Production Efficiency Moments
The left panel of Figure 3 shows the variance of home production efficiency log θN and market productivity log zM
and the middle panel shows the correlation between the two variables as a function of the elasticity of substitution
across sectors φ. The dashed vertical line shows the variances and correlation at our estimated value of φ = 2.35.
The right panel plots estimates of the distributions of zM , θH = hNh+h
                                                                     N
                                                                       P
                                                                         θN + hNh+h
                                                                                 P
                                                                                   P
                                                                                     θP , and θN at φ = 2.35.


to become perfect complements, we obtain log θN = constant + log cM − log hN . In this case

the variance of log θN is roughly 1.3 because the variance of log cM is roughly 0.3, the variance

of log hN is roughly 1, and the two variables are relatively uncorrelated in the cross-section of

households. When φ tends to infinity and the goods tend to become perfect substitutes, we obtain

log θN = constant+log z̃M . In that case, the variance of log θN converges to the variance of log z̃M .

When φ tends to one, the variance of log θN tends to infinity. To summarize, for any value of φ,
the variance of log θN exceeds the variance of log z̃M .

             Figure 3 summarizes the properties of production efficiencies.21 The left panel shows the
variances of log θN and log zM and the middle panel shows the correlation of the two variables as
function of the elasticity of substitution across sectors φ. The variance of log θN is larger than

the variance of log zM for any value of φ < 5 in the figure.22 The correlation between the two
                                  2
                               φ                                       φ
covariation, Var(log θN ) = φ−1       Var(log ωN ) + Var(log zN ) + 2 φ−1 Cov (log ωN , log zN ). Under our estimated
φ = 2.35, the dispersion in θN is roughly four times as large as the dispersion in market productivity zM when, for
example, Var(log zM ) = Var(log zN ) = Var(log ωN ) and Cov (log ωK , log zK ) = 0.
  21
     Appendix Table A.6 presents the correlation matrix of all observables and sources of heterogeneity. Appendix
Figure A.1 shows estimates of the distributions of all other sources of heterogeneity.
  22
     We note that the argument in the preceding paragraph referred to after-tax market productivity log z̃M whereas
in Figure 3 we use the more primitive pre-tax market productivity log zM . The former measure of productivity is
roughly 77 percent as dispersed as the latter given our estimated tax progressivity parameter τ1 = 0.12.



                                                                                                                30
variables changes sign with the value of φ. When goods are substitutes, φ > 1 as suggested by

our estimation, efficiency in the home sector is positively correlated with efficiency in the market
sector. If goods were complements, φ < 1, the correlation would typically have been negative.
    The right panel of Figure 3 plots the distributions of production efficiencies under our estimated
                                                                                       hN              hP
φ = 2.35. We define effective home production efficiency θH =                        hN +hP θN   +   hN +hP θP .   Because θP

is a constant, we find that effective efficiency at home θH is less dispersed than θN . The means
of zM , θH , and θN are 26.6, 10.9, and 14.3 dollars respectively. The fraction of households with
efficiency exceeding 100 dollars per hour equals roughly 1 percent, 0.5, and 1.2 percent respectively.


4       Inequality and Home Production

We demonstrate that home production amplifies inequality across households and that hetero-

geneity in production efficiency rather than disutility of work is crucial in amplifying inequality.

4.1       Home Production Amplifies Inequality

We demonstrate that inequality across households is larger in the home production model than

in the model without home production, despite both models generating the same data on market

observables. By inequality, we mean a mapping from the dispersion in observed allocations and

inferred sources of heterogeneity to measures capturing welfare differences across households. We

acknowledge there are various such mappings and, therefore, present four inequality metrics.

4.1.1     Equivalent Variation

The equivalent variation, a broadly used metric in welfare economics, is the change in income

required for a household to achieve a reference level of utility. Let ι̂ be a reference household
with a derived utility V (ĉM,t , ĥM,t , ĥK,t ; ι̂), and a value function Ŵt (ι̂). For every household ι, we
compute the income transfer Tt (ι) making it indifferent between being ι and being ι̂ in the current

period, holding constant ι’s expectation over all future allocations. The equivalent variation Tt (ι)
solves:


                                           V (cM,t , hM,t , hK,t ; ι) + βδ Et Wt+1 (ι0 )|ι ,
                                                                                        
 Ŵt (ι̂; ι) =         max                                                                                               (17)
                 {cM,t ,hM,t ,hK,t }



                                                                  31
                                                                                                   2.2
                             1
   Standard Deviation of T




                                                                           90-10 Difference of T
                             .9




                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                   1.8
                             .8
                             .7




                                                                                                   1.6
                             .6




                                                                                                   1.4
                                  25   35          45      55    65                                      25   35          45      55   65

                                            ωK=0        ωK>0                                                       ωK=0        ωK>0


                                               Figure 4: Dispersion in Equivalent Variation
Figure 4 shows the dispersion in equivalent variation T for the model without (ωK = 0, blue dashed line) and with
home production (ωK > 0, black dotted line) by age. The standard deviation of T is normalized by mean market
             R
consumption cM (ι)dΦ(ι) which is constant across models and ages.


subject to the budget constraint:

 cM,t = ỹt + Tt (ι) + NAt (ι).                                                                                                        (18)

In the left-hand side of equation (17) we define Ŵt (ι̂; ι) ≡ V (ĉM,t , ĥM,t , ĥK,t ; ι̂) + βδ Et [Wt+1 (ι0 )|ι]

and in equation (18) we keep the net asset position NAt (ι) constant at its value before the transfer

Tt (ι) is given.

            Figure 4 presents the cross-sectional dispersion in equivalent variation by age.23 The left panel

shows the standard deviation of equivalent variation, standardized by the mean value of market
             R
consumption cM (ι)dΦ(ι) which is constant across models and ages. The standard deviation is

around 0.6 in both economies at 25. By 45, however, the standard deviation has increased to

more than 0.9 in the home production model, as opposed to below 0.8 in the model without home
production. Similarly, the right panel shows divergent patterns until 55 between the two models

using the difference between the 90th and 10th percentile in equivalent variation. Both inequality

metrics tend to converge across the two models for households older than 60.
  23
      For the equivalent variation in this figure, the reference household ι̂ is the household with the median utility in
the sample. Our results are similar when ι̂ is the household with the mean utility in the sample, when the identity
of ι̂ differs by age and is the household with the median utility for each age, and when the identity of ι̂ differs by
age and is the household with the mean utility for each age.

                                                                      32
                           1




                                                                                                                                                               .8
                                                                                             .8
 Standard Deviation of T




                                                                   Standard Deviation of T




                                                                                                                                     Standard Deviation of T
                                                                                                                                                               .7
                           .9




                                                                                             .7




                                                                                                                                                               .6
                           .8




                                                                                             .6




                                                                                                                                                               .5
                           .7




                                                                                             .5




                                                                                                                                                               .4
                           .6




                                25   35          45      55   65                                  25   35          45      55   65                                  25   35          45      55   65

                                          ωK=0        ωK>0                                                  ωK=0        ωK>0                                                  ωK=0        ωK>0


                                     (a) Baseline                                             (b) corr(hN , log zM ) = −0.8                                     (c) corr(hN , log cM ) = −0.8

                                            Figure 5: Counterfactuals of Dispersion in Equivalent Variation
Figure 5 shows the dispersion in equivalent variation T for the model without (ωK = 0, blue dashed line) and with
home production (ωK > 0, black dotted line) by age in the baseline and in counterfactual datasets.


                           What drives our inference that inequality is higher with home production? An important fea-

ture of the data driving this inference is that home hours hN are not negatively correlated with

market consumption cM and market productivity zM in the cross section of households. We calcu-

late that hN has a correlation of 0.07 with log zM and 0 with log cM . Thus, home production does

not offset heterogeneity originating in the market sector. Instead, home production exacerbates

inequality given the large dispersion in home production efficiency θN .24

                           To illustrate this point, in Figure 5 we repeat our analyses using a different correlation of home

hours hN with other observables in the data. The left panel repeats the age profile of the standard

deviation in equivalent variation T (ι) shown in the left panel of Figure 4. In the other two panels
we calculate the equivalent variation T (ι) when we repeat our inference of (α, ε, B, DP , θN ) in

counterfactual data in which the correlation of home hours hN with market productivity log zM
       24
    We focus on hN because its low correlation with cM and zM is more informative than the low correlations of
hP and further discuss the role efficiency and disutility heterogeneity in Section 4.2. Given that child care is the
largest subcategory of hN , our estimate of a weakly positive correlation between hN and zM is broadly consistent
with the findings of Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney (2008) who document that higher educated and higher income
parents tend to spend more time with their children. Appendix Tables A.1, A.2, and A.3 demonstrate that the
lack of a negative correlation with wages is present both for individuals and households and is present within age,
sex, and education groups. Appendix Tables A.4 and A.5 demonstrate that the correlation of home hours with
both consumption and wages is broadly similar in magnitude between the CEX/ATUS sample and PSID samples
in which home production time is not imputed.




                                                                                                            33
and market expenditures log cM is -0.8. The figure shows that if the data featured a significantly
more negative correlation between hN and either log zM or log cM , then we would have concluded

that inequality in the model with home production is actually lower.

4.1.2      Redistributive Transfers

Our second measure of inequality is the cross-sectional dispersion in redistributive transfers which
equalize marginal utilities. After households choose their allocations of consumption and hours,

we allow a utilitarian planner to redistribute aggregate market consumption across households in
order to maximize average household utility. The dispersion in these transfers captures the extent

of redistribution required to maximize social welfare or, equivalently, to equalize marginal utilities

of market consumption. Formally, the problem is to choose transfers {t(ι)} to maximize:
 Z
       V (cM (ι) + t(ι), hM (ι), hN (ι), hP (ι))dΦ(ι),                                                    (19)
   ι
                                                              R
subject to aggregate transfers being equal to zero                ι t(ι)dΦ(ι)   = 0.

       The optimal transfers equal the gap between average and individual market value of total

consumption cT (ι):25
           Z
 t(ι) =          cT (ι)dΦ (ι) − cT (ι).                                                                   (20)
             ι

The dispersion in redistributive transfers t(ι) differs from the dispersion in equivalent variation

T (ι) in Section 4.1.1 because it leads to an equalization of marginal utilities instead of utility
levels. An advantage of using the dispersion in t(ι) as a measure of inequality is that it depends
transparently only on observables and estimated parameters.

       The left panel of Figure 6 shows the age profiles of the cross-sectional standard deviation in
redistributive transfers t(ι) for the two models, standardized again by the mean value of market
              R
consumption cM (ι)dΦ(ι). The standard deviation of t(ι) is larger and increases more over the

life cycle in the model with home production. We obtain a similar result in the right panel which
shows the difference between the 90th and 10th percentile in redistributive transfers t(ι).
  25
     We remind the reader that the marginal utility of market consumption under an equilibrium allocation (cM +
t, hM , hN , hP ) equals the inverse of the market value of total consumption cT given in equation (13).



                                                         34
                             .8




                                                                                                     1.8
   Standard Deviation of t




                                                                             90-10 Difference of t
                             .7




                                                                                                     1.6
                             .6




                                                                                                     1.4
                                                                                                     1.2
                             .5
                             .4




                                                                                                     1
                                  25     35          45      55    65                                      25   35          45      55   65

                                              ωK=0        ωK>0                                                       ωK=0        ωK>0


                                               Figure 6: Dispersion in Redistributive Transfers
Figure 6 shows the dispersion in redistributive transfers t for the environment without (ωK = 0, blue dashed line)
and with home production (ωK > 0, black dotted line) by age. The standard deviation of t is normalized by mean
                     R
market consumption cM (ι)dΦ(ι) which is constant across models and ages.


            It is instructive to compare our findings to the those of Frazis and Stewart (2011) and Bridgman,

Dugan, Lal, Osborne, and Villones (2012) who have embraced the view that home production

decreases inequality. Their argument is that, since home hours do not correlate with income in the

cross section of households, adding a constant value of home production across households results

in a smaller dispersion in total income. Inspection of equation (13) for cT reveals a fundamental

difference in our logic. Home hours in our model are valued at their opportunity cost which varies

across households. Using a constant opportunity cost does not take into account differences in the

efficiency or disutility of home hours across households.26

4.1.3                             Lifetime Welfare Cost of Heterogeneity

This section presents the lifetime welfare effects from heterogeneity across households. Our cal-

culations contrast with our inequality metrics so far which ignore dynamic considerations. The
  26
    A reasonable concern using wages to value home hours is that some households or members of the household
may be at a corner solution. In practice, we are not concerned that valuing home hours at its opportunity cost
biases our results for three reasons. First, in our baseline CEX/ATUS sample of married households the fraction of
households with either zero market hours or zero home hours per year is less than one percent. Further, sensitivity
analyses presented in Section 5 confirm our inequality results in a sample of singles and in a subsample of married
households with a working spouse for which valuation at market wages is less concerning. Finally, our notion of
inequality in consumption allows for a wedge between the wage and the marginal value of home hours hP arising
from disutility differences across sectors.


                                                                        35
lifetime welfare effect is the share of consumption in every period which a household is willing

to sacrifice ex-ante to be indifferent between being born in the baseline environment with hetero-
geneity and allocations {ct , hM,t , hN,t , hP,t } and a counterfactual environment in which dimensions
of heterogeneity are shut down. The allocations in the counterfactual economy are denoted by

{ĉt , ĥM,t , ĥN,t , ĥP,t } and are generated using the equations in Table 1 after shutting down particular
dimensions of heterogeneity.27

    The share of lifetime consumption that makes households indifferent between the actual and

the counterfactual economy is given by the λ which solves:


 Ej−1 W ({ct , hM,t , hN,t , hP,t }) = Ej−1 W ({(1 − λ)ĉt , ĥM,t , ĥN,t , ĥP,t }) ,                              (21)
                                                                                φ
                                                                               φ−1
                          φ−1                    φ−1                    φ−1
where ct =         cM,t    φ    + (θN,t hN,t )    φ    + (θP,t hP,t )    φ            . When λ > 0, households prefer the

counterfactual to the actual allocation. Benabou (2002) and Floden (2001) have emphasized

that total welfare effects from eliminating heterogeneity arise both from level effects when ag-

gregate allocations change and effects capturing changes in the dispersion in allocations across

households. Therefore, alongside λ, we discuss how heterogeneity influences aggregate labor pro-
         R                   R
ductivity ι zM (ι)hT (ι)dΦ(ι) ι hT (ι)dΦ(ι). We denote by λp the percent change in aggregate

labor productivity between the counterfactual and the baseline allocation. Dispersion in market

productivity zM decreases aggregate labor productivity because hT is negatively correlated with

zM in both models.

    In the first row of Table 6, we shut down all sources of heterogeneity and both models collapse
to a representative household economy. The welfare cost of heterogeneity λ is 12 percent in the
model with home production as opposed to 6 percent in the model without home production.

The difference between the two models reflects predominately the differential cost of dispersion
in allocations rather than aggregate productivity changes λp which are relatively similar across
models.28
  27
     Consistent with our definition of equilibrium in which G is an endogenous variable, in these counterfactuals
we keep constant the tax parameters (τ0 , τ1 ) because we prefer to evaluate more direct welfare effects arising from
heterogeneity rather than more nuanced effects arising from changes in the tax parameters in order to satisfy the
government budget constraint. By contrast, when we calculate optimal taxes (τ0 , τ1 ) in Section 4.1.4, we keep
constant G to its initial equilibrium value.
  28
     The welfare effects in Table 6 reflect heterogeneity both within age and over the life cycle because each coun-
terfactual imposes a constant value of the source of heterogeneity for households of all ages. We have repeated


                                                                  36
                            Table 6: Lifetime Welfare Cost of Heterogeneity

                                  No Home Production: ωK = 0 Home Production: ωK > 0
         No dispersion in ...         λp                   λ                λp               λ
         zM , θN , B, DP             0.04               0.06               0.05             0.12
         zM , θN                     0.04               0.07               0.05             0.16
         zM                          0.04               0.07               0.05             0.11
         θN                           —                    —               0.00             0.13

Table 6 shows changes in aggregate labor productivity λp and welfare λ for the environment without (ωK = 0) and
with (ωK > 0) home production. Each row shuts down combinations of sources of heterogeneity.


   The larger dispersion costs of heterogeneity in the home production model reflect the costs of

dispersion in the efficiency of work rather than the disutility of work. To see this, in the second

row we shut down heterogeneity in efficiencies, zM and θN , while we maintain heterogeneity in

disutilities of work B and DP . We find even larger welfare effects than in the first row and, thus,

conclude that heterogeneity in B and DP is not important for the welfare effects of eliminating

all heterogeneity. In the third row, we shut down only heterogeneity in market productivity zM

and find that eliminating this source of dispersion carries larger welfare gains in the model with

home production than in the model without. In the fourth row, we shut down heterogeneity in

home production efficiency θN only. The significant welfare effects illustrate again the key role of

heterogeneity in θN for the welfare losses.

4.1.4    Optimal Tax Progressivity

This section contrasts the optimal progressivity of the tax system between the model with and

without home production. Relative to our previous inequality metrics, this optimal taxation
exercise mixes redistribution with efficiency concerns because the optimal progressivity of the tax
system increases with redistributive motives and decreases with the efficiency losses from distorting

labor allocations. However, this exercise allows us to more directly link our inequality result to
these exercises by shutting down only the within-age heterogeneity and allowing each source of heterogeneity to
take its mean value by age as shown previously in Figure 1. Appendix Table A.7 shows similar welfare effects to
those shown in Table 6 and, therefore, we conclude that the welfare effects predominately reflect the within-age
component of heterogeneity.



                                                      37
                                                 250
                        After-tax labor income
                                                 200
                                                 150
                                                 100
                                                 50
                                                 0


                                                       0            100                200            300
                                                                    Pre-tax labor income
                                                             data         ωK=0 model         ωK>0 model


                                                           Figure 7: Optimal Tax Function
Figure 7 displays the relationship between pre-tax labor income y and after-tax labor income ỹ under the parameters
estimates for the United States (orange solid line), under the optimal tax function for the model without home
production (ωK = 0, blue dashed line), and under the optimal tax function with home production (ωK > 0, black
dotted line).


policy.

    Given government expenditures G fixed at its initial equilibrium level, the government chooses

tax function parameters τ ≡ (τ0 , τ1 ) to maximize utilitarian welfare:
  Z
    V (cM (τ ), hM (τ ), hN (τ ), hP (τ ); ι)dΦ(ι) ,                                                           (22)
   ι

subject to the government budget constraint:
  Z
     zM − (1 − τ0 )zM 1−τ1 hM (τ )dΦ(ι) = G.
                         
                                                                                                               (23)
   ι

    In Figure 7 we plot the relationship between pre-tax labor income y and after-tax labor income
ỹ, both in thousands of 2010 dollars. The orange solid curve shows the relationship between y

and ỹ under the parameter τ1 = 0.12 which we estimated in the data. The blue dashed and black
dotted curves show this relationship under the optimal τ1 = 0.06 for the model without home
production and the optimal τ1 = 0.24 for the model with home production. The relationship

between y and ỹ is significantly more concave in the model with home production. To give an
example, consider a household earning 200 thousand dollars. Under the optimal tax schedule in
the model without home production the household faces an average tax rate of 12 percent, while

in the model with home production the average tax rate increases to 19 percent.

                                                                          38
        Table 7: The Role of Home Efficiency and Home Disutility in Amplifying Inequality

                               No Home Production                     Home Production
                 Statistics                                  Efficiency   Baseline    Disutility
                 std(T )                 0.78                  1.14         0.90          0.76
                 std(t)                  0.55                  0.83         0.73          0.65
                 λ                       0.06                  0.20         0.12          0.03
                 τ1                      0.06                  0.32         0.24          0.13

Table 7 shows the four inequality metrics for the model without home production, the home production model with
only efficiency heterogeneity, the baseline home production model with both efficiency and disutility heterogeneity,
and the home production model with only disutility heterogeneity. Parameters τ0 , τ1 , and φ are held constant to
their values shown in Table 5. The estimated values for η are 0.90, 0.53, 0.50, and 0.57. The estimated value of
θP is 4.64 for the baseline home production model and 9.74 for the model with only heterogeneity in disutility of
home work.


4.2     Heterogeneity in Home Efficiency versus Disutility of Work

Using four different metrics of inequality, we have demonstrated that home production amplifies

inequality across households. In our baseline model heterogeneity in the home sector shows up in

both the production efficiency of work θN and the disutility of work DP because both sectors are

operating in equilibrium (ωN > 0 and ωP > 0). Which source of heterogeneity is quantitatively

more important in elevating inequality?

    To quantify the importance of home production efficiency and disutility of home work, we
consider the two polar cases of all home time hN + hP belonging either to the sector with hetero-

geneity in production efficiency or to the sector with heterogeneity in disutility of work. When we
set ωP = 0, then we obtain a two-sector model in which the disutility of work B is equalized across
sectors and the sectoral allocation of time depends on production efficiencies in the market zM

and at home θN . Instead, setting ωN = 0 yields a two-sector model in which market productivity
zM and differences in the disutility of work across sectors, B and DP , determine the allocation of
time.

    Table 7 summarizes our results. The first column presents the four inequality metrics (averaged
across all ages) in the model without home production and the last three columns present the
metrics in the three versions of the home production model. In the home production model with

                                                        39
only heterogeneity in home production efficiency, all inequality metrics are magnified relative to

the baseline with heterogeneity in both efficiency and disutility. If there was only heterogeneity in
disutility of home work, there would be no significant difference in inequality between the model
with and the model without home production. We conclude that heterogeneity in home production

efficiency rather than disutility of work is important in amplifying inequality across households.29


5        Sensitivity Analyses

In this section we present various sensitivity analyses with respect to the parameterization of the

model, subsamples of the population, and measurement error in observables. Each row in Table 8

corresponds to a different sensitivity analysis. For both models, the columns show the standard de-

viation in equivalent variation T , the standard deviation in transfers required to equalize marginal

utilities t, the ex-ante lifetime welfare loss from shutting down all heterogeneity λ, and the degree

of progressivity in the optimal tax system τ1 . In each exercise, we repeat our analysis of identifying

the sources of heterogeneity (α, ε, B, DP , θN ) and then calculate the inequality metrics. The first

row of the table repeats these statistics for our baseline case.

       Rows 2 to 9 vary parameters of the model. Relative to our estimated value τ1 = 0.12, changing

the progressivity of the tax system to τ1 = 0.06 as in Guner, Kaygusuz, and Ventura (2014) or to

τ1 = 0.19 as in Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014) does not alter significantly any result.

We also obtain highly similar results when we change the target for the average labor income tax
G/Y to 0.05 or 0.15. In rows 6 and 7 we change the target coefficient from the regression of log hM

on ε used to identify the curvature with respect to hours η. Raising η to target a coefficient of
0.70 as suggested by Pistaferri (2003) increases the level of three of the inequality metrics in both
models, but in all cases inequality remains higher in the model with home production.

       In rows 8 and 9, we vary the elasticity of substitution across goods φ. The Std(t) inequality
metric is relatively insensitive to φ. When φ = 0.5 and goods are complements, the Std(T ), λ, and
  29
    We have also considered two additional cases of interest. In the first case there is heterogeneity in home
production efficiency θN and θP in both sectors and no disutility differences across sectors, B = DN = DP . We
obtain nearly identical results to the ωP = 0 case. In the second case there is heterogeneity in the disutility of
home work DN and DP in both sectors and both θN and θP are constant across households. We obtain nearly
identical results to the ωN = 0 case.



                                                       40
                           Table 8: Sensitivity Analyses of Inequality Metrics

                                     No Home Production: ωK = 0                 Home Production: ωK > 0
                                   Std(T )      Std(t)         λ      τ1      Std(T )      Std(t)      λ       τ1
 1.    Baseline                       0.78       0.55         0.06   0.06       0.90        0.73     0.12    0.24

                                                  Parameter Values
 2.    τ1 = 0.06                      0.78       0.55         0.06   0.12       0.93        0.74     0.14    0.27
 3.    τ1 = 0.19                      0.78       0.55         0.05   -0.04      0.88        0.72     0.10    0.20
 4.    G/Y = 0.05                     0.78       0.55         0.06   0.03       0.90        0.73     0.12    0.24
 5.    G/Y = 0.15                     0.78       0.55         0.06   0.09       0.90        0.73     0.12    0.25
 6.    Target Frisch = 0.4            0.68       0.55         0.02   -0.74      0.80        0.73     0.10    0.06
 7.    Target Frisch = 0.7            0.85       0.55         0.08   0.26       0.98        0.73     0.13    0.31
 8.    φ = 0.5                        0.78       0.55         0.06   0.06       1.94        0.70     0.52    0.44
 9.    φ = 20                         0.78       0.55         0.06   0.06       0.85        0.71     0.09    -0.80

                             Marital, Employment, Family, and Education Groups
 10.   Singles                        0.89       0.61         0.01   0.03       0.90        0.71     0.08    0.13
 11.   Non-working spouse             0.80       0.55         0.10   0.22       1.34        1.07     0.21    0.33
 12.   Working spouse                 0.78       0.54         0.05   0.09       0.85        0.70     0.10    0.23
 13.   No children                    0.79       0.55         0.10   -0.06      0.81        0.67     0.18    0.13
 14.   One child                      0.78       0.55         0.07   0.10       0.85        0.72     0.11    0.27
 15.   Two or more children           0.77       0.53         0.04   0.15       0.96        0.77     0.19    0.31
 16.   Child younger than 5           0.77       0.54         0.01   0.15       1.02        0.82     0.24    0.34
 17.   Less than college              0.78       0.55         0.02   -0.22      0.86        0.71     0.06    0.13
 18.   College or more                0.76       0.52         0.06   -0.10      0.86        0.68     0.15    0.20

                                             Consumption Expenditures
 19.   Food expenditures              0.82       0.56         0.04   -0.05      0.92        0.75     0.11    0.21
 20.   All expenditures               0.88       0.63         0.07   0.18       0.99        0.83     0.11    0.27
 21.   Adjusted baseline              0.57       0.39         0.07   0.23       0.79        0.60     0.13    0.31
 22.   Adjusted all                   0.84       0.60         0.07   0.26       0.97        0.80     0.11    0.31

Table 8 presents each sensitivity analysis in a row. Columns show the four inequality metrics for the model without
home production (ωK = 0) and the model with home production (ωK > 0).


τ1 metrics of inequality increase substantially relative to the baseline with φ = 2.35. Intuitively,

the complementarity between goods implies that home production amplifies differences in the



                                                         41
market sector even more. When φ = 20 and goods are almost perfect substitutes, we still find

that inequality is higher with home production according to the Std(T ), Std(t), and λ metrics
but to a lesser extent than before. The main difference with our baseline arises in terms of the
optimal progressivity which is significantly affected by the value of φ. Because a higher value of

φ increases the efficiency losses from a progressive tax system, we obtain a lower τ1 in the model
with home production and φ = 20 than in the model without home production.
   In rows 10 to 18 of Table 8 we repeat our analyses in subsamples of households defined along

their marital status, employment status of the spouse of the head, number of children, age of
youngest child, and education. Repeating our analyses for different samples allows us to explore

whether our inequality results reflect within group inequality or inequality across groups. Addi-

tionally, verifying our results at the subgroup level is reassuring because it allows us to control for

dimensions of heterogeneity which we did not model, such as spousal employment at the extensive

margin, the presence of young children, or the number of children.

   Our results are remarkably stable at the subgroup level, with the home production model

always generating more inequality than the model without home production according to all four

metrics. Row 10 shows the sample of singles, for which the inequality gap between models is

generally smaller. Rows 11 and 12 show subsamples of married households according to whether

the spouse is working or not. Reassuringly for the mechanisms we have stressed, we obtain a

larger inequality gap between models in the group of households with non-working spouses for

which we expect home production efficiency differences to be more important. In rows 13 to 15
we differentiate according to the number of children present in the household. We obtain larger
inequality gaps between models in households with more children, which highlights the importance

of time spent on child care for our results. Similarly, in row 16 we find even larger inequality gaps
in households with a child younger than 5. Finally, rows 17 and 18 show results for married
households with a head who has not completed college and with a head who has completed college

or more. Our results are similar to the baseline with the exception of the optimal progressivity τ1
which declines substantially in the model without home production.
   In rows 19 and 20 we show that our results are robust under two alternative measures of



                                                  42
market expenditures cM . In row 19 we use food only whereas in row 20 we use all expenditures
including health, education, and durables. The inequality metrics and the gap between the two

models are generally similar to the baseline which used nondurable consumption excluding health
and education. From the four metrics, the optimal progressivity τ1 is the most sensitive to the
measure of consumption.

       A concern about our results is that the dispersion in reported consumption reflects measure-
ment error which may affect inequality differentially across the two models. We now examine the

robustness of our results to measurement error in consumption expenditures. For each spending
category comprising our aggregate household consumption measure, we use the elasticity of the

spending category with respect to aggregate household consumption estimated by Aguiar and Bils

(2015) to adjust households’ spending category for measurement error. Aggregating across all

spending categories produces measurement-error adjusted aggregate household consumption mea-

sures which we use to repeat our analyses.30 We present results in row 21 for the baseline measure

of nondurable consumption and in row 22 for all expenditures including health, education, and

durables. We find that the model with home production still generates larger inequality than the

model without home production.31

       An alternative way to examine the sensitivity of our results to measurement error is to simulate

the effects of reducing the dispersion in observables on the inequality metrics. We consider a

classical measurement error model in which the reported value of variable x for household ι is:

 log x(ι) = log x∗ (ι) + m(ι),                                                                                  (24)

where x∗ is the measurement-error adjusted value of variable x and m denotes a classical mea-
  30
                                                                                P
    Let xM,j (ι) be reported spending of household ι in category j, xM (ι) =      j xM,j (ι) be aggregate reported
consumption of household ι, and βj be the elasticity of spending xM,j with respect to aggregate household con-
sumption xM estimated by Aguiar and   PBils (2015). We allocate aggregate spending over all households in each
category for a particular year, xM,j = ι xM,j (ι), to households in proportion to their predicted spending in that
category based on their aggregate household consumption and the spending elasticity, xM (ι)βj . For each household
                             βj
ι we obtain cM,j (ι) = PxMx (ι)(ι)βj xM,j and define the measurement-error adjusted aggregate household consumption
             P           ι M
as cM (ι) = j cM,j (ι).
   31
      Measurement-error adjusted consumption is less dispersed than reported consumption and, therefore, inequality
according to the Std(T ) and Std(t) metrics decreases in both models relative to the baseline. The measurement
error adjustment lowers consumption dispersion because low-elasticity categories (such as food) account for larger
fractions of aggregate spending. We calculate that the expenditure-weighted average elasticity of spending categories
is 0.71 with respect to nondurable consumption and 0.95 with respect to aggregate spending. We have confirmed
that our results are similar when using NIPA expenditures instead of CEX expenditures.

                                                         43
                          Table 9: Inequality Metrics and Measurement Error

                                     No Home Production: ωK = 0                 Home Production: ωK > 0
                                   Std(T )     Std(t)         λ       τ1      Std(T )     Std(t)       λ      τ1
 1.     Baseline                     0.78        0.55        0.06   0.06        0.90       0.73      0.12    0.24

                                               Consumption x = cM
         2
 2.     σm /var(log x) = 0.20        0.74        0.51        0.05   0.10        0.87       0.69      0.12    0.26
         2
 3.     σm /var(log x) = 0.50        0.62        0.41        0.04   0.15        0.80       0.60      0.12    0.27
         2
 4.     σm /var(log x)   = 0.80      0.45        0.26        0.03   0.18        0.70       0.47      0.12    0.29

                                               Market Hours x = hM
         2
 5.     σm /var(log x) = 0.20        0.79        0.55        0.05   0.08        0.90       0.73      0.12    0.24
         2
 6.     σm /var(log x) = 0.50        0.80        0.55        0.06   0.14        0.89       0.73      0.12    0.26
         2
 7.     σm /var(log x)   = 0.80      0.80        0.55        0.06   0.21        0.88       0.73      0.12    0.30

                                             Home Hours x = {hN , hP }
         2
 8.     σm /var(log x) = 0.20        0.78        0.55        0.06   0.06        0.92       0.74      0.12    0.24
         2
 9.     σm /var(log x) = 0.50        0.78        0.55        0.06   0.06        0.88       0.73      0.13    0.24
         2
 10.    σm /var(log x)   = 0.80      0.78        0.55        0.06   0.06        0.78       0.70      0.14    0.25

                                       All Variables x = {cM , hM , hN , hP }
      2
 11. σm /var(log x) = 0.20           0.74        0.51        0.05   0.12        0.89       0.70      0.12    0.26
      2
 12. σm /var(log x) = 0.50           0.63        0.41        0.05   0.21        0.77       0.59      0.13    0.29
         2
 13.    σm /var(log x)   = 0.80      0.46        0.26        0.05   0.31        0.51       0.40      0.14    0.33

Table 9 presents each sensitivity analysis in a row. Columns show the four inequality metrics for the model without
home production (ωK = 0) and the model with home production (ωK > 0).


                              2.
surement error with variance σm

      In Table 9, rows 2 to 4 show results with measurement error in market consumption, rows 5 to

7 with measurement error in market hours, rows 8 to 10 with measurement error in home hours,
and rows 11 to 13 with measurement error in all variables simultaneously. For each case we show

measurement errors absorbing 20, 50, and 80 percent of the variance of the observed variable. Our
                                                    2 across households and then use simulated
process is to draw measurement error with variance σm
values x∗ , which by construction display lower dispersion than reported values x, as the data

input for the extraction of the sources of heterogeneity (α, ε, B, DP , θN ) and the measurement of



                                                        44
inequality.

       We find small differences relative to our baseline results. Inequality tends to decline with
measurement error in consumption, but not differentially across the two models. For market hours,
measurement error affects only the optimal progressivity τ1 , but we always find that progressivity

is higher in the home production model. Finally, most of our results are robust to measurement
error of up to 80 percent of the variance of home hours. At that level, the dispersion in equivalent
variation in the model with home production is equal to the dispersion in the model without home

production. We still obtain higher inequality with home production using the other three metrics
of inequality.


6        Other Datasets and Countries

We show the similarity of the inequality results between the CEX/ATUS and three alternative

datasets, the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), the Japanese Panel Survey of Consumers

(JPSC), and the Longitudinal Internet Studies for the Social Sciences from the Netherlands (LISS).

6.1       Comparison between CEX/ATUS and PSID

The PSID has two advantages relative to the CEX/ATUS. It has a panel dimension and contains

information on both expenditures and time spent on home production. However, we prefer using

the CEX/ATUS sample for our baseline analyses for three reasons. First, the PSID survey question

covers aggregated time spent on home production, which does not allow us to separate credibly
home hours hN in the sector with efficiency heterogeneity from home hours hP in the sector with
disutility heterogeneity. Second, the PSID has lower quality of time use data as compared to the

time diaries from the ATUS. In particular, it is not clear if respondents include activities such
as child care and shopping in their reported home hours.32 Third, food is the only measure of
consumption which is consistently covered across surveys. Later surveys cover expanded categories

but the sample size is significantly smaller than the CEX/ATUS sample.
       We use two versions of the PSID. In the version in which cM includes only expenditures on food,
  32
    The survey question is “About how much time do you spend on housework in an average week? I mean time
spent cooking, cleaning, and doing other work around the house.”



                                                   45
we have 69,951 observations between 1975 and 2014 for 10,992 households. In the version in which

cM includes food, utilities, child care expenses, clothing, home insurance, telecommunication,
transportation, and home repairs, we have 13,626 observations between 2004 and 2014. PSID does
not have information which allows us to disaggregate time spent on home production between hN

and hP . To make the analyses as comparable as possible to CEX/ATUS, we consider three cases.
The first is when all home hours belong to hN in the sector with efficiency heterogeneity. The
second case, which is more comparable to our baseline in the CEX/ATUS, is that home hours are

split equally between the two sectors. The third case is when all home hours belong to hP in the
sector with disutility heterogeneity.

       Table 10 reassesses our conclusions regarding inequality.33 The first panel repeats the find-

ings of Table 7 in the CEX/ATUS for the four inequality metrics in the model without home

production, the home production model with only efficiency heterogeneity, the baseline home pro-

duction model with both efficiency and disutility heterogeneity, and the home production model

with only disutility heterogeneity. The second panel reports these statistics for the version of the

PSID which includes an expanded set of consumption categories. The third and fourth panels

report these statistics for the CEX/ATUS and PSID datasets when we restrict our measure of

consumption to include only food.

       Our conclusions regarding inequality and the prominent role of heterogeneity in home produc-

tion efficiency are stable across the four datasets. First, the baseline model with home production

generates higher inequality than the model without home production. Second, in the model with
only efficiency heterogeneity, all inequality metrics are magnified relative to the baseline with
both efficiency and disutility heterogeneity. Third, if there was only disutility heterogeneity, there

would be no significant difference in inequality between the model with and the model without
home production. The only significant change in the PSID relative to the CEX/ATUS is in the
optimal progressivity τ1 which displays a smaller difference between the two models.34
  33
      To isolate differences arising from samples rather than parameter values, we keep parameters fixed at their
values shown in Table 5. We follow a similar strategy with the JPSC and the LISS datasets later. The exception
is the constant level of production efficiency θP which we calibrate in each dataset to hit the same target as in the
CEX/ATUS.
   34
      Appendix Figures A.2 and A.3 display the age profiles of means and variances of sources of heterogeneity
(α, ε, B, DP , log θN ) from the version of the PSID with food in the baseline case which splits home hours equally


                                                         46
                 Table 10: Inequality and Home Production: CEX/ATUS and PSID

                CEX All         No Home Production                     Home Production
                Statistics                                   Efficiency    Baseline     Disutility
                std(T )                    0.78                 1.14         0.90          0.76
                std(t)                     0.55                 0.83         0.73          0.65
                λ                          0.06                 0.20         0.12          0.03
                τ1                         0.06                 0.32         0.24          0.13
                PSID All        No Home Production                     Home Production
                Statistics                                   Efficiency    Baseline     Disutility
                std(T )                    0.58                 0.85         0.63          0.56
                std(t)                     0.40                 0.61         0.51          0.45
                λ                          0.11                 0.18         0.15          0.10
                τ1                         0.33                 0.36         0.33          0.29
                CEX Food        No Home Production                     Home Production
                Statistics                                   Efficiency    Baseline     Disutility
                std(T )                    0.82                 1.15         0.92          0.80
                std(t)                     0.56                 0.84         0.75          0.67
                λ                          0.04                 0.20         0.11          0.02
                τ1                        -0.05                 0.29         0.21          0.09
                PSID Food       No Home Production                     Home Production
                Statistics                                   Efficiency    Baseline     Disutility
                std(T )                    0.57                 0.87         0.63          0.55
                std(t)                     0.40                 0.62         0.51          0.45
                λ                          0.09                 0.18         0.14          0.09
                τ1                         0.28                 0.33         0.29          0.24

Table 10 shows the four inequality metrics for the model without home production, the home production model with
only efficiency heterogeneity, the baseline home production model with both efficiency and disutility heterogeneity,
and the home production model with only disutility heterogeneity. Parameters τ0 , τ1 , and φ are held constant to
their values shown in Table 5. For each column, the values for η are given by 0.90, 0.53, 0.50, and 0.57 (constant
across panels). The estimated value of θP is 4.64 for the baseline home production model and 9.74 for the model
with only heterogeneity in disutility of home work in the first panel; 4.01 and 6.68 in the second panel; 4.65 and
9.74 in the third panel; 3.80 and 6.31 in the fourth panel.




                                                        47
    Our results using the PSID are particularly reassuring because we do not take a stance about

the classification of time uses between hN and hP . Therefore, the result that inequality is higher
with home production does not hinge on which activities are subject to efficiency heterogeneity
and which activities are subject to disutility heterogeneity. What is important for this result is

that some portion of home production time is subject to heterogeneity in production efficiency.

6.2     Comparison between US, Japan, and the Netherlands

In this section, we repeat our analyses using datasets from other countries. As in the PSID, these
datasets have limited information to disaggregate time spent on home production between hN

and hP . To make the analyses comparable to CEX/ATUS and PSID, we consider the three cases

of all home hours belonging to hN in the sector with efficiency heterogeneity, of splitting home

hours equally between the two sectors, and of all home hours belonging to hP in the sector with

disutility heterogeneity. We apply the same sampling restrictions as in the CEX/ATUS and focus

our analyses on married households.

    The first dataset is the Japanese Panel Survey of Consumers (JPSC; see, for example, Lise and

Yamada, 2019). The JPSC records information for time spent on commuting, working, studying,

home production and child care, leisure, and sleeping, personal care and eating. For aggregate

home hours hN +hP we use the variable for home production and child care and for market hours we

use hours worked. To calculate the home and market hours for a given week, we weight the time use

on workdays and days off by the number of days worked. Our measure of consumption expenditures

includes food, utilities, apparel, transport, culture and leisure, communication, trips and activities,
house and land rent. The final dataset has 12,423 observations between 1998 and 2014. The second

dataset is the Longitudinal Internet Studies for the Social Sciences from the Netherlands (LISS; see,

for example, Cherchye, Demuynck, De Rock, and Vermeulen, 2017), administered by CentERdata.
The dataset is based on a representative sample of Dutch households who participate in monthly

surveys. We use the three waves (2009, 2010, and 2012) which contain information on time use.
between hN and hP . The difference relative to the means and variances we extracted using the CEX/ATUS is that
we obtain these age profiles by regressing each source of heterogeneity on age and year dummies and an individual
fixed effect. Therefore, these profiles reflect the within-household evolution of the sources of heterogeneity. Despite
this difference, most of age profiles in the PSID are quantitatively similar to the age profiles in the CEX/ATUS.



                                                          48
           Table 11: Inequality and Home Production: US, Japan, and the Netherlands

                CEX/ATUS         No Home Production                     Home Production
                Statistics                                   Efficiency     Baseline    Disutility
                std(T )                    0.78                  1.14         0.90         0.76
                std(t)                     0.55                  0.83         0.73         0.65
                λ                          0.06                  0.20         0.12         0.03
                τ1                         0.06                  0.32         0.24         0.13
                JPSC             No Home Production                     Home Production
                Statistics                                   Efficiency     Baseline    Disutility
                std(T )                    0.66                  0.98         0.76         0.67
                std(t)                     0.46                  0.68         0.60         0.56
                λ                          0.04                  0.11         0.07         0.02
                τ1                         -0.15                 0.19         0.11         0.03
                LISS             No Home Production                     Home Production
                Statistics                                   Efficiency     Baseline    Disutility
                std(T )                    0.64                  1.12         0.80         0.64
                std(t)                     0.45                  0.77         0.63         0.54
                λ                          0.03                  0.20         0.12         0.02
                τ1                         -0.80                -0.12         -0.24        -0.80

Table 11 shows the four inequality metrics for the model without home production, the home production model with
only efficiency heterogeneity, the baseline home production model with both efficiency and disutility heterogeneity,
and the home production model with only disutility heterogeneity. Parameters τ0 , τ1 , and φ are held constant to
their values shown in Table 5. For each column, the values for η are given by 0.90, 0.53, 0.50, and 0.57 (constant
across panels). The estimated value of θP is 4.64 for the baseline home production model and 9.74 for the model
with only heterogeneity in disutility of home work in the upper panel; 3.54 and 5.91 in the middle panel; 3.46 and
5.78 in the lower panel.


Home production time includes household chores, child care, and administrative chores. Market

hours are measured by time spent on paid work, which includes commuting time. Consumption
expenditures include food, utilities, home maintenance, transportation, daycare, and child support.

The final dataset has 978 observations.

    Table 11 summarizes our results. The upper panel repeats our findings in the CEX/ATUS and
the other panels show inequality statistics in the JPSC and the LISS. Our conclusions regarding


                                                        49
inequality and the role of production efficiency heterogeneity are stable in other countries as well.

Namely, the baseline model with home production always generates higher inequality than the
model without home production. All inequality statistics are magnified in the home production
model with only efficiency heterogeneity, whereas with only disutility heterogeneity there would

be no significant difference in inequality between the models with and without home production.


7     Conclusion

The literature examining the causes, welfare consequences, and policy implications of the substan-

tial labor market dispersion we observe across households typically abstracts from the possibility

that households can produce goods and services outside of the market sector. We revisit these

issues taking into account that households spend a significant amount of their time in home pro-

duction. Our model incorporates non-separable preferences between expenditures and time and

home production efficiency and disutility of home work heterogeneity into a standard incomplete

markets model with uninsurable risk.

    We reach several substantial conclusions. We find that home production amplifies welfare-based

differences across households and inequality is larger than we thought. Our result is surprising

given that a priori one could expect home production to compress welfare differences originating

in the market sector when households are sufficiently willing to substitute between market expen-

ditures and time in the production of home goods. We show that home production efficiency is
an important source of within-age and life-cycle differences in consumption expenditures and time

allocation across households. Through the lens of the model we infer that home production does
not offset differences that originate in the market sector because production efficiency differences
in the home sector are significant and the time input in home production does not covary with

consumption and wages in the cross section of households.




                                                 50
References
Acemoglu, D., and D. Autor (2011): “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Em-
  ployment and Earnings,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter, and D. Card,
  pp. 1043–171. Elsevier.

Aguiar, M., and M. Bils (2015): “Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequality?,”
  American Economic Review, 105(9), 2725–2756.

Aguiar, M., and E. Hurst (2005): “Consumption versus Expenditure,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 113(5), 919–948.

          (2007): “Life-Cycle Prices and Production,” American Economic Review, 97(5), 1533–
  1559.

          (2013): “Deconstructing Life Cycle Expenditure,” Journal of Political Economy, 121(3),
  437–492.

Aguiar, M., E. Hurst, and L. Karabarbounis (2013): “Time Use During the Great Reces-
  sion,” American Economic Review, 103(5), 1664–1696.

Aiyagari, R. (1994): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Savings,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 109(3), 659–684.

Attanasio, O., E. Hurst, and L. Pistaferri (2015): “The Evolution of Income, Consump-
  tion, and Leisure Inequality in the United States, 1980-2010,” in Improving the Measurement of
  Consumer Expenditures, pp. 100–40. NBER Chapters.

Attanasio, O., and L. Pistaferri (2016): “Consumption Inequality,” Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, 30(2), 3–28.

Baxter, M., and U. J. Jermann (1999): “Household Production and the Excess Sensitivity
  of Consumption to Current Income,” American Economic Review, 89(4), 902–920.

Becker, G. S. (1965): “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, 75(299),
  493–517.

Benabou, R. (2002): “Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous-Agent Economy: What
  Levels of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency?,” Econometrica, 70(2), 481–517.

Benhabib, J., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1991): “Homework in Macroeconomics: House-
  hold Production and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Journal of Political Economy, 99(6), 1166–1187.



                                               51
Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri, and I. Preston (2008): “Consumption Inequality and Partial
  Insurance,” American Economic Review, 98(5), 1887–1921.

Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri, and I. Saporta-Eksten (2016): “Consumption Inequality
  and Family Labor Supply,” American Economic Review, 106(2), 387–435.

         (2018): “Children, Time Allocation and Consumption Insurance,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 126(1), 73–115.

Boerma, J., and L. Karabarbounis (2020): “Labor Market Trends and the Changing Value
 of Time,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 21, 729–54.

Bridgman, B., A. Dugan, M. Lal, M. Osborne, and S. Villones (2012): “Accounting for
  Household Production in the National Accounts: An Update, 1965-2014,” Survey of Current
  Business, 92, 23–36.

Cardia, E., and P. Gomme (2018): “Market Work, Housework and Childcare: A Time Use
 Approach,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 29, 1–24.

Cherchye, L., T. Demuynck, B. De Rock, and F. Vermeulen (2017): “Household Con-
  sumption When the Marriage is Stable,” American Economic Review, 107(6), 1507–1534.

Chetty, R., A. Guren, D. Manoli, and A. Weber (2012): “Does Indivisible Labor Explain
  the Difference Between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of Extensive Margin
  Elasticities,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 27, 1–56.

Constantinides, G. M., and D. Duffie (1996): “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Con-
  sumers,” Journal of Political Economy, 104(2), 219–240.

Deaton, A. (1997): “The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to
  Development Policy,” World Bank.

Deaton, A., and C. Paxson (1994): “Intertemporal Choice and Inequality,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 102(3), 437–467.

Dotsey, M., W. Li, and F. Yang (2014): “Consumption and Time Use Over the Life Cycle,”
  International Economic Review, 55(3), 665–692.

Floden, M. (2001): “The Effectiveness of Government Debt and Transfers as Insurance,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 48(1), 81–108.

Frazis, H., and J. Stewart (2011): “How Does Household Production Affect Measured Income
 Inequality?,” Journal of Population Economics, 24, 3–22.


                                              52
Ghez, G., and G. S. Becker (1975): The Allocation of Time and Goods Over the Life Cycle.
  New York: Columbia University Press.

Gourinchas, P.-O., and J. A. Parker (2002): “Consumption Over the Life Cycle,” Econo-
  metrica, 70(1), 47–89.

Greenwood, J., and Z. Hercowitz (1991): “The Allocation of Capital and Time Over the
  Business Cycle,” Journal of Political Economy, 99(6), 1188–1214.

Gronau, R. (1986): “Home Production: A Survey,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by
  O. Ashenfelter, and R. Layard, pp. 274–304. Elsevier.

Guner, N., R. Kaygusuz, and G. Ventura (2014): “Income Taxation of U.S. Households:
  Facts and Parametric Estimates,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 17(4), 559–581.

Guryan, J., E. Hurst, and M. Kearney (2008): “Parental Education and Parental Time
  with Children,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(3), 23–46.

Heathcote, J., F. Perri, and G. L. Violante (2010): “Unequal We Stand: An Empir-
 ical Analysis of Economic Inequality in the United States, 1967–2006,” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 13, 15–51.

Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. L. Violante (2008): “Insurance and Oppor-
  tunities: A Welfare Analysis of Labor Market Risk,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(3),
  501–525.

         (2014): “Consumption and Labor Supply with Partial Insurance: An Analytical Frame-
  work,” American Economic Review, 104(7), 2075–2126.

Hsieh, C.-T., and P. Klenow (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
  India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403–1448.

Huggett, M. (1993): “The Risk Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agents Incomplete-Insurance
  Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17(5–6), 953–969.

Jones, C. I., and P. J. Klenow (2016): “Beyond GDP? Welfare Across Countries and Time,”
  American Economic Review, 106(9), 2426–2457.

Kaplan, G. (2012): “Inequality and the Life Cycle,” Quantitative Economics, 3(3), 471–525.

Karabarbounis, L. (2014): “Home Production, Labor Wedges, and International Business
 Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 64, 68–84.

Krebs, T. (2003): “Growth and Welfare Effects of Business Cycles in Economies with Idiosyn-
  cratic Human Capital Risk,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 6(4), 846–868.

                                              53
Krueger, D., and F. Perri (2003): “On the Welfare Consequences of the Increase in Inequality
  in the United States,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 18, 83–123.

          (2006): “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality? Evidence and The-
  ory,” Review of Economic Studies, 73(1), 163–193.

Lise, J., and K. Yamada (2019): “Household Sharing and Commitment: Evidence from Panel
  Data on Individual Expenditures and Time Use,” Review of Economic Studies, 86(5), 2184–
  2219.

McGrattan, E., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1997): “An Equilibrium Model of the
  Business Cycle with Household Production and Fiscal Policy,” International Economic Review,
  38(2), 267–290.

Pistaferri, L. (2003): “Anticipated and Unanticipated Wage Changes, Wage Risk, and In-
  tertemporal Labor Supply,” Journal of Labor Economics, 21, 729–54.

Rios-Rull, J.-V. (1993): “Working in the Market, Working at Home, and the Acquisition of
  Skills: A General-Equilibrium Approach,” American Economic Review, 83(4), 893–907.

Rupert, P., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1995): “Estimating Substitution Elasticities in
  Household Production Models,” Economic Theory, 6(1), 179–193.

          (2000): “Homework in Labor Economics: Household Production and Intertemporal
  Substitution,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(3), 557–579.

Storesletten, K., C. I. Telmer, and A. Yaron (2004): “Consumption and Risk Sharing
  Over the Life Cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(3), 609–633.




                                             54
                            Inferring Inequality with Home Production
                                                     Online Appendix
                                   Job Boerma and Loukas Karabarbounis



A       Proofs

In this appendix, we derive the equilibrium allocations presented in Table 1 in the main text and
prove the observational equivalence theorem. We proceed in four steps. First, in anticipation of

the no-trade result, we solve the planner problems. Second, we postulate equilibrium allocations

and prices using the solutions to the planner problems. Third, we establish that the postulated

equilibrium allocations and prices indeed constitute an equilibrium as defined in Section 2 in the

main text. Finally, we show how to invert the equilibrium allocations and identify the sources of

heterogeneity leading to these allocations.

A.1       Preliminaries

In what follows, we define the following state vectors. The sources of heterogeneity differentiating

households within each island ` is given by the vector ζ j :


 ζtj = (κjt , υtε ) ∈ Ztj .                                                                      (A.1)


Households can trade bonds within each island contingent on the vector sj :


 sjt = (Btj , αtj , κjt , υtε ).                                                                 (A.2)


We define a household ι by a sequence of all dimensions of heterogeneity:

       j    j
 ι = {θK , DK , B j , αj , κj , υ ε }.                                                           (A.3)


Finally, we denote the history of all sources of heterogeneity up to period t with the vector:


 σtj = (θK,t
         j      j
             , DK,t , Btj , αtj , κjt , υtε , ..., θK,j
                                                    j      j
                                                        , DK,j , Bjj , αjj , κjj , υjε ).        (A.4)


                                                                      1
We denote conditional probabilities by f t,j (·|·). For example, the probability that we observe σtj
                j
conditional on σt−1 is f t,j (σtj |σt−1
                                    j
                                        ) and the probability that we observe sjt conditional on sjt−1 is

f t,j (sjt |sjt−1 ).

      We use υ to denote innovations to the processes and Φυ to denote the distribution of the innova-
tion. We allow the distributions of innovations to vary over time, {Φυtα , ΦυtB , Φυtκ , Φυtε , ΦjθK,t , ΦjDK,t },

and the initial distributions to vary over cohorts j, {Φjα,j , ΦjB,j , Φjκ,j } . We assume that both θK,t
                                                                                                      j

     j
and DK,t are orthogonal to the innovations {υtB , υtα , υtκ , υtε } and that all innovations are drawn

independently from each other.

A.2         Planner Problems

In every period t and in every island `, the planner solves a static problem which consists of finding

the allocations maximizing average utility for households on the island subject to an aggregate

resource constraint. We omit t and ` from the notation for convenience.

A.2.1        No Home Production, ωK = 0

The planner chooses an allocation {cM , hM } to maximize:
 Z " 1−γ                        1
                                  #
      cM − 1 (exp(B)hM )1+ η
              −                     dΦζ (ζ) ,                                                              (A.5)
  Z
       1−γ            1 + η1

subject to an island resource constraint for market goods:
  Z                    Z
        cM dΦζ (ζ) =       z̃M hM dΦζ (ζ) .                                                                (A.6)
    Z                  Z

      Denoting by µ(α, B) the multiplier on the island resource constraint, the solution to this

problem is characterized by the following first-order conditions (for every household ι):


  [cM ] : c−γ
           M = µ(α, B),                                                                                    (A.7)
                       1     1
  [hM ] : exp(B)1+ η hM η = z̃M µ(α, B).                                                                   (A.8)


Equation (A.7) implies that market consumption is equalized for every ι on the island and, thus,
there is full consumption insurance. Combining equations (A.6) to (A.8), we solve for market



                                                        2
consumption and market hours for every ι:
                                        1
                                    1η
                R  1+η                η +γ

               Zz̃M    dΦζ (ζ)
 cM    =                            ,                                                                       (A.9)
            exp η 1 + η1 B
             hR                 i− 1 γ
                     1+η            η +γ
                  z̃
                Z M      dΦζ (ζ)
           η
 hM    = z̃M                 η1 +γ .                                                                        (A.10)
              exp 1 + η1 B

A.2.2      Home Production, ωK > 0

The planner chooses {cM , hM , hK } to maximize:
 Z                        P              1+ η1 
               exp(B)hM + exp(DK )hK
    log c −                                       dΦζ (ζ),                                                    (A.11)
                                                 
                                 1
                            1+ η
   Z

                                                                                       φ
                                                                                      φ−1
                                                              φ−1       P        φ−1
where consumption is given by c =                        cM    φ    +    (θK hK ) φ        subject to the island market

resource constraint (A.6).

   Denoting by µ(α, B, DK , θK ) the multiplier on the island resource constraint, the solution to

this problem is characterized by the following first-order conditions (for every household ι):
          φ−1 −1 − 1
  [cM ] : c φ     cMφ = µ(α, B, DK , θK ),                                                                      (A.12)
                      X                η1       µ(α, B, DK , θK )
 [hM ] : exp(B)hM +       exp(DK )hK        = z̃M                   ,                                           (A.13)
                                                      exp(B)
                                                       η1                                         −1
                           X                                       φ−1
                                                                     φ
                                                                                   φ−1
                                                                                          −1     hK φ
 [hK ] :       exp(B)hM +       exp(DK )hK                    = θK              c    φ                          (A.14)
                                                                                                exp(DK )
  Combining equations (A.12) to (A.14), we solve for the ratio of home hours to consumption:
                   !φ
 cM      exp (DK )      1−φ
    =                 θK   .                                                         (A.15)
 hK    exp (B) z̃M

   Substituting these ratios into equations (A.12) to (A.14), we derive:
                  1                               1
 cM =                                                               φ−1 ,                                      (A.16)
           µ(α, B, DK , θK )        P    φ−1
                                                 
                                                     exp(B)/z̃M
                               1+       θK            exp(DK )
                                                               φ
                                     φ−1         exp(B)/z̃M
                  1                 θK            exp(DK )
 hK =                                                               φ−1 .                                      (A.17)
           µ(α, B, DK , θK )        P    φ−1
                                                 
                                                     exp(B)/z̃M
                               1+       θK            exp(DK )


                                                                        3
   These expressions yield solutions for {cM , hM , hK } given a multiplier µ(α, B, DK , θK ). The
multiplier is equal to the inverse of the market value of total consumption:

           X exp (DK )                        1
cM + z̃M                     hK =                        .                                     (A.18)
                   exp (B)             µ(α, B, DK , θK )

The equality follows from equations (A.16) to (A.17).
   Substituting equation (A.13) into equation (A.6), we obtain the solution for µ(α, B, DK , θK ):

                                  exp(B)
 µ(α, B, DK , θK ) =                                 1 .
                                                    1+η                                       (A.19)
                      R          1+η
                             Z z̃M dΦζ (ζ)

The denominator is an expectation independent of ζ. Therefore, µ is independent of ζ. We also

note that µ(α, B, DK , θK ) in the model with home production equals µ(α, B) in the model without

home production under γ = 1. Given this solution for µ(α, B, DK , θK ), we obtain the solutions:
        hR                      1
                             i 1+η
               1+η
           Z z̃M dΦζ (ζ)                                  1
 cM =                                                                     φ−1 ,               (A.20)
                  exp (B)                     P    φ−1
                                                         
                                                             exp(B)/z̃M
                                     1+           θK          exp(DK )
        hR                      1
                             i 1+η                                   φ
               1+η                             φ−1       exp(B)/z̃M
           Z z̃M dΦζ (ζ)                      θK          exp(DK )
 hK =                                                                     φ−1 ,               (A.21)
                  exp (B)                     P    φ−1
                                                         
                                                             exp(B)/z̃M
                                     1+           θK          exp(DK )
             hR                   i−    1
                      1+η                 1
                                       1+ η

        η         Z z̃M dΦζ (ζ)                   X exp (DK )
 hM = z̃M                                    −                        hK .
                      exp B                               exp (B)

A.3     Postulating Equilibrium Allocations and Prices

We postulate an equilibrium in four steps.

                                                                            j                  j
  1. We postulate that the equilibrium features no trade across islands, x(ζt+1 ; ι) = 0, ∀ι, ζt+1 .

                                         
  2. We postulate that the solutions cM,t , hM,t for the model without home production and
     
       cM,t , hM,t , hK,t for the model with home production from the planner problems in Section

      A.2 constitute components of the equilibrium for each model.

  3. We use the sequential budget constraints to postulate equilibrium holdings for the bonds

      b` (sjt ; ι) which are traded within islands. For the models without home production these are

                                                                   4
         given by:
                                 ∞
                             "                        j      j
                                                                                             #
                                               µt+n (αt+n , Bt+n )
          b` (sjt ; ι) = E
                                 X
                                       (βδ)n
                                                                                            
                                                                         cM,t+n − ỹt+n           ,                            (A.22)
                                 n=0               µt (αtj , Btj )
                                       1−τ1
         where ỹ = z̃M hM = (1 − τ0 )zM    hM denotes after-tax labor income.

         For the model with home production, bonds b` (sjt ; ι) are given by the same expression but

         using the marginal utility µ(α, B, DK , θK ) instead of µ(α, B). As shown above, the two

         marginal utilities are characterized by the same equation (A.19) under γ = 1.

   4. We use the intertemporal marginal rates of substitution implied by the planner solutions to
         postulate asset prices for b` (sjt+1 ; ι) and x(ζt+1
                                                          j
                                                              ; ι). For the model without home production,

         we obtain:
                                        1                                         1
                                                        !                                         !
                                        η   +1                                    η   +1
      qb` (sjt+1 )   = βδ exp γ         1
                                                  B
                                                 υt+1       exp − (1 − τ1 ) γ     1
                                                                                            α
                                                                                           υt+1
                                        η   +γ                                    η   +γ
                                                                                                      γ
             "R                                                                             #− 1 η
                     κ           κ                  ε         ε
                                                       R                
             exp Aυt+1      κ (υ
                        dΦυt+1                                        η +γ
                                t+1 ) exp Aυt+1 dΦυt+1 (υt+1 )
                                                           ε
         ×                                                                 f t+1,j (sjt+1 |sjt ), (A.23)
                            exp (Aυtε ) dΦυtε (υtε )
                          R

                            1                                               1
                                        !                                                !
                              + 1                                             +  1
                     Z                                  Z
                            η       B                 B                     η        α                 α
      qx (Zt+1 ) = βδ exp γ 1      υt+1  dΦυt+1B (υt+1 )  exp − (1 − τ1 ) γ 1       υt+1    dΦυt+1α (υ
                                                                                                      t+1 )
                            η +γ                                            η +γ
                                                                                                      γ
             "R                                                                            #− 1 η
                          κ                    κ                  ε                   ε
                                                       R                
                  exp   Aυt+1         dΦυt+1
                                          κ (υ
                                              t+1 ) exp Aυt+1                dΦυt+1 (υt+1 ) η +γ
                                                                                ε
                                                                                                               κ      ε
                                                                                                                                 
         ×                                                                                                P   υt+1 , υt+1   ∈ Zt+1 ,
                                          exp (Aυtε ) dΦυtε (υtε )
                                        R

                                                                                                                             (A.24)
         where A ≡ (1 + η)(1 − τ1 ). For the model with home production, we obtain the same
         expressions under γ = 1.

A.4          Verifying the Equilibrium Allocations and Prices

We verify that the equilibrium postulated in Section A.3 constitutes an equilibrium by showing

that the postulated equilibrium allocations solve the households’ problem and that all markets

clear.

A.4.1        Household Problem

The problem for a household ι born in period j is described in the main text. We denote the

Lagrange multiplier on the household’s budget constraint by µ̃t . We drop ι from the notation for

                                                                     5
simplicity.

No Home Production, ωK = 0. The optimality conditions are:

  (βδ)t−j c−γ   t,j j
           M,t f (σt |σj ) = µ̃t ,                                                                          (A.25)
                     1       1
  (βδ)t−j exp(Bt )1+ η hM,t η f t,j (σtj |σj ) = z̃M,t
                                                   j
                                                       µ̃t ,                                                (A.26)
              µ̃t+1
 qb` (sjt+1 ) =       ,                                                                                     (A.27)
                µ̃t
               Z
                    µ̃t+1 B       α
 qx (Zt+1 ) =             dυt+1 dυt+1 .                                                                     (A.28)
                      µ̃t

Comparing the planner solutions to the household solutions we verify that they coincide for market

consumption and hours when the multipliers are related by:

 µ̃t = (βδ)t−j f t,j (σtj |σj )µ(αtj , Btj ).                                                               (A.29)

Therefore, the Euler equations become:
                          j      j
                       µ(αt+1 , Bt+1 )
 qb` (sjt+1 ) = βδ       j     j
                                              j
                                    f t+1,j (σt+1 |σtj ),                                                   (A.30)
                      µ(αt , Bt )
                             j      j
                       µ(αt+1    , Bt+1 ) t+1,j j
                     Z
 qx (Zt+1 ) =     βδ           j    j
                                         f      (σt+1 |σtj )dυt+1
                                                              B     α
                                                                  dυt+1 .                                   (A.31)
                         µ(αt , Bt )


Home Production, ωK > 0. We denote total hours, taking into account the respective disutility,
                     P
by h̃ = exp(B)(hM ) + exp(DK )(hK ). Using again the correspondence between the planner and
                                                                                      j
the household first-order conditions to relate the multipliers µ̃t and µ(αtj , Btj , DK,t    j
                                                                                          , θK,t ), we write
the optimality conditions as:

   z̃M,t  φ−1 −1 − φ1     1

          c φ     cM,t = h̃tη ,                                                                             (A.32)
 exp(Bt )
       φ−1
       φ
     θK,t          φ−1 −1 − 1       1

                   c φ     hK,tφ = h̃tη ,                                                                   (A.33)
 exp(DK,t )
                       Z      j      j      j        j
                           µ(αt+1 , Bt+1 , DK,t+1 , θK,t+1 )
 qb` (sjt+1 )   = βδ               j    j    j    j
                                                                       j
                                                            f t+1,j (σt+1 |σtj )dθK,t+1
                                                                                  j        j
                                                                                        dDK,t+1  ,            (A.34)
                              µ(αt , Bt , DK,t , θK,t )
                       Z      j       j       j       j
                           µ(αt+1 , Bt+1  , DK,t+1 , θK,t+1 ) t+1,j j
 qx (Zt+1 ) = βδ                    j    j    j    j
                                                             f       (σt+1 |σtj )dυt+1
                                                                                    B    α
                                                                                       dυt+1   j
                                                                                             dθK,t+1   j
                                                                                                     dDK,t+1 .
                               µ(αt , Bt , DK,t , θK,t )
                                                                                                            (A.35)

                                                               6
A.4.2      Euler Equations

We next verify that the Euler equations are satisfied at the postulated equilibrium allocations and
prices.

No Home Production, ωK = 0. Using the marginal utility of market consumption of the
planner problem µ(αtj , Btj ), we write the Euler equation for the bonds b` (sjt+1 ) at the postulated

equilibrium as:
                          j      j
                       µ(αt+1 , Bt+1 )
 qb` (sjt+1 )   = βδ                                 j
                                           f t+1,j (σt+1 |σtj )                                                                       (A.36)
                         µ(αtj , Btj )
                                                                                                     γ
                               1
                                                               1+η                    − 1 η
                                η
                                  +1    j       R        j                           j       η +γ
                       exp γ    1
                                  +γ
                                       Bt+1            z̃M,t+1           dΦζ j     (ζt+1 )
                                η                                            t+1
                                                                                                                   j
                = βδ                                                                        γ            f t+1,j (σt+1 |σtj ),
                               1                           −                           η

                                 η
                                   +1 j    R j 1+η         j
                                                                                          1 +γ
                                                                                          η
                           exp γ 1 +γ Bt     z̃M,t  dΦζ j (ζt )
                                       η                                    t



where the second line follows from equations (A.7) and (A.9). Using that Btj follows a random

walk-process with innovation υtB we rewrite qb` (sjt+1 ) as:
                                                                                                         γ
                                                                 1+η                       − 1 η
                                                           j                             j       η +γ
                                1
                                                  ! R    z̃M,t+1           dΦζ j       (ζt+1 )
                                η   +1                                           t+1
 qb` (sjt+1 )   = βδ exp γ      1
                                            B
                                           υt+1                                                  γ           f t+1,j (sjt+1 |sjt ).   (A.37)
                                η   +γ                           1+η            − 1 η
                                                        R      j                j     η +γ
                                                             z̃M,t      dΦζ j (ζt )
                                                                                   t



    To simplify the fraction in qb` (sjt+1 ) we use that:
                                                                   
   j
 z̃M,t+1 = (1 − τ0 ) exp (1 − τ1 ) αtj + υt+1 α
                                                 + κjt + υt+1
                                                          κ      ε
                                                              + υt+1    .

Given that A = (1 + η) (1 − τ1 ), the expectation over the random variables in the numerator is
given by:
    Z                     
              j    κ     ε           j
      exp A κt + υt+1 + υt+1 dΦζ j (ζt+1 )
                                 t+1
    Z                  Z                        Z
            j       j          κ
                                          κ           ε
                                                                     ε
  = exp(Aκt )dΦκj (κt ) exp Aυt+1 dΦυt+1 (υt+1 ) exp Aυt+1
                                       κ                     dΦυt+1
                                                                ε   (υt+1 ),                                                          (A.38)
                            t



where the final equality follows from the assumption that the innovations are drawn independently.

Similarly, the expectation over the random variables in the denominator equals:
 Z                        Z
             j         j
    exp(Aκt )dΦκj ,t (κt ) exp (Aυtε ) dΦυtε (υtε ).                                                                                  (A.39)

                                                                     7
As a result, the price qb` (sjt+1 ) is:
                               1                                       1
                                               !                                       !
                               η   +1                                  η   +1
 qb` (sjt+1 )   = βδ exp γ     1
                                         B
                                        υt+1       exp − (1 − τ1 ) γ   1
                                                                                 α
                                                                                υt+1
                               η   +γ                                  η   +γ
                                                                                                γ
                    "R                                                                     #− 1 η
                               κ            κ                  ε    ε
                                                        R                 
                         exp Aυt+1 dΦυt+1
                                       κ (υ                                                   η +γ
                                           t+1 ) exp Aυt+1 dΦυt+1 (υt+1 )
                                                                 ε
                ×                                                                                     f t+1,j (sjt+1 |sjt ),
                                       exp (Aυtε ) dΦυtε (υtε )
                                     R

                                                                                                                               (A.40)

where f t+1,j (sjt+1 |sjt ) = f (υt+1
                                  B )f (υ α )f (υ κ )f (υ ε ). This confirms our guess in equation (A.23).
                                         t+1     t+1     t+1

The key observation is that the distributions for next-period innovations are independent of the

current period state and, therefore, the term in square brackets is independent of the state vector

which differentiates islands `. As a result, all islands ` have the same bond prices, qb` (sjt+1 ) =
     B , υα
              
Qb υt+1    t+1 .

    We next calculate the bond price for a set of states Vt+1 ⊆ Vt+1 :
                          1                                               1
                                     !                                               !
                            + 1                                             + 1
                 Z                                    Z
                          η                                               η
 qb` (Vt+1 ) = βδ exp γ 1        B              B                                α             α
                                                                                                  
                                υt+1   dΦυt+1
                                          B    υt+1     exp − (1 − τ1 ) γ 1     υt+1   dΦυt+1
                                                                                          α   υt+1
                  VB      η +γ                         Vα                 η +γ
                                                                                                γ
                    "R                                                                     #− 1 η
                               κ            κ                  ε    ε
                                                        R                 
                         exp Aυt+1 dΦυt+1
                                       κ (υ                                                    η +γ
                                           t+1 ) exp Aυt+1 dΦυt+1 (υt+1 )
                                                                 ε
                ×                                                                                     .                        (A.41)
                                       exp (Aυtε ) dΦυtε (υtε )
                                     R


Similarly, all islands face the same price qb` (Vt+1 ) = Qb (Vt+1 ).
                                                                                              B , υ α ):
    Finally, we calculate the price for a claim which does not depend on the realization of (υt+1  t+1

                             1                                               1
                                        !                                               !
                             η +1 B                                          η +1 α
                 Z                                       Z
  `                                                 B                                                α
                                                                                                      
 qb (Vt+1 ) = βδ      exp γ 1      υt+1 dΦυt+1 B  υt+1     exp − (1 − τ1 ) γ 1     υt+1 dΦυt+1 α  υt+1
                   VB       η +γ                          Vα                 η +γ
                                                                                                γ
                    "R                                                                     #− 1 η
                               κ            κ                  ε    ε
                                                        R                 
                         exp Aυt+1 dΦυt+1
                                       κ (υ                                                    η +γ
                                           t+1 ) exp Aυt+1 dΦυt+1 (υt+1 )
                                                                 ε
                ×                                                                                     .                        (A.42)
                                       exp (Aυtε ) dΦυtε (υtε )
                                     R


All islands face the same price qb` (Vt+1 ) = Qb (Vt+1 ).

    By no arbitrage, the prices of bonds x and b which are contingent on the same set of states must

be equalized. Therefore, the price of a claim traded across islands for some set Zt+1 is equalized
across islands at the no-trade equilibrium and given by:

                 κ      ε
                                    
 qx (Zt+1 ) =P (υt+1 , υt+1 ) ∈ Zt+1 Qb (Vt+1 ),                                                                               (A.43)


                                                               8
          κ , υε ) ∈ Z                                 κ      ε
                         
where P (υt+1  t+1    t+1 denotes the probability of (υt+1 , υt+1 ) being a member of Zt+1 . The

expression for qx (Zt+1 ) confirms our guess in equation (A.24)

Home Production, ωK > 0. For the model with home production, we use the solution for the

marginal utility of market consumption in the planner problem µ(αtj , Btj , DK,t
                                                                             j      j
                                                                                 , θK,t ) to write the

Euler equation for the bonds b` (sjt+1 ) at the postulated equilibrium as:
                              j      j      j        j
                           µ(αt+1 , Bt+1 , DK,t+1 , θK,t+1 )
                       Z
 qb` (sjt+1 )   = βδ                                                              j
                                                                        f t+1,j (σt+1 |σtj )dθK,t+1
                                                                                              j       j
                                                                                                    dDK,t+1                   (A.44)
                                     µ(αtj , Btj , DK,t
                                                    j      j
                                                        , θK,t )
                       Z                                                                1
                                                                                    − 1+η
                                                    R         1+η
                                              j             j                  j
                                   exp       Bt+1         z̃M,t+1      dΦζ j (ζt+1 )
                                                                               t+1
                                                                                                           j
                = βδ                                                           1
                                                                           − 1+η                f t+1,j (σt+1 |σtj )dθK,t+1
                                                                                                                       j       j
                                                                                                                             dDK,t+1 .
                                              R       1+η
                                              j       j                j
                                         exp Bt     z̃M,t      dΦζ j (ζt )
                                                                               t



where the second equality follows from equation (A.19). Using equations (A.38) and (A.39), and
               j          j
the fact that θK,t+1 and DK,t+1 are orthogonal to the innovations, the price qb` (sjt+1 ) simplifies to:
                                                             
 qb` (sjt+1 )   = βδ exp            B
                                   υt+1                α
                                          − (1 − τ1 ) υt+1
                                                                                 # 1
                                                                              ε ) − 1+η
                  "R
                           κ              κ ) exp Aυ ε
                                             R                  
                     exp Aυt+1       κ (υ
                                 dΦυt+1  t+1                 t+1   dΦυ ε   (υt+1
                ×                                                      t+1
                                                                                        f t+1,j (sjt+1 |sjt ). (A.45)
                                     exp (Aυtε ) dΦυtε (υtε )
                                   R


The price qb` (sjt+1 ) is identical to equation (A.40) for the model without home production under

γ = 1. The remainder of the argument is identical to the argument for the model without home

production.

A.4.3         Household’s Budget Constraint

We now verify our guess for the bond positions b`t (sjt ) and confirm that the household budget
constraint holds at the postulated equilibrium allocations. The proof to this claim is identical for

both models. We define the deficit term by dt ≡ cM,t − ỹt . Using the expression for the price
qb` (sjt+1 ) in equation (A.30), the budget constraint at the no-trade equilibrium is given by:
                                      j      j      j        j
                                   µ(αt+1 , Bt+1 , DK,t+1 , θK,t+1 )
                           Z
 b`t (sjt )   = dt + βδ                                                     b`t+1 (sjt+1 )f t+1 (σt+1
                                                                                                  j
                                                                                                      |σtj )dsjt+1 dθK,t+1
                                                                                                                     j       j
                                                                                                                           dDK,t+1 .
                                          µ(αtj , Btj , DK,t
                                                         j      j
                                                             , θK,t )

By substituting forward using equation (A.30), we confirm the guess for b`t (sjt ) in equation (A.22)

and show that the household budget constraint holds at the postulated equilibrium allocations.

                                                                        9
A.4.4         Goods Market Clearing

Aggregating the resource constraints in every island, we obtain that the allocations solving the
planner problems satisfy the aggregate goods market clearing condition:
 Z                                Z
       cM,t dΦ(ι) + G =                 zM,t hM,t dΦ(ι).                                                         (A.46)
   ι                                ι

A.4.5         Asset Market Clearing
                                                                                                  R      j
We now confirm that asset markets clear. The asset market clearing conditions                       ι x(ζt ; ι)dΦ(ι)   =0

hold trivially in a no-trade equilibrium with x(ζtj ; ι) = 0. Next, we confirm that asset markets

within each island ` also clear, that is ι∈` b` (sjt ; ι)dΦ(ι) = 0 , ∀`, sjt .
                                        R

     Omitting the household index ι for simplicity, we substitute the postulated bond holdings in

equation (A.22) into the asset market clearing conditions:
                   Z "X   ∞             j          j       j            j
                                                                                      #
                                    µ(αt+n    , Bt+n   , DK,t+n      , θK,t+n  )
 Z
     ` j                          n
    b (st )dΦ(ι) = E          (βδ)                                               dt+n dΦ(ι)
                         n=0              µ(αtj , Btj , DK,tj        j
                                                                 , θK,t  )
                    ∞               j        j        j            j
                                µ(αt+n  , Bt+n    , DK,t+n     , θK,t+n    )
                              Z
                                                                                      j     j      j
                   X        n
                 =     (βδ)               j      j     j       j
                                                                             dt+n f (σt+n |σt−1 )dσt+n dΦ(ι).
                   n=0                µ(α t , B t  , D    ,
                                                      K,t K,tθ      )

                                        j                                         j     j
For simplicity we omit conditioning on σt−1 and write the density function as f (σt+n |σt−1 ) =
       B })f ({υ α })f ({υ κ })f ({υ ε })f ({θ
f ({υt+n             t+n          t+n         t+n        K,t+n })f ({DK,t+n }). Further, the expression for the
                                                                                                   B , υα
                                                                                                            
growth in marginal utility is identical between the two models and we denote it by Q υt+n                t+n ≡
    j       j     j       j            j     j
µ(αt+n  ,Bt+n   ,DK,t+n ,θK,t+n )   µ(αt+n ,Bt+n )                                            R ` j
          j   j   j
      µ(α ,B ,D ,θ )   j          =      j   j
                                      µ(α ,B )
                                                   . Hence, we write aggregate  bond holdings   b (st )dΦ(ι) as:
         t    t     K,t   K,t                   t   t


       ∞
       X              Z Z
                  n                B      α
                                                         B          α          κ          ε
             (βδ)               Q υt+n , υt+n   dt+n f ({υt+n })f ({υt+n })f ({υt+n })f ({υt+n })f ({θK,t+n }) . . .
       n=0
                                   B       α       κ       ε       j         j
           . . . f ({DK,t+n })d{υt+n  }d{υt+n }d{υt+n  }d{υt+n }d{θK,t+n }d{DK,t+n }dΦ(ι)
   ∞
   X       Z
         n               κ          ε        κ       ε
 =   (βδ)      dt+n f ({υt+n })f ({υt+n })d{υt+n }d{υt+n }dΦ(ι)
  Zn=0
       B     α          B          α                                  B       α
                 
 × Q υt+n , υt+n   f ({υt+n })f ({υt+n })f ({θK,t+n })f ({DK,t+n })d{υt+n }d{υt+n }d{θK,t+n }d{DK,t+n }.


Recalling that the deficit terms equal dt = cM,t − ỹt , the bond market clearing condition holds

because the first term is zero by the island-level resource constraint.


                                                                10
A.5      Observational Equivalence Theorem

We derive the identified sources of heterogeneity presented in Table 2. Our strategy is to invert
the equilibrium allocations presented in Table 1 and solve for the unique sources of heterogeneity
leading to these allocations. The identification is defined up to a constant because the constant

Cs appearing in the equations of Table 2 depends on the ε’s.

A.5.1      No Home Production, ωK = 0

Given cross-sectional data {cM,t , hM,t , zM,t }ι and parameters γ, η, τ0 , τ1 , we show that there exists
a unique {αt , εt , Bt }ι such that the equilibrium allocations generated by the model are equal to

the data for every household ι. We divide the solution for cM with the solution for hM to obtain:
                                                        Z
  cM,t              −η(1−τ )
       = (1 − τ0 ) zM,t 1 exp((1 − τ1 )(1 + η)αt )             exp((1 − τ1 )(1 + η)εt )dΦζ j (ζtj ) .   (A.47)
  hM,t                                                    ζt
                                                                                             t



Since the left-hand side is a positive constant and the right-hand is increasing in αt , the value of

αt is determined uniquely for every household ι from this equation. Since log zM,t = αt + εt , εt is

also uniquely determined. Finally, we can use the solution for cM,t or hM,t in Table 1 to solve for

a unique value of Bt .

A.5.2      Home Production, ωK > 0

Given cross-sectional data {cM,t , hM,t , zM,t , hN,t , hP,t }ι and parameters φ, γ, η, τ0 , τ1 , we show that

there exists a unique {αt , εt , Bt , θN,t , DP,t }ι such that the equilibrium allocations generated by the
model are equal to the data for every household ι.

   Dividing the solution for hN with the solution for cM we obtain θN from the following equation:

  hN,t    φ−1 −φ
       = θN,t z̃M,t .                                                                                   (A.48)
  cM,t

Next, we divide the solutions for hP with the solution for hN , we solve for the ratio of disutilities
exp(DP )/ exp(B):
                    !φ−1                 φ
  hP,t       θP,t             exp(Bt )
       =      j
                                               .                                                        (A.49)
  hN,t       θN,t            exp(DP,t )



                                                     11
    Next, we divide the solution for hT with the solution for cM and use equation (A.48) to obtain:
                 exp(DP,t )               η(1−τ1 )
 hM,t + hN,t +    exp(Bt ) hP,t          zM,t                      exp(−(1 + η)(1 − τ1 )αtj )
                                     =
             cM,t                         1 − τ0          exp((1 + η)(1 − τ1 )εt )dΦζ j ,t (ζtj )
                                                     R
                                                         Zt
                                         
                                                      j
                                                          !φ−1                         !φ−1 
                                                    θN,t             exp (Bt ) /z̃M,t
                                     × 1 +           j
                                                                +                                  (A.50)
                                                    z̃M,t           exp DP,t /θP,t

Since the left-hand side is a positive constant and the right-hand is increasing in αt , the value of
αt is determined uniquely for every household ι from this equation. Since log zM,t = αt + εt , the εt
is also uniquely determined. Next, we can identify B using the first-order conditions with respect

to market consumption and equations (A.18), (A.48) and (A.49) to obtain:
                                                           φ1                        −η
                                                                          φ−1
                            c̄M,t                   c̄M,t                       hP,t
                            z̃M,t   + hN,t +        h̄P,t
                                                                   θP,t    φ
                                                                                z̃M,t
                    
 exp (1 + η) Bt =                                               φ1                          .      (A.51)
                                                                              φ−1
                                                        c̄M,t                       hP,t
                             h̄M,t + hN,t +             h̄P,t
                                                                       θP,t    φ
                                                                                    z̃M,t

Finally, once we know B, we can solve for DP from equation (A.49).


B      Additional Results

In this appendix we present summary statistics from various datasets and additional results and

sensitivity analyses.

    • Table A.1 shows summary statistics of wages and hours for married individuals in the ATUS

      and for married households in the CEX in which we have imputed home hours. The ATUS

      sample excludes respondents during weekends and, so, market hours are noticeably higher.

    • Tables A.2 and A.3 show summary statistics of wages and hours for married individuals in
      the ATUS by sex and education.

    • Tables A.4 and A.5 present summary statistics of wages, hours, and expenditures in the
      CEX and PSID samples.

    • Table A.6 presents the correlation matrix of observables and sources of heterogeneity in the

      two models.


                                                                        12
                   Table A.1: ATUS (Raw) versus CEX (Imputed) Samples

                           ATUS Married Individuals    CEX Married Households
          Age               All    25-44      45-65     All     25-44      45-65
          Mean hM          42.1    41.9       42.2      66.1     66.8       65.5
          Mean hN          12.5    14.6       10.5      21.3     25.4       17.3
          Mean hP          10.6    10.7       10.5      16.7     16.4       17.0
          corr(zM , hM )   0.06    0.03       0.08     -0.15     -0.14     -0.14
          corr(zM , hN )   0.01    0.04       -0.01     0.10     0.16       0.12
          corr(zM , hP )   -0.08   -0.06      -0.09     0.02     0.00       0.03
          corr(hM , hN )   -0.44   -0.46      -0.42    -0.25     -0.36     -0.23
          corr(hM , hP )   -0.45   -0.44      -0.46    -0.42     -0.42     -0.41
          corr(hN , hP )   0.10    0.14       0.08      0.15     0.20       0.17



• Figure A.1 presents distributions of the sources of heterogeneity in the two models.

• Table A.7 presents the welfare effects of eliminating heterogeneity within age groups.

• Figures A.2 and A.3 present the life-cycle means and variances of the sources of heterogeneity

  in the version of the PSID with food expenditures. We obtain these age profiles by regressing

  each inferred source of heterogeneity on age and year dummies and an individual fixed

  effect. Therefore, these age profiles reflect the within-household evolution of the sources of
  heterogeneity.




                                             13
                         Table A.2: Correlations in ATUS Married by Sex

                         ATUS All                   ATUS Men                      ATUS Women
Age              All      25-44     45-65    All     25-44     45-65      All       25-44   45-65
corr(zM , hM )   0.06      0.03     0.08     0.02    0.00      0.04       0.04      0.02    0.06
corr(zM , hN )   0.01      0.04     -0.01    0.03    0.07      0.01       0.03      0.05    0.01
corr(zM , hP )   -0.08    -0.06     -0.09   -0.02    0.00      -0.04      -0.08     -0.08   -0.09
corr(hM , hN )   -0.44    -0.46     -0.42   -0.40    -0.41     -0.39      -0.44     -0.47   -0.43
corr(hM , hP )   -0.45    -0.44     -0.46   -0.39    -0.38     -0.41      -0.46     -0.44   -0.47
corr(hN , hP )   0.10      0.14     0.08     0.06    0.09      0.05       0.07      0.10    0.07


                    Table A.3: Correlations in ATUS Married by Education

                         ATUS All            ATUS Less than College        ATUS College or More
Age              All      25-44     45-65    All     25-44     45-65      All       25-44   45-65
corr(zM , hM )   0.06      0.03     0.08     0.05    0.04      0.03       0.05      0.02    0.07
corr(zM , hN )   0.01      0.04     -0.01   -0.01    0.01      -0.01      -0.02     0.02    -0.04
corr(zM , hP )   -0.08    -0.06     -0.09   -0.05    -0.03     -0.06      -0.07     -0.06   -0.09
corr(hM , hN )   -0.44    -0.46     -0.42   -0.42    -0.44     -0.41      -0.47     -0.50   -0.45
corr(hM , hP )   -0.45    -0.44     -0.46   -0.45    -0.43     -0.46      -0.45     -0.45   -0.45
corr(hN , hP )   0.10      0.14     0.08     0.08    0.12      0.06       0.14      0.17    0.13




                                              14
  Table A.4: CEX/ATUS (1995-2016) versus PSID (1975-2014) Moments

                               CEX/ATUS                        PSID
Age                     All     25-44         45-65    All    25-44   45-65
Mean hM                66.1      66.8          65.5   67.8     65.3    70.3
Mean hN + hP           38.0      41.8          34.3   25.9     27.1    24.7
corr(zM , hM )         -0.15     -0.14        -0.14   -0.15   -0.15   -0.14
corr(zM , hN + hP )    0.09      0.12          0.10   0.00     0.02   -0.02
corr(zM , cfood
           M )         0.22      0.21          0.22   0.28     0.29    0.27
corr(hM , hN + hP )    -0.42     -0.49        -0.42   -0.24   -0.28   -0.20
corr(hM , cfood
           M )         0.10      0.09          0.12   0.06     0.06    0.08
corr(hN + hP , cfood
                M )    -0.03     -0.01        -0.02   0.01     0.03   -0.01


  Table A.5: CEX/ATUS (1995-2016) versus PSID (2004-2014) Moments

                               CEX/ATUS                        PSID
Age                    All      25-44         45-65   All     25-44   45-65
Mean hM                66.1     66.8          65.5    64.8    67.6    62.0
Mean hN + hP           38.0     41.8          34.3    24.3    24.1    24.6
corr(zM , hM )         -0.15    -0.14         -0.14   -0.09   -0.15   -0.06
corr(zM , hN + hP )    0.09     0.12          0.10    -0.01   0.03    -0.03
corr(zM , cnd
           M)          0.25     0.25          0.25    0.26    0.29    0.25
corr(hM , hN + hP )    -0.42    -0.49         -0.42   -0.23   -0.27   -0.20
corr(hM , cnd
           M)          0.14     0.16          0.13    0.20    0.21    0.20
corr(hN + hP , cnd
                M)     -0.05    -0.04         -0.03   -0.03   -0.03   -0.03




                                         15
                         Table A.6: Within-Age Correlations


ωK = 0 log zM   log cM    log hM   log hN        log hP     α       ε       B     DP      log θN
log zM   1.00    0.29      -0.07     —             —       0.70    0.42    0.42    —       —
log cM           1.00      0.13      —             —       0.69   -0.50   -0.55    —       —
log hM                     1.00      —             —      -0.46    0.50   -0.71    —       —
log hN                               —             —        —       —       —      —       —
log hP                                             —        —       —       —      —       —
α                                                          1.00   -0.35    0.23    —       —
ε                                                                  1.00    0.26    —       —
B                                                                          1.00    —       —
DP                                                                                 —       —
log θN                                                                                     —

ωK > 0 log zM   log cM    log hM   log hN    log hP        α       ε       B      DP      log θN
log zM   1.00    0.29     -0.07     0.07         -0.02    0.82    0.42    0.45    -0.58    0.69
log cM           1.00      0.13     0.00         -0.06    0.66    -0.54   -0.43   -0.01    -0.14
log hM                     1.00    -0.17         -0.30    -0.32   0.38    -0.48   0.06     -0.20
log hN                              1.00         0.18     0.13    -0.08   -0.29   -0.36    0.68
log hP                                           1.00     0.08    -0.15   -0.03   -0.70    0.12
α                                                         1.00    -0.18   0.23    -0.41    0.46
ε                                                                 1.00    0.40    -0.34    0.46
B                                                                         1.00    -0.06    0.31
DP                                                                                1.00     -0.66
log θN                                                                                     1.00




                                            16
                                                                                              1.5
               .8
               .6
Density of α




                                                                                              1
                                                                              Density of ε
               .4




                                                                                              .5
               .2
               0




                                                                                              0
                          0        1          2       3          4   5                              -1   0           1        2   3

                                         ωK=0             ωK>0                                                    ωK=0    ωK>0
               1.5




                                                                                              1
                                                                                              .8
Density of B
               1




                                                                              Density of DP
                                                                                              .6
               .5




                                                                                              .4
                                                                                              .2
               0




                     -1       0           1       2              3   4
                                                                                              0




                                         ωK=0             ωK>0                                      -2        0           2           4




                                       Figure A.1: Distributions of Sources of Heterogeneity




                 Table A.7: Within-Age Heterogeneity and Lifetime Consumption Equivalence

                              No within-age dispersion in ...             ωK = 0 model                       ωK > 0 model
                              zM , θN , B, DP                                                   0.07               0.14
                              zM , θN                                                           0.07               0.16
                              zM                                                                0.07               0.11
                              θN                                                                    —              0.12




                                                                         17
                                                                                                                              .15
                                 .4




                                                                                                                              .1
                                 .3




                                                                                                                              .05
         Mean of α




                                                                                                       Mean of ε
                                 .2




                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                              -.05
                                 .1




                                                                                                                              -.1
                                 0




                                       25         35            45             55            65                                      25   35          45             55   65

                                                         ωK=0               ωK>0                                                               ωK=0               ωK>0
                                 .3




                                                                                                                              .4
                                 .2
          Mean of B and DP




                                                                                                        Mean of log(θN)
                                                                                                                              .3
                                 .1




                                                                                                                              .2
                                 0




                                                                                                                              .1
                                 -.1
                                 -.2




                                                                                                                              0
                                       25         35            45             55            65                                      25   35          45             55   65

                                             B in ωK=0          B in ωK>0           DP in ωK>0                                                             ωK>0




                                             Figure A.2: Means of Sources of Heterogeneity (PSID Food)
Figure A.2 plots the age means of uninsurable component of market productivity α, insurable component of market
productivity ε, disutilities of work B and DP , and home production efficiency log θN for the economy with (ωK > 0,
black dotted lines) and without home production (ωK = 0, blue dashed lines).
                                 .5




                                                                                                                              .4
                                 .4
         Variance of α




                                                                                                       Variance of ε
                                                                                                                              .3
                                 .3




                                                                                                                              .2
                                 .2




                                                                                                                              .1
                                 .1




                                       25         35            45             55            65                                      25   35          45             55   65

                                                         ωK=0               ωK>0                                                               ωK=0               ωK>0
                                                                                                                              1.4
                                 .4
          Variance of B and DP




                                                                                                                              1.2
                                                                                                        Variance of log(θN)
                                 .3




                                                                                                                              1
                                 .2




                                                                                                                              .8
                                 .1




                                                                                                                              .6




                                       25         35            45             55            65                                      25   35          45             55   65

                                             B in ωK=0          B in ωK>0           DP in ωK>0                                                             ωK>0




                                            Figure A.3: Variances of Sources of Heterogeneity (PSID Food)
Figure A.3 plots the age variances of uninsurable component of market productivity α, insurable component of
market productivity ε, disutilities of work B and DP , and home production efficiency log θN for the economy with
(ωK > 0, black dotted lines) and without home production (ωK = 0, blue dashed lines).

                                                                                                  18
