                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  CHANGES ACROSS COHORTS IN WAGE RETURNS TO SCHOOLING AND EARLY
                       WORK EXPERIENCES

                                        Jared Ashworth
                                        V. Joseph Hotz
                                        Arnaud Maurel
                                         Tyler Ransom

                                      Working Paper 24160
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24160


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2017




We thank Christian Belzil, Michael Boehm, Flavio Cunha, Lance Lochner, Matt Masten and
participants at various seminars and conferences for useful comments and discussions at various
stages of this research. We especially wish to thank Vladislav Slanchev for providing us with a
version of his statistical software for estimating dynamic discrete choice models with a latent
factor error structure that we used in our structural analysis and for his generous assistance in
adapting it to our context. Any remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Jared Ashworth, V. Joseph Hotz, Arnaud Maurel, and Tyler Ransom. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Changes across Cohorts in Wage Returns to Schooling and Early Work Experiences
Jared Ashworth, V. Joseph Hotz, Arnaud Maurel, and Tyler Ransom
NBER Working Paper No. 24160
December 2017
JEL No. C33,I21,I26,J22,J24

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the wage returns to schooling and actual early work experiences, and how
these returns have changed over the past twenty years. Using the NLSY surveys, we develop and
estimate a dynamic model of the joint schooling and work decisions that young men make in
early adulthood, and quantify how they affect wages using a generalized Mincerian specification.
Our results highlight the need to account for dynamic selection and changes in composition when
analyzing changes in wage returns. In particular, we find that ignoring the selectivity of
accumulated work experiences results in overstatement of the returns to education.


Jared Ashworth                                             Arnaud Maurel
Graziadio School of Business and Management                Department of Economics
Pepperdine University                                      Duke University
Malibu, CA 90263                                           213 Social Sciences Building
jared.ashworth@pepperdine.edu                              Box 90097
                                                           Durham, NC 27708
V. Joseph Hotz                                             and NBER
Department of Economics                                    apm16@duke.edu
Box 90097
Duke University                                            Tyler Ransom
Durham, NC 27708-0097                                      Department of Economics
and NBER                                                   University of Oklahoma
hotz@econ.duke.edu                                         158 CCD1
                                                           308 Cate Center Drive
                                                           Norman, OK 73072
                                                           ransom@ou.edu
1         Introduction
        Since the 1970s, there have been dramatic changes in the structure of the U.S. labor
market. Foremost among these is a steep increase in the college wage premium during the
1980s, followed by a slower increase thereafter (see, e.g., Katz and Murphy, 1992; Card and
Lemieux, 2001; Carneiro and Lee, 2011; Valletta, forthcoming). The characteristics and skill
accumulation of American youth have also changed over this same time period.1 College
attendance has drastically increased, college graduation has been delayed, and the average
amount of in-college accumulated work experience has gone up (see, e.g., Bacolod and Hotz,
2006; Scott-Clayton, 2012; Bound, Lovenheim and Turner, 2012). Accounting for these
changes in composition is important to understand how the premium for skill investment
has evolved over time.
        Our paper addresses three related research questions. First, what are the trends across
cohorts in the wage returns to schooling and early career work experiences? Second, how
much of the evolution in the college wage premium actually reflects an increase of in-school,
and, more generally, early work experience? Third, what is the relative importance of changes
in skill prices versus skill composition in explaining how the returns to skills have changed
over the past 20 years? Answering these questions requires controlling for selection into
schooling and work experiences. We do this by specifying and estimating, for three different
cohorts, a dynamic model of schooling and work decisions. We then decompose the evolution
in the premia to different skills into price and composition effects. By carefully accounting
for selection in a dynamic setting, we also distinguish between changes in the price and
composition of observed and unobserved skills.
        Our analysis makes use of two longitudinal data sets, the 1979 and 1997 panels of the
National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth (NLSY). We divide our analysis into three separate
cohorts of individuals, all restricted to males: (i) NLSY79 respondents born in years 1959
and 1960; (ii) NLSY79 respondents born in years 1961 through 1964; and (iii) NLSY97
respondents, all of whom were born in years 1980 through 1984. We divide the cohorts in
this way due to swiftly changing market conditions during the 1980s, specifically pertaining
    1
    For example, Altonji, Bharadwaj and Lange (2012) note an increase in skills over time, but an overall
widening of the skill distribution driven by trends in parental education.


                                                   1
to the college wage premium.2
       Our use of longitudinal, rather than repeated cross-sectional, data allows us to more
accurately measure early-career schooling and work experiences and account for their endo-
geneity.3 From each of the NLSY surveys, we construct comparable measures of schooling,
employment, and military histories from ages 16 through 29, along with comparable mea-
sures of earnings, educational attainment, cognitive skill, local labor market conditions, and
personal and family background characteristics. From these histories, we are able to con-
struct multidimensional measures of human capital investment, including whether or not
work experience occurred simultaneously with schooling.
       Our analysis builds on the extensive literature that estimates the returns to schooling,
beginning with the seminal work of Mincer (1974), who introduced what has become known
as the Mincer model. This model interprets the coefficient on schooling in a log wage
equation that controls for a quadratic in potential experience as a rate of return. Heckman,
Lochner and Todd (2006) show that using flexible polynomials of schooling and potential
work experience in the wage equation, as well as allowing for non-linearities associated with
degree completion (also known as “sheepskin effects”), is essential to accurately estimate
the returns to schooling. Extending the insights of Heckman, Lochner and Todd (2006), we
show that it is also crucial to differentiate between actual and potential work experience when
estimating the returns to schooling, let alone the returns to accumulated work experiences.
       We deal with selection into schooling and work experiences by specifying and estimating
a dynamic model of schooling and work decisions that controls for person-specific unobserved
heterogeneity.4 We follow Cameron and Heckman (1998, 2001) and Heckman, Stixrud and
Urzúa (2006), among others, and use a factor model to reduce the dimensionality of the
unobservable state space.5 We use cognitive test scores and the panel structure of the data
   2
     See Section 2.1 for further discussion.
   3
     See also Bacolod and Hotz (2006); Altonji, Bharadwaj and Lange (2012); Böhm (2013); Castex and
Dechter (2014); Lee, Shin and Lee (2015); Deming (2017), who have also used NLSY data to make cross-
cohort comparisons about the labor market.
   4
     See also recent work by Belzil and Hansen (2017) who estimate, using data from the NLSY79 and
NLSY97, a dynamic model of schooling choices in which they control for dynamic selection on unobservables.
   5
     For other examples of factor models that have been used in the context of the returns to schooling, see,
among others, Taber (2001); Hotz et al. (2002); Cunha, Karahan and Soares (2011); Heckman, Humphries
and Veramendi (forthcoming).




                                                     2
to identify the heterogeneity factors. Noteworthy, we separately account for work experience
that is accumulated before or after graduation. Distinguishing between these two forms of
work experience is important since they may be rewarded differently upon post-schooling
labor market entry. Furthermore, failure to account for pre-graduation work experience may
bias estimates of the returns to schooling by incorrectly attributing to schooling the portion
of the wage that in fact corresponds to in-school work experience.6
       Our paper also contributes to the literature on understanding the effect of in-school work
on future educational and labor market outcomes (Hotz et al., 2002; Bacolod and Hotz, 2006;
Scott-Clayton, 2012). Working while in school may cause students to take longer to complete
schooling, or drop out altogether. However, accumulating work experience during school may
also have long-term benefits in the form of higher wages. Key to distinguishing between the
costs and benefits of in-school work is accounting for the selectivity of the individuals who
participate. If, for example, high-ability students disproportionately obtain in-school work
experience and are much more likely to graduate from high school and/or college, then
failure to account for this type of selection will produce misleading policy conclusions about
the benefits of in-school work experience. We attempt to account for such selection in our
econometric analyses.
       After estimating our model, we examine the selection-corrected returns to schooling and
work experiences, as well as to unobservable cognitive and non-cognitive skills, and how they
have trended over the cohorts we study. We then use the model estimates to decompose
the role of price and composition effects in explaining changes in the wage structure over
this period of time.7 Our framework allows us to separately identify changes in wages due
to observable characteristics from changes due to unobservable characteristics (see Fortin,
Lemieux and Firpo, 2011).
       We find that failure to account for selection into various types of schooling and work
experience results in sizable overstatements of the wage returns to degree attainment, and a
   6
      For example, Arcidiacono et al. (2016) find that pre- and post-graduation work experience is rewarded
differently for college graduate workers.
    7
      For examples of other studies that have decomposed trends in the returns to education, see Taber (2001);
Fang (2006); Fortin (2006); Lee and Wolpin (2010); Cunha, Karahan and Soares (2011); and Carneiro and Lee
(2011). Lee and Wolpin (2010) is particularly relevant for us as, to do so, they estimate a dynamic structural
(equilibrium) model of schooling and work decisions in which they distinguish between six different types of
sector-occupation-specific skills.


                                                      3
slight understatement of the wage returns to completed years of schooling. In addition, our
selection-corrected estimates reveal a steady decline over time in the returns to an additional
year of schooling, dropping from 5% to 1% in more recent cohorts. The returns to a high
school degree have increased slightly over this time period, while the returns to a bachelor’s
degree have declined since the late 1980s.
   Controlling for selection also reveals that in-school work experience increases wages later
in life, especially for the most recent cohort. The return to working while in college is large,
and only sees a small decline from 6% to 5% across the cohorts we analyze. For in-high-
school work experience, however, the return fluctuates significantly, starting at 3% in the
oldest cohorts, and increasing to 5% for the most recent cohorts. The return to in-high-
school work experience is especially sensitive to accounting for selection. With regards to
non-school-related work experience, we find that the return to full-time work experience has
increased slightly from 3% to 3.4%, while the return to part-time work experience is small,
often negative and does not change much across cohorts. We emphasize that the returns
to non-part-time work experiences are in most cases larger than the return to schooling.
This underscores the importance of accounting for actual – rather than potential – work
experience in measuring the returns to human capital investment, especially work experience
accumulated during school.
   In addition to measuring the returns to work experiences, we also measure the returns
to unobservable cognitive and non-cognitive skills. Both types of skills are rewarded slightly
more today than 20 years ago. In addition, the return to a one-standard-deviation increase
in cognitive skills is slightly higher (15-17%) than for non-cognitive skills (11-12%).
   Finally, we decompose the across-cohort changes in the returns to schooling and work
experiences into secular changes in skill prices, changes in the amounts and composition of
work and schooling experiences, and changes in the selectivity of individuals who acquire
them. We find that changes in the composition of both observable and unobservable skills
play a large role in explaining trends in skill premia. These composition effects are most
pronounced in the skills that are most highly rewarded: in-school work experience and
graduation from high school and college. Overall, our results support the idea that the
average level of cognitive and non-cognitive skills among college students and graduates has


                                               4
declined due to the expansion of enrollment in higher education institutions over our period
of interest.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 details the construction
of the data and the descriptive trends over this time period; Sections 3 and 4 discuss the
specification and estimation of our econometric model; Section 5 discusses results of the
model estimates; and Section 6 formulates counterfactual comparisons upon which we base
our decompositions. Finally, Section 7 concludes.


2         Differences in Wages, Skills & Skill Returns across
          Cohorts
        In this section, we discuss the data used to describe differences in wages, education and
types of work experience across three birth cohorts over the last 20 years, and to estimate
our dynamic model of schooling and work decisions.

2.1        The Data

The data we use are derived from two panels of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
(NLSY), the NLSY79 and NLSY97. These surveys interview American youth beginning
in their adolescent years and following them through adulthood and contain information
on education, employment, marriage and fertility, and health, among many others. The
NLSY79 began with a sample of respondents born between 1957-1964 who were interviewed
in 1979, when they were between the ages of 14-22. The respondents in the NLSY97 were
born between 1980-1984, and were first interviewed in 1997 when they were between the ages
12-17.
        From these data, we make several sample selections. First, as noted above, we restrict our
analysis to male respondents.8 Second, we restrict ourselves to the male respondents in the
NLYS79 who were no more than age 20 in 1979 (i.e., were born between 1959 and 1964), in
order to minimize recall error at the first interview about their work and schooling experiences
    8
    We focus on males for two main reasons: (i) including women during early adulthood would require
us to model their fertility decisions, which is outside of the scope of the present analysis; and (ii) much of
the literature that has studied human capital formation to which our analysis is comparable has focused on
males.



                                                      5
during adolescence. (No such restrictions were imposed on the NLSY97, given that the oldest
respondents were only age 17 at the start of the latter survey.) Third, we drop respondents
in the military and in the economically disadvantaged white NLSY79 oversamples, since the
former oversample was not followed after 1984 and the latter oversample was not followed
after 1990. Finally, we drop respondents who were screened as “mixed race” in the NLSY97,
since this was not an option in the NLSY79. After these restrictions, which are documented
in detail in Tables B.1 and B.2, we end up with 3,862 male respondents from the NLSY79
and 4,559 from the NLSY97.
       In all of the analysis presented below, we configure our data into three separate birth co-
horts: (i) NLSY79 respondents born in years 1959 – 1960 (henceforth referred to as “NLSY79
Old” or “79O”); (ii) NLSY79 respondents born in years 1961 – 1964 (henceforth referred
to as “NLSY79 Young” or “79Y”); and (iii) NLSY97 respondents (henceforth referred to
as “NLSY97” or “97”). We choose to split the NLSY79 sample into two groups of cohorts
because our analysis focuses on wage returns at a certain age (age 29), implying that we
measure wages for the different cohorts over different calendar years. Given the swiftly
changing market conditions between birth cohorts of the NLSY79 – particularly manifest in
the college wage premium (see Taber, 2001) – dividing the NLSY79 into two cohort groups
is pertinent to our analysis.
       In both of the NLSY surveys, individuals are interviewed annually for the first 15 survey
rounds and biennially thereafter. At each interview, respondents provide a history of what
has transpired in their lives since the previous interview.9 For example, the survey collects
information on all jobs held between the current and previous interview, the wage and hours
worked at each of those jobs, and the industry and occupation code of each job. Data
related to educational attainment and schooling enrollment/attendance are similarly rich.
Linking the survey reports together, it is possible to get measures of employment, schooling
enrollment, military service, and hourly wages for those employed on a month-by-month
basis. We track activities on a monthly basis so as to be able to distinguish between work
   9
    At the first interview, the survey asked extensive questions related to working and schooling history
before the survey. For respondents who missed an interview, interviewers attempted to contact the individual
during the following cycle and collect data on experiences between the current interview and the most recent
completed interview.



                                                     6
experience that occurred during school as opposed to over the summer or between semesters,
as well as work experience that occurred before graduation as opposed to after graduation.
In the analysis below, we focus on the activities of respondents in our three birth cohorts
over the ages 16 through 29. (See Tables B.1 and B.2 for the number of person-months
observations for each of our three birth cohorts.)
       Our analysis is conducted on three samples: 1,196 males in the NLSY79 Old (178,326
individual-month observations), 2,656 males in the NSLY79 young (396,258 individual-month
observations) and 4,443 males in the NLSY97 (587,050 individual-month observations).10
The additional sample cuts are due to attrition from the survey or missing interview spells
of three or more years. A complete summary of sample selection criteria is included in Tables
B.1 and B.2.
       In our analysis, we make use of variables that measure the following: personal and family
background characteristics; local labor market conditions; earnings; and schooling and work
histories, including military participation. For schooling and work histories, we observe for
each calendar month the individual’s schooling level and enrollment status along with his
employment status and intensity (i.e. part-time or full-time). If an individual is employed,
we observe his corresponding hourly wage. We discuss the exact construction of each of our
variables in Appendix A.


2.2       Differences across Cohorts

In this section, we present some stylized facts about the variation in the data across the
three birth cohorts. As mentioned previously, we construct comparable measures of cognitive
ability test scores, personal and family background measures, earnings, education, schooling,
employment, and military histories from the two NLSY surveys.11 We begin by discussing
the changes in background characteristics, such as personal and family characteristics, as
well as in local labor market conditions, across cohorts before discussing the patterns for
  10
     Our wage analysis comprises 100,293 observations in the NLSY79 Old, 228,180 observations in the
NLSY79 Young, and 292,529 observations in the NLSY97.
  11
     To make cognitive ability test scores comparable, we follow Altonji, Bharadwaj and Lange (2009) and
Altonji, Bharadwaj and Lange (2012) by making use of an equipercentile mapping in ASVAB test scores
that corrects for both testing medium (i.e. pencil and paper vs. computer assisted) and age at test (NLSY97
respondents were much younger than NLSY79 respondents when they took the ASVAB).


                                                    7
key endogenous variables of interest, namely schooling and employment decisions. We then
describe how wages vary with respect to these decisions.


2.2.1      Demographics

We start by describing the differences across our three birth cohorts in economic, personal and
family background characteristics. We first examine the role of local labor market conditions
in the human capital accumulation process (see also, e.g., Cameron and Heckman, 1998; Hotz
et al., 2002). Table 1 gives information about how our two county-level local labor market
variables, employment rate and income per worker, evolve over the life cycle.12 At all ages
except 29, employment rate and income per worker grow across each successive cohort. By
age 29, the employment rates are equalized across each of the cohorts, likely reflecting the
effect of the Great Recession on the NLSY97 cohort.13 The gap in income per worker at
age 29 is also negligibly small between the two NLSY79 cohorts, but there is a large and
significant gap between the NLSY97 and the NLSY79 cohorts.
       We next discuss the change in Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) scores over
time.14 Table 2 displays the median and standard deviations of the AFQT scores for the
various cohorts and how they changed across these cohorts. Median AFQT scores initially
fall between the NLSY79 cohorts, with a statistically insignificant drop of 0.07 standard
deviations for the overall sample which is driven by a large and significant 0.17 standard
deviation drop for high-school graduates. AFQT scores for the NLSY97 cohort are, in
general, higher than those for the NLSY79 Young cohort, with an overall increase of 0.08
standard deviations. However, while this is driven by a large 0.19 standard deviation increase
for high-school dropouts, it is offset by a decrease in the median scores of college graduates
  12
     Note that “Employment rate” is used abusively here since it is computed as, for the respondent’s county
of residence at each age, the number of employees reported by employers divided by total population.
Multiple job holding, among other reasons, can cause this number to diverge from the canonical employment
rate measure.
  13
     The NLSY97 cohort reached age 29 in 2009 through 2013.
  14
     The AFQT is a subset of the ASVAB (Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery). Specifically,
AFQT scores are a weighted average of four ASVAB sub-tests: Arithmetic Reasoning (AR), Mathematics
Knowledge (MK), Paragraph Comprehension (PC), and Word Knowledge (WK). In our model, we make
use of six ASVAB sub-tests, the four in the AFQT as well as Coding Speed (CS) and Numerical Operations
(NO). However, to maintain comparability with previous literature, we report the change in the AFQT in
this section.



                                                     8
by 0.12 standard deviations. These trends imply that the center of the distribution of
cognitive skills declined across the cohorts for almost all of the educational categories, with
the standard deviation of AFQT scores higher for the NLSY97 cohort among high-school
dropouts and college graduates but little or no change for high school graduates or those
with some college. These results are consistent with the findings of Altonji, Bharadwaj and
Lange (2012), who document a widening of the AFQT distribution between the NLSY79
and NLSY97 cohorts.
   Finally, we examine the changes across cohorts in the relationship between family back-
ground characteristics and educational attainment. This comparison is made in Table 3,
where we consider four different characteristics: mother’s education, father’s education, fam-
ily income, and living in a female-headed household. Between the NLSY97 and the NLSY79
cohorts, parental education increased by more than one grade level for mothers and more
than four-fifths of a grade level for fathers. Between the two NLSY79 cohorts there was little
change in parental education, an exception being the sharp and significant increase in fa-
ther’s education level between the two NLSY79 cohorts for high school dropouts. The mean
of family income sharply declined across the two NLSY79 cohorts for high-school graduates
and those with some college. With respect to the family income of the parental household
in which the individual grew up, there was a sharp increase across the NLSY79 Young and
NLSY97 for college attendees, while there was a small and insignificant decrease for high-
school dropouts. This supports the idea that parents’ family income has become more tightly
associated with college attendance over this period. Finally, the share of the men in our sam-
ples that grew up in female-headed households increased by 9 percentage points between the
NLSY97 and NLSY79 Young cohorts, with higher rates – 10–12 percentage points higher –
among those without college degrees.


2.2.2   Work experience and educational attainment

We now consider the changes across the three cohorts in months of accumulated schooling
and work experience as well as educational degrees attained. Table 4 computes the average
levels of schooling and work experience attained by age 29 (beginning at age 16), broken out
by final education level. Consistent with Bound, Lovenheim and Turner (2012), we find that

                                              9
students in the NLSY97 spent longer in school, and that this increase was most pronounced
among those who attended college.
   Despite spending longer in school, the young men in the most recent cohort who at least
graduated from high school had accumulated similar amounts of total work experience by
age 29 to the earlier cohorts. That said, there were changes in the types of work experience
they accumulated. In particular, there was an increase across cohorts in the accumulated
level of in-school work for those with at least a high school degree, particularly for in-college
work among college graduates in the NLSY97. These patterns suggest that the longer time
spent in school by the young men in more recent cohorts was due, in part, to their spending
more time working while in school. Furthermore, while the overall level of out-of-school
part-time work rose slightly across cohorts, the overall level of out-of-school full-time work
sharply declined.
   These differences across cohorts in the types of accumulated work experiences that young
men experienced motivate our differential treatment of in-school and out-of-school work ex-
perience. Specifically, one of our primary empirical questions is to assess whether or not
spending longer in school (or working while in school) is detrimental to future wages. Fi-
nally, we note that young men who dropped out and never completed high school experi-
enced a decline in accumulated work experience across our NLSY cohorts, with those in the
NSLY97 cohort having accumulated almost 10 months less work experience by age 29 and
this decline largely the result of being employed fewer months in out-of-school, full-time jobs.
This interaction between completed schooling and human capital investment highlights the
importance of using a sufficiently flexible model to estimate the returns to schooling and
work experiences.
   Table 5 lists various degree attainment frequencies among the cohorts. High school
graduation (or GED completion) rates increased by about two percentage points for the
NLSY97 cohorts but were at the same level between the two NLSY79 cohorts. Further,
college attendance has steadily increased by 4–5 percentage points across the cohorts. This
across-cohort increase in college attendance, significantly outpaced the across-cohort increase
in high school graduation rates, suggesting that most of the across-cohort increase in college
attendance came from those who previously would have graduated high school and not


                                               10
enrolled in college.
       In Table 5, we also compare college graduation rates at age 26 and 29 in order to assess
how time-to-degree has changed. By age 29, we observe a steady 3 percentage point increase
in the graduation rate across all three cohorts. However, as of age 26 there is no difference
in graduate rates between the NLSY79 Young and the NLSY97 cohorts. Together with the
evidence in Table 4, this latter evidence in Table 5 indicates that time to a bachelor’s degree
has increased over this period, a finding consistent with Bound, Lovenheim and Turner
(2012).15 Some of this increased time to college degree might be explained by an increase in
the amount of in-college work experience that is documented in Table 4.


2.2.3      Wages

Finally, we examine how wage profiles have varied across our three cohorts. We first doc-
ument how wages at age 29 for different schooling levels and levels of accumulated work
experience have changed across cohorts. Herein, we refer to differences in wages across
school and work experience levels as “wage premia,” although we hasten to add that these
measures are not to be interpreted as causal effects. Below, in Section 4, we develop a
econometric model to estimate the causal effects of schooling and work experience on wages.
       Table 6 reports the wage premia to experiences for those working full-time at age 29.
Each row shows how much higher the average full-time wage is for an additional year of each
type of experience for the four different education groups (HS dropouts, HS graduates, some
college, and college graduates). In addition, the overall pattern of differences across cohorts
can be seen in the last panel, which groups individuals of all education levels together. In
this last panel, the wage premia are highest for working in college, in the range of 8% to
11%. On the other hand, part-time work (while not in school) experience is associated with
lower wages, in the range of 0 to -5% for an additional year of experience.16 For full-time
work, the wage premia are around 4% to 5%. While the overall returns to the various work
experiences increased between both NLSY79 cohorts, they have generally declined between
  15
      Note that these differences across cohorts also hold for graduation conditional on starting college, though
all differences lack statistical significance.
   16
      As we will see later in the paper, this negative association partly reflects negative selection into part-time
work.



                                                        11
the NLSY79 Young and NLSY97, with the returns to full-time work being the most stable
over time. These findings point to significant across-cohort changes in either the composition
of those engaging in these work activities, or the return to these skills, or both. The model
we introduce in the next section allows us to distinguish between these different mechanisms.
       We also assess how the observed wage premia associated with educational attainment
have changed across these cohorts. Table 7 shows average log wages, wage premia and
dispersion associated with high school graduation, completion of some college, and college
graduation across the three cohorts. The high school wage premium exhibits a U-shape across
the three cohorts, while the college wage premium exhibits a hump shape. The premium
for completing some college is constant across the NLSY79 cohorts, but falls steeply in the
NLSY97 cohort.
       While our finding of a decreasing college wage premium between the NLSY79 Young
and the NLSY97 is at odds with some previous research (Böhm, 2013; Castex and Dechter,
2014; Deming, 2017), it is consistent with some recent studies of changes in wages over time
and is robust to a number of different specifications.17,18 While a large number of studies
using CPS data show that the college wage premium has increased over this time period, our
results are closer to those in recent studies by Beaudry, Green and Sand (2014) and Valletta
(forthcoming) who find a slowdown in the growth of the wages of college workers and of
the college wage premium, respectively, for younger workers since 2000, which includes the
period when the NLSY97 cohorts reached age 29.19
  17
      In particular, we are able to replicate these trends using files provided in the online appendix of Castex
and Dechter (2014). Specifically, the differences in results are due to two implementation choices made by
Castex and Dechter (2014): (i) focusing on individuals aged 16 at the time of taking the ASVAB test; and
(ii) including a three-year moving average of the national unemployment rate. Using their data, we show
that dividing the NLSY79 into two cohorts and removing the three-year moving average of the national
unemployment rate yields estimates of the college wage premium that are identical to ours, i.e. a large spike
within the NLSY79 followed by a slight decrease from the NLSY79 Young to the NLSY97. These results are
not reported for brevity, but are available upon request.
   18
      Deming (2017) also analyzes changes in the wage returns to skills using the NLSY79 and NLSY97. Using
his replication files, we are able to show that there has been a decline in the college wage premium if we
divide the NLSY79 into two cohorts. While Deming allows the returns to skill to vary by NLSY cohort in his
analysis, he does not allow the returns to completed education to vary. Neither Castex and Dechter (2014)
nor Deming (2017) account for actual work experience when measuring returns to skills.
   19
      Valletta (forthcoming) finds that among workers age 25-34 the college-only wage premium fell from
2001-2004 and has remained fairly flat through 2015 (see Panel (a) of his Figure 4). Beaudry, Green and
Sand (2014) find that wage profiles for college workers in more recent birth cohorts have fallen since 2000
and exhibited lower growth rates (see Panel (b) of their Figures 1 and 2). Both of these studies use data



                                                      12
    In Table 7 we also present estimates of the dispersion of wages by education group for our
three cohorts. We find that wage dispersion for high school and college graduates increased
across cohorts, while it declined across the cohorts for high school dropouts. These findings
are generally consistent with the secular trends in Goldin and Katz (2007) and Lee, Shin
and Lee (2015), who show that wage dispersion has increased over time, especially for those
in the upper parts of the distribution. To our knowledge, the across-cohort trends in wage
dispersion among high school dropouts have not been documented in the existing literature.
    As noted above, our discussion thus far has ignored the possibility that selective differ-
ences in educational attainment and accumulated work experiences may affect the suggested
impacts of the latter on wages among young men and how they changed across cohorts. In
the next section, we introduce the model that we use to account for selection into the various
types of experience, and, in our final results, present and discuss selection-corrected wage
returns. The differences we have documented in schooling and work experiences, as well
as in demographic, family, and local labor market characteristics are the prime motivation
for our model in which we attempt to estimate the evolution of wage returns to skills by
accounting for these changes in composition.




3     The Model
In this section we develop a dynamic model of schooling and work decisions. We use it to
form an econometric model that accounts for the endogeneity of accumulated schooling and
work experiences in the estimation of wage returns across our three birth cohorts.
from the CPS. That said, the remaining differences in the evolution of the college wage premium between
the CPS – as used by Valletta (forthcoming) and Beaudry, Green and Sand (2014) – and those in Table 7
based on NLSY data may be explained by differences in composition in the two samples, in the way wages
are measured, and the fact that the CPS is a series of cross-sections of the U.S. population while the NLSY
samples are collected longitudinally for a set of birth cohorts.




                                                    13
3.1     Activities and Risk Sets

We assume that at each age a – which is measured in months in our case – individual i, who
is a member of birth cohort c, chooses activity j from a risk set of activities, where the risk
set at any point in time may vary with age and/or the occurrence(s) of one or more previous
events. For simplicity, we suppress notation indexing the individual’s cohort. In practice, we
estimate the model separately for each cohort c – namely NLSY79 old, NLSY79 young, and
NLSY97 – so all the parameters should be understood as cohort-specific. Let Ria denote the
risk set for individual i at age a, where we assume that there are K possible risk sets, i.e.,
Ria = r ∈ 1, . . . , K. Then, conditional on facing risk set Ria = r, individual i chooses from
among J r activities, where we define
                                 
                                 1 if i is in activity j from risk set r at age a
                                 
                       driaj =                                                               (1)
                                 0 otherwise,
                                 


      PJ r
and     j=1   driaj = 1, for all i, a and r.
   After the initial risk set (Ria = 1), we allow for attainment-contingent risk sets, i.e., some
attainment activity (j ∗ ) has to occur in order to change the risk set. More formally:


                                 Ria = r iff dR
                                              iãj ∗ = 1 at some age ã, ã < a,
                                                 iã
                                                                                             (2)


for r > 1. In our case, the relevant activities are graduation from high school, which changes
the risk set to Ria = 2, and graduation from college, which changes the risk set to Ria = 3,
and thus K = 3. The three risk sets and the activities associated with each are given in
Table 8.



3.2     School and Work Experiences

   We are interested in estimating the effects of accumulated experiences on various out-
comes. In particular, we are interested in accumulated years of school attendance, as well
as years of work experiences. We also use our model to estimate the effect of educational


                                                       14
attainment, such as high school and college graduation, on these outcomes. In the follow-
ing, we will refer to these work experiences, schooling activities and graduation outcomes
collectively as “experiences.” The vector of types of experience is given by:

                                                                                       0
          xria ≡ x1ia , xr2ia , x3ia , x4ia , x5ia , x6ia , Iia (Ria > 1), Iia (Ria = 3)                (3)


where the experience variables are: x1ia , the number of years of schooling attendance as of
age a; xr2ia , the number of years of in-school work experience given the relevant risk set r;
x3ia , the total number of years of part-time (non-school) work as of age a; x4ia , the total
number of years of full-time (non-school) work as of age a; x5ia , the number of years in
the military as of age a; x6ia , the number of years spent in other activities20 as of age a;
Iia (Ria > 1), an indicator equal to 1 if individual i has received a high school degree as of age
a; and Iia (Ria = 3), an indicator equal to 1 if individual i has received a bachelor’s degree
as of age a.21 For j = 1, 3, . . . , 6, the experience variables are accumulated from a starting
age, a0 = 192 (16 years old):22

                                                        a−1
                                                      1 X
                                            xjia =          di`j .                                      (4)
                                                     12 `=a
                                                           0



For j = 2, if the individual is in the first risk set (Ria = 1), then the vector xr2ia is a scalar
for the number of years spent working in high school since a0 , x2HS ia . If in the other risk
sets (Ria > 1), the vector contains two elements: the number of years already accumulated
from working while in high school and the number of years spent working while in college or
graduate school, x2COL ia . Thus,
                                              
                                                                     if Ria = 1
                                      
                                       x2HS ia
                                      
                             xr2ia   ≡                                                                (5)
                                                                     if Ria > 1,
                                      
                                       x2HS ia , x2COL ia
                                      

  20
     This residual category includes home production as well as unemployment.
  21
     Note that schooling experience x1ia is the sum of school-only and work-in-school experience so as to be
comparable to the literature originating with Mincer (1974).
  22
     Since there is no ambiguity here, we suppress the r superscript from the activity indicators drilj .




                                                      15
where

                                                     a−1
                                                   1 X
                                      x2HS ia =          di`2
                                                  12 `=a
                                                           0
                                                      a−1
                                                  1   X
                                    x2COL ia =                   di`2 if Ria > 1,
                                                  12 `=a
                                                           HSi




and where aHSi is the age of graduation from high school.

3.3        Wages

Let Wiaj denote the potential hourly wage rate that individual i would realize at age a if he
were to choose activity j, j = 2, 3, 4. We assume that Wiaj is determined by the individual’s
accumulated human capital, or skills, Hia , as of the beginning of age a, measured in efficiency
units; the occupation-specific skill price Piaj per efficiency unit that varies across time and/or
ages, a, and across the local labor market in which i resides at age a;23 and idiosyncratic
shocks, denoted by eεiaj , that are unanticipated by the individual:


                                             Wiaj = Piaj Hia eεiaj ,                            (6)


so that the log of wages, denoted by wiaj , is given by the following linear function:


                                          wiaj = piaj + hia + εiaj
                                                     e
                                                  = wiaj + εiaj ,                               (7)

                                           e
where piaj ≡ ln Piaj , hia ≡ ln Hia , and wiaj ≡ piaj + hia is i’s expected log wage at age a, i.e.,
the wage that i expects to get if he chooses activity j. We assume that piaj is the following
function of age/time and the conditions of the local labor market in which i resides at age
a, mia :
                                            piaj = β0j + β m mia .                              (8)

We further assume that the (log of the) individual’s stock of human capital, hia , is deter-
mined by some observed personal characteristics, e.g., one’s birth year, race, etc., denoted
  23
       See Moretti (2011) for a survey of models of local labor markets.


                                                       16
by the vector zi , the individual’s accumulated schooling and work experience and degree
completion,24 xria , and the individual’s unobserved characteristics, ξ i , which are broken out
into elements pertaining to the individual’s cognitive (ξ1i ) and other (non-cognitive) abilities
(ξ2i ):
                             hia = β z zi + β x g (xria ) + βξ1j ξ1i + βξ2j ξ2i .                      (9)

It follows that

                       e
               wiaj = wiaj + εiaj ,

                     = β0j + β m mia + β z zi + β x g (xria ) + βξ1j ξ1i + βξ2j ξ2i + εiaj ,          (10)


where g (·) contains: (i) a cubic polynomial in all types of accumulated experience,25 (ii)
pairwise interactions between school experience and each of the work experience variables
(work in school, part-time work and full-time work), and (iii) indicators for having graduated
high school and for having graduated college (see also Heckman, Lochner and Todd, 2006).
       One of our primary interests is in obtaining consistent estimates of the parameters in
(10). These estimates, in turn, allow us to isolate the role played by skill prices, as opposed
to skill composition, in the change across cohorts in returns to schooling and types of work
experience. As we make clear below, the central obstacle to this differential attribution is
that the elements of xria are endogenous unless one conditions on the unobserved factors, ξ i .
We now develop the nature of linkage through the sequences of activity choices individual i
makes over his life cycle.


3.4       Activity-specific Value Functions

Let the value function for individual i who is of age a and who engages in activity j in risk
                      r
set r be denoted by Viaj . These value functions depend on the elements of the individual’s
information set at age a, namely, personal characteristics, zi , family background character-
istics, fi , local labor market characteristics, mia , accumulated school and work experiences
  24
    Since risk set is tantamount to degree completion, these act as risk-set specific intercepts.
  25
    See also Belzil and Hansen (2002) who estimate the returns to schooling using an extended Mincerian
specification in which they relax the assumption that wages are linear in the number of years of schooling.



                                                     17
xria , and the individual’s unobserved characteristics, ξ i . For computational simplicity, we
                  r
approximate the Viaj ’s as a linear function of these characteristics:26

              r
            Viaj (ξ i ) = αrfj fi + αrzj zi + αrmj mia + αrxj b (xria , zi ) + αξ1j
                                                                                r          r
                                                                                    ξ1i + αξ2j ξ2i + ωiaj
                         r
                      = viaj (ξ i ) + ωiaj ,                                                                (11)


where b (·) contains: (i) a set of nine bin indicators for each type of accumulated experience,
and (ii) linear interactions between race/ethnicity and each type of accumulated experi-
ence.27 Finally, ωiaj captures the idiosyncratic factors that affect the individual’s value from
choosing activity j at age a.
                                                                         r∗
       It follows that at each age a, individual i chooses the activity jia from among the activities
in the current risk set (Ria = r) that yields the highest value:

                                                r∗            r
                                               jia = argmax Viaj .                                          (12)
                                                          j



3.5        Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Abilities

Our model incorporates two unobserved random factors representing the unobserved cog-
nitive and other, non-cognitive abilities of individuals. To measure unobserved cognitive
ability (ξ1i ), we use six subject tests from the ASVAB.28 We chose to include these subjects
because (i) each appears in both the NLSY79 and the NLSY97; and (ii) they are measure
constructs typically thought to be associated with individuals’ cognitive ability or skills. For
each subject test s, the z-scored test score y for individual i is expressed as a linear function
  26                                               r
     In the following, we make the dependence of Viaj on ξ i explicit, which will be convenient when discussing
the estimation of the model in the next section.
  27
     As an example of the bin indicators, we include a set of nine bins for the number of months of full-
time work experience outside of school. The cut points for each of the bins occur at the following values:
10 months, 20 months, 30 months, 40 months, 50 months, 60 months, 70 months, and 80 months. While
the choice of cut points for each experience is different, the cut points are constant across NLSY cohorts.
Allowing the different types of experience to vary in this way allows us to estimate highly non-linear effects
of experience on the decision to invest in different types of human capital. This non-linear relationship is
necessary in order to match the observed data.
  28
     The six subject tests we use are: Arithmetic Reasoning, Coding Speed, Mathematics Knowledge, Nu-
merical Operations, Paragraph Comprehension, and Word Knowledge. The frequently used AFQT score is
a composite of all of these subjects except for Coding Speed and Mathematics Knowledge. Our six subject
tests are the same as used by Heckman, Humphries and Veramendi (forthcoming).



                                                         18
of personal characteristics, zi , family background characteristics, fi , and the cognitive ability
ξ1i , namely
                                yis = γ0s + γ fs fi + γ zs zi + γξ1s ξ1i + ηis ,                          (13)

where ηis captures idiosyncratic variation in test scores not related to the cognitive ability
or other test score determinants.29
       There is little overlap in the measures of non-cognitive traits across the two NLSY sur-
veys.30 Due to this data limitation, we are unable to include comparable measures of non-
cognitive ability for all three of our NLSY cohorts. For this reason, we rely on the panel
nature of the data to identify the residual (non-cognitive) ability factor ξ2i . Thus, this sec-
ond factor is defined as all unobserved person-specific determinants of the agent’s wage and
decision process that are not in, and orthogonal to, the clearly-defined cognitive factor.



4        Inference
In this section we further characterize our econometric model and the strategy for estimating
its parameters. In particular, we summarize the specification of the error structure of our
model and the estimation procedure we employ. For now, we continue to not distinguish
between the three different cohorts – NLSY79 Old, NLSY79 Young and NLSY97 – although
we allow all of the parameters of our model to be cohort-specific and we explicitly examine the
across-cohort differences in the estimated marginal returns to schooling and work experiences.
Finally, we also discuss the identification of the model.


4.1       Error Structure

We assume that ξ i is a person-specific vector of factors that is stochastically independent
of the distributions of the observables, zi , fi , mia , and of the unobservables, ω ia , εia , and
  29
     The mean and standard deviation used to compute the z-scores are taken across all cohorts.
  30
     The NLSY79 contains the Rotter locus of control score and Rosenberg self-esteem scale for all individuals.
These have been used in other studies as non-cognitive measures (Heckman, Stixrud and Urzúa, 2006; Cunha,
Karahan and Soares, 2011). The NLSY97 does not collect information on any of these tests, but instead
collects information on risky behavior such as school suspensions, sexual promiscuity and substance abuse.
See, e.g., Aucejo and James (2017) who use school suspensions, fights, precocious sex, grade retention,
substance abuse, and 8th grade GPA as non-cognitive measures.


                                                      19
η i , for all a and i. At the same time, because the choice of past activities determines
the accumulated experience in xria it is not the case that the elements of this vector are
independent of ξ i .
       We further assume that ξ i is mean zero and has identity covariance matrix. With re-
spect to ω ia , εia , and η i , respectively, we assume that they are mutually independent, and
independently distributed both across and at each age, a, and have mean zero and constant
variances. That the vector of activity shocks, ω ia , is uncorrelated with εia is the result of
assuming that decisions about activities are made before the actual realizations of wages are
known by individual i.


4.2        Likelihood Function and Estimation Method

We assume that the idiosyncratic errors in the activity payoff functions, ωiaj , have a Type I
extreme value distribution so that the choice probability for activity j in risk set r, conditional
on ξ i = ξ, has the logistic form:

                                                                r
                                                                       
                                        r
                                                    exp       viaj (ξ)
                                      Piaj (ξ) = P                   r
                                                                              ,                                (14)
                                                  k=1,...,J r exp  (viak (ξ))

                                              r
where, as defined in the first line of (11), viak (ξ) is the component of the value function
associated with activity k that is deterministic from individual i’s viewpoint.
       Additionally, we assume that the idiosyncratic errors entering the wage function in (10)
are normally distributed with zero mean and variance, σw2 j , and the corresponding contribu-
tion to the likelihood, conditional on ξ i = ξ, is given by:

                            wiaj − β0j − β m mia − β z zi − β x g (xria ) − βξj1 ξ1 − βξj2 ξ2
                                                                                               
               1
  fwiaj (ξ) =     φ                                                                                 , j = 2, 3, 4,
              σwj                                       σwj

where φ (·) is the standard normal pdf.31
       We also assume that the idiosyncratic errors entering the ASVAB test score function
in (13) are normally distributed with zero mean and variance σy2s , and that the likelihood
  31
       Recall that risk-set-specific intercepts are included in xria through degree attainment dummies.




                                                         20
contribution, conditional on ξi1 = ξ1 , is given by:
                                                                                                         
                                          1            yis − γ0s − γ fs fi − γ zs zi − γξs1 ξ1
                            fyis (ξ1 ) =      φ                                                               .                          (15)
                                         σ ys                           σ ys

       It follows that the (unconditional) log likelihood function is given by:

                                                        X            Z
                                         log L (θ) =           log         Li (θ | ξ) fξ (ξ)dξ,                                          (16)
                                                           i


where, conditional on ξ i = ξ, the individual contribution to the likelihood is given by:

                                               "                                                                          #I(Ria =r)
                                                                         driaj                                    driak
                   Y                 YY            Y                              Y
                                                             r                                r
  Li (θ | ξ) =          fyis (ξ1 )                         Piaj (ξ)                        [Piak (ξ) fwiak (ξ)]                        , (17)
                    s                a     r   j=1,5,6,7                         k=2,3,4

                               0
with θ ≡          α0 , β 0 , γ 0 , I(A) is the indicator function that is equal to one if A is true
and zero otherwise, and fξ (·) is the pdf of ξ. In the analysis that follows, we assume that
ξ has a standard multivariate normal distribution, and estimate the model via maximum
likelihood.32


4.3       Identification

In this section we discuss the identification of key features of the model. Note that we cannot
readily identify the effects of endogenously-determined schooling and work experiences on
wages or subsequent school and work decisions by relying on standard instrumental variable
techniques, as finding valid instruments for these sequences of past choices over individuals’
careers is challenging. Herein, we deal with dynamic selection into schooling and work
experiences by explicitly modeling the underlying choice process, controlling for person-
specific unobserved factors as in Cameron and Heckman (1998, 2001) and Heckman, Stixrud
and Urzúa (2006). In what follows, we discuss how identification is achieved within this
  32
     In practice, we use quadrature to approximate the integral of the likelihood function. Specifically, we
use Gaussian quadrature with seven points of support for each dimension of the integral. As starting values
for the parameters, we use perturbed point estimates from the specification of the model without unobserved
heterogeneity. Finally, the covariance matrix of the estimated parameters is estimated as the inverse of the
estimated Hessian matrix.



                                                                 21
econometric framework.
       First, one can use the results of Hu and Shum (2012) to show nonparametric identification
                                           r
of the conditional choice probabilities, Piaj (ξ). This identification result relies on the first-
order Markov structure, and the resulting dynamic exclusion restrictions implied by our
dynamic discrete choice model.33 Under the assumption that the idiosyncratic preference
shocks are distributed following a Type 1 extreme value assumption, the conditional value
functions are then identified (up to a reference alternative) by inverting the conditional choice
                 r
probabilities, Piaj (ξ).
       We now turn to the unobserved individual factors, (ξ1 , ξ2 ), and the outcome equations.
Aside from the aforementioned dynamic exclusion restrictions, we also impose two types of
exclusion restrictions which play an important role in identifying the covariate effects in the
outcome equations, as well as the distribution and the returns to these unobserved factors (i.e.
the factor loading parameters). First, we impose the restriction that the non-cognitive factor,
ξ2 , does not enter the ASVAB test score equations. This results in a system of six continuous
and selection-free measurements that are dedicated to the first factor ξ1 . From this set of
measurements, the factor loadings associated with ξ1 are identified from the covariances of
the ASVAB test scores.34 Having identified the factor loadings, the distributions of ξ1 and
of the idiosyncratic performance shocks are identified in a second step using deconvolution
arguments (Kotlarski, 1967).
       Note, however, than one cannot directly use the same arguments for the second unob-
served factor ξ2 , as we do not have access to a set of selection-free measurements dedicated
to that factor. Here, the panel structure of the data – in particular the autocorrelation of
wages and choices (conditional on observed covariates) – along with the correlation between
these two sets of variables and the ASVAB measurements are key to the identification of the
returns to unobserved factors, (ξ1 , ξ2 ), in the outcome and choice equations.
       Finally, we exclude the vector of family background characteristics, fi , from the wage
  33
     In our model, choices and outcomes today only depend on the past sequence of choices through the
accumulated experiences at the beginning of the period, once we condition on unobserved heterogeneity.
  34
     The existence of a set of measurements dedicated to the first factor, ξ1 , is not only useful in terms of
identification, but it also helps with the interpretation of the factors, with ξ1 being interpreted as a cognitive
factor, and the second factor, ξ2 , which enters the choice as well as the wage equations, as a non-cognitive
factor.



                                                       22
equations (see Willis and Rosen, 1979; Taber, 2001; Hotz et al., 2002, for similar restrictions).
The assumption that these background characteristics affect wages only indirectly through
individual decisions is instrumental in identifying the wage equation parameters from the
observed wages of the selected group of labor market participants.



5     Results
In this section we present the results of our estimation. We first focus on how the specification
of the log wage function impacts the measured returns to schooling and work experiences.
In particular, we show that generalizing the classic Mincer model by controlling for observed
and unobserved selection, produces returns to schooling estimates that are much lower than
those produced by wage equation specifications that control only for potential experience or
control for actual work experience but fail to account for the endogeneity of the latter. This
highlights the importance of selection on observables and unobservables in determining these
returns. Second, we discuss how the returns to schooling and work experiences, as well as
the returns to unobserved ability as measured by our factor loading estimates, have changed
over time.


5.1    Specifications of the Wage Equations

Our empirical framework allows us to estimate wage returns to various types of school and
work experiences by accounting for the endogeneity of schooling and work choices. As de-
scribed above, our most comprehensive (and preferred) specification of the wage equation
includes non-linear functions of school and work experience variables, indicators for gradua-
tion attainment and type of work, demographic and background characteristics, local labor
market conditions, and measures for unobserved cognitive and non-cognitive abilities. We
compare this specification with other models, specifically an extension of the classic Min-
cerian (1974) model where we control for high school and college graduation dummies and
potential work experience, and a model along the lines of the flexible specification intro-
duced in Heckman, Lochner and Todd (2006). While our version of the latter specification
(referred to as HLT hereafter) is parametric, it remains very flexible and includes controls

                                               23
for race, high school and college graduation, cubic polynomials in school and potential work
experience, as well an interaction between schooling and potential experience.
       The classic Mincerian model restricts log-wage to be a linear function of the number of
years of schooling and a quadratic function of the number of years of potential experience
(defined as age − years of schooling − 6). Heckman, Lochner and Todd (2006) relax these
assumptions by using indicators for each year of schooling and each year of potential expe-
rience and allow returns to potential experience to vary by levels of schooling: high school
dropout, high school graduate, some college, and college graduate. They find that the re-
turns to schooling change drastically with the introduction of non-linearities in schooling as
well as non-separability between schooling and work experiences.
       Our preferred specification differs from Heckman, Lochner and Todd (2006) in three
notable ways. The first one relates to work experience. In our model, we use actual work
experience instead of potential work experience, distinguishing between in-high-school, in-
college, part-time, full-time, and military work experiences. Second, we include controls for
observable characteristics, in particular nativity (native-born or foreign-born) and birth year,
and local labor market conditions (employment rate and income per capita).35 Third, and
most importantly, we control for selection into schooling and work experience levels based on
unobservable characteristics. We do so by allowing the cognitive and non-cognitive ability
factors, (ξ1 , ξ2 ), to enter the wage equation.
       We report the marginal effects associated with these different specifications and different
variables of interest in Tables 9 and 10.36 For the accumulated experience variables, xria , i.e.,
schooling, work, military, etc., that enter the model in a nonlinear fashion, we evaluate the
marginal effects using the average experience vector at age 29 (xr29 ).37
  35
     Note that we do not directly control for the ASVAB test scores as these are used as noisy measurements
for the cognitive factor, ξ1 , which also enters the wage equation.
  36
     The full estimation results are available from the authors upon request.
  37
     We use this age because (i) it is an age by which most people have completed schooling, and (ii) it is
the last observation in our panel. Estimating the returns even later in life would be interesting, but is not
feasible given data limitations. Note that, on the other hand, in this specification the returns to graduation
do not depend on age as graduation dummies enter the model linearly.




                                                     24
5.2       Returns to Schooling

Table 9 presents estimates of the returns to schooling for our various specifications. Panel
(a) displays the return to an additional year of schooling, while Panels (b) and (c) present
estimates of “sheepskin effects” for graduating from high school and college, respectively.
We report six different specifications on separate rows in each Panel, beginning with raw
premia and ending with our preferred specification.
       We start by comparing results for the Mincerian and HLT specifications, which are re-
ported in rows (ii) and (iii), respectively. There is virtually no difference in the estimated
returns to high school graduation [Panel (b)] across these two specifications, while the esti-
mated returns to college graduation [Panel (c)] for the HLT specification are about 10% to
22% lower than the Mincer specification for the NLSY97 and NLSY79 Old cohorts, respec-
tively. In contrast, the estimated returns to an additional year of schooling [Panel (a)] are
dramatically larger for the HLT specification compared to the Mincer one, with the return
to an extra year of schooling based on the former specification being 38% larger than the
latter specification for the NLSY97 cohort and five times larger for the NLSY79 Old cohort.
       In row (iv) of the Panels in Table 9, we present estimates for the wage equation specifica-
tion in which we replace potential work experience with actual work experience. Note that
these estimates do not account for the potential endogeneity of work experience. Relative
to the estimates in the preceding rows of the Panels, the estimates of returns to high school
graduation [Panel (b)] and an extra year of schooling [Panel (a)] in row (iv) are much lower,
while the estimated returns to college graduation in row (iv) are not that different from those
in the preceding rows of Panel (c). This finding suggests that a sizable part of the estimated
returns to schooling in the previous rows actually may be returns to the work experiences
individuals acquire during their transition from school to work.38
       In row (v) of the Panels in Table 9 we extend the above specification to include controls
for the local labor market conditions and demographic background characteristics displayed
in Tables 1 and 3, respectively. Adding these variables does not result in estimated returns
for years of schooling and degrees that differ substantially from those in the preceding rows
  38
     In results not reported, but available upon request, we find that the primary driver of the decline in row
(iv) is due to controlling for in-school work experience.


                                                      25
of the Panels. The one exception is with the return to college graduation, which declines by
5%-15% when one adds controls for demographics and labor market conditions.
   The estimated returns to schooling and degrees for the last and preferred specification
we consider, which accounts for selection on unobservable characteristics, are found in row
(vi) of the Panels in Table 9. This specification accounts for selection by jointly estimating
the wage equation with our choice model and ability measurement equations, as described in
Section 4.2. Compared to the estimates for our other specifications, accounting for selection
reduces the returns to high school [Panel (b)] and college degrees [Panel (c)], but increases
the returns to each additional year of schooling [Panel (a)]. The returns to schooling and
degrees in row (vi) are much lower than the unadjusted ones in row (i) of each Panel, with
this difference attributable in part to holding constant actual work experiences, in part to
controlling for observable characteristics and, finally, in part to accounting for selection on
unobservables. Below, in Section 6, we quantify the relative importance of these components
and how much they account for changes in the returns to education (and work experiences)
across the cohorts we analyze.
   Finally, we compare how our estimates of the returns to schooling when one controls for
selection in row (vi) have changed across our three cohorts. These changes are recorded in
the last two columns of Table 9 for each panel. The estimated returns to an additional year
of schooling [Panel (a)] declined across the three cohorts, while the return to a high school
degree [Panel (b)] increased, albeit at a decreasing rate. The across-cohort change in the
return to obtaining a college degree [Panel (c)] followed an inverse U-shape. Finally, we note
that the across-cohort changes in the returns to education in row (vi) are quite different than
the corresponding changes for the estimated returns produced by the other specifications,
suggesting that the selection processes that govern educational and early work experiences
have changed over the past 20 years.
   Overall, we find that accounting for the accumulated actual work experiences of young
men and their endogeneity not only affects one’s conclusions about the magnitudes of returns
to years of schooling and to degrees, but also alters the conclusions one draws about how
these returns have changed over time.



                                              26
5.3       Returns to Work Experiences

We next consider the returns to various types of work experiences and how they have changed
across cohorts. Estimates for the returns to work experiences are presented in Table 10. Panel
(a) displays results for the wage equation specification that corresponds to the controls of
demographics and local labor market conditions and was used to produce row (v) in Table
9, while Panel (b) is based on the selection-corrected wage equation used to produce the
returns to education estimates in rows (vi) of Table 9. The first row of both Panel (a) and
Panel (b) of Table 10 (Year of School ) is the same as rows (v) and (vi) of Panel (a) of Table
9, respectively. The second and third rows of both Panels display the additional returns
to working while in high school and college, respectively. Finally, rows (iv) and (v) display
the estimated returns to part- and full-time out-of-school work experience, respectively. As
before, the estimated returns to the various types of work experiences are measured at age
29.
       We begin with the returns to working while in school. Consider, first, the returns to
working while in college. For this type of work experience, we find sizable returns, ranging
between 4 and 6 percent, which are higher than those to any other form of work experience
we consider or, for that matter, the return to an extra year of pure schooling. Comparing
the estimates for the returns to this form of work experience across Panels (a) and (b), we
find that they are not particularly sensitive to whether or not one controls for unobserved
heterogeneity. Finally, we note that these returns are highest for the NSLY79 Old cohort
(6%) and are a bit lower (5%) for the two more recent cohorts.
       With respect to the returns to working while in high school, Table 10 shows that they
are, in almost every instance, lower than the corresponding returns to working while in
college. Moreover, they are more sensitive to whether or not one controls for unobserved
heterogeneity. In particular, the returns to working while in high school initially vary from
0% to 2.5% and are decreasing over time. After controlling for unobserved heterogeneity,
the range of these returns widens to -1% to 5% and is U-shaped across the three cohorts.39
  39
    Our estimates of the returns to working while in high school are similar to those found in Hotz et al.
(2002) who also estimate the wage returns to early work experiences using data from the NLSY79 Young
cohort. In contrast, Hotz et al. (2002) find much smaller returns to working in college than we do. This
discrepancy likely results from differences in the specifications of the random factors used in each paper. In


                                                     27
    With respect to non-school related work experiences, we find an estimated return of be-
tween 3% and 3.5% to wages from an additional year of full-time, non-school work experience.
This return does not vary much across our three cohorts and is robust to the inclusion of
unobserved heterogeneity. In contrast, the estimated returns to part-time, non-school related
experience are quite sensitive to controls for unobserved heterogeneity. In particular, with
no controls for unobserved heterogeneity [Panel (a)], it appears that returns to part-time,
non-school work are always negative and are sizable, with a negative return between -4.5%
and -2.2%. Once we control for unobserved heterogeneity, these negative returns shrink by
a factor of 5 or more and are not statistically significant for the NLSY79 Young cohort. In
short, it appears that those individuals who tend to accumulate part-time, non-school work
experience are negatively selected on unobservables and their wage losses greatly exaggerate
the detrimental consequences of early part-time, non-school work for the subsequent wages
of young men.
    In summary, we find that the returns to in-school and full-time work experiences tend to
be large, larger in fact in many cases than the returns to an additional year of schooling. We
also find that the returns to work experiences, especially those for in-high-school and part-
time work experiences, differ substantially depending on whether one controls for or does
not control for unobserved heterogeneity, which has large impacts on the implied trends in
the returns to work experiences.


5.4     Returns to Unobserved Skills

Finally, we examine the contribution of the unobserved factors to the wages of young men.
Table 11 contains estimates of the cognitive and non-cognitive factor loadings for the full-
time wage equation for each of the three cohorts. Recall that the distribution of the factors
is multivariate normal with mean zero and identity covariance matrix. It follows that these
estimates can be interpreted as the change in log wages due to a one-standard-deviation
increase in the unobserved ability, holding fixed all observable characteristics and the other
dimension of unobserved ability.
this paper, we use a two-factor specification, with one of the factors measuring cognitive ability, while Hotz
et al. (2002) use a single-factor specification that is not explicitly linked to cognitive skills.


                                                     28
       We find that the wage return to cognitive ability (or cognitive skills) of young men is
between 15% and 17% for a one-standard-deviation increase in cognitive skills and is slightly
higher than the return to non-cognitive skills, which is between 11% and 12% for a one-
standard-deviation increase. Across cohorts, the returns to each factor are lowest for the
NLSY79 Young cohort. The cognitive factor loading is highest for the NLSY79 Old, while
the non-cognitive factor loading is highest for the NLSY97, although the estimated returns
to non-cognitive skills are fairly stable across cohorts.40



6        Decomposing Changes in Skill Wage Premia
In this section we use the parameter estimates of the model to conduct a set of decomposition
analyses of the sources of changes in skill wage premia. Specifically, we assess the relative
importance of the changes in prices of skills versus changes in the composition of skills across
the three NLSY cohorts in accounting for the observed changes in the wage premia to these
skills. A key feature of our decomposition approach is that it allows us to account for the
endogenous nature of the changes in educational attainment and types of work experience
for each of the cohorts.


6.1       Setup

Our approach differs from the canonical Oaxaca decomposition in two important ways. First,
we are interested in the difference across groups in wage premia to skills, rather than dif-
ferences in wage levels. Second, as noted above, our decomposition explicitly accounts for
unobserved wage determinants. This approach allows us to quantify the extent to which
wage premia for various skills have changed over time due to changes in the (causal) re-
turns to skills (i.e. price effects), or changes in the selectivity of those who accumulate the
skills (i.e. composition effects), where selection can be either on observable or unobservable
  40
     Our results contrast with Castex and Dechter (2014) and Deming (2017), who also examine the wage
returns to skills between the NLSY79 and NLSY97 but find that the returns to cognitive skills (as measured
by AFQT) have diminished greatly between the two. This likely reflects the fact that our empirical framework
differs from both of theirs in several important ways. Most importantly, we estimate the returns to skills
after controlling for selection on observables and unobservables. Additionally, our factor model explicitly
acknowledges the fact that cognitive skills are measured with error by the ASVAB test scores.


                                                    29
characteristics.


6.1.1      Price versus Composition Effects in Changes in Skill Wage Premia

To distinguish between changes in prices and composition of skills in accounting for the
changes in the skill wage premia, we decompose the wage premia as follows. Denote by
w the outcome of interest (log wage) and s the skill of interest (e.g. college graduation,
or full-time work experience). We partition individuals into two skill groups, denoting the
group with the higher level of skill by h, and the lower skill group by l. We use the 79
and 97 subscripts to denote the cohort group.41 Thus, for example, with respect to college
graduation, college graduates in the NLSY79 cohort are in the (S = h, C = 79) skill group,
while high school graduates in the NLSY79 cohort are in the (S = l, C = 79) group.
       Using this notation, the (population-level) across-cohort change in the wage premium to
the skill s (∆t Rs ) is then given by:


                      ∆t Rs ≡ [E (w|S = h, C = 97) − E (w|S = l, C = 97)] −

                               [E (w|S = h, C = 79) − E (w|S = l, C = 79)]

                             = (β97 − β79 )∆s E(Z97 |S = s) +                                   (18)
                               |            {z            }
                                           price

                               β (∆ E(Z97 |S = s) − ∆s E(Z79 |S = s)) .
                               | 79 s           {z                  }
                                                   composition


where ∆t denotes the differencing across the cohorts, ∆s denotes the simple differencing
operator between s = h and s = l, ands βc (Zc ) denotes the wage equation parameters
(characteristics) associated with cohort c. Using our model and parameter estimates, we
consistently estimate both components of the decomposition by replacing βc with their max-
imum likelihood estimates, β̂c from Tables 9, 10 and 11 that control for unobserved het-
erogeneity, and by replacing the conditional expectations, E(Zc |S = s), with their sample
analogues.
       In practice, we use the following partitions of skill levels to group individuals in our data.
  41
    For expositional purposes, we focus on comparing the NLSY79 Young cohort with the NLSY97 cohort.
As such, we will use shorthand and refer to that cohort as NLSY79 and use the 79 subscript. We show
decomposition results for both pairwise cohort comparisons later on.


                                                      30
For continuous measures, such as full-time work experience level, we define the high-skill
group h as individuals whose skill level falls in the interval (s, s + 1], while the low-skill
group l corresponds to the interval (s − 1, s], where s denotes the average skill level among
full-time workers who are age 29, where s is specific to each cohort and measured in number
of years. For discrete measures (i.e. high school graduation and college graduation), the
high-skill (low-skill) group is simply defined as those who have obtained (not obtained) the
degree, i.e. s = 1 (s = 0).


6.1.2   Accounting for Unobserved Skills

As noted above, the random factor specification we use allows us to analyze the role of
changes in the prices and composition of unobserved cognitive and non-cognitive abilities
across cohorts. In order to do so, we draw a vector of ability factors, (ξ1 , ξ2 ), from the
population distribution and use our model and parameter estimates to simulate individual
paths of decisions and outcomes conditional on the unobserved factors and initial conditions,
such as demographics and family background. We then estimate the conditional expectations
of the unobserved skills E(ξ1 |S = s) and E(ξ2 |S = s) using sample analogues from this
simulated dataset (see Appendix C for a more detailed discussion).
   Using the notation introduced in the previous section, we can partition the vector of
characteristics Z into components that are observed and those that are unobserved (to the
econometrician). Let Z unobs (Z obs ) denote the unobserved (observed) components of Z and
let β unobs (β obs ) denote the parameters associated with these characteristics. Then, we can




                                             31
extend the decomposition in (18) as follows:

                              obs    obs        obs
                    ∆t Rs = (β97  − β79  )∆s E(Z97  |S = s) +
                            |              {z             }
                                         observed price

                                unobs    unobs        unobs
                              (β97    − β79    )∆s E(Z97    |S = s) +
                              |                 {z                }
                                            unobserved price
                                                                                                          (19)
                               obs         obs                       obs
                                                                                  
                              β79    ∆s E(Z97  |S   = s) −     ∆s E(Z79  |S   = s) +
                              |                       {z                          }
                                               observed composition

                                unobs       unobs                 unobs
                                                                               
                              β79     ∆s E(Z97    |S = s) − ∆s E(Z79    |S = s) .
                              |                       {z                       }
                                                 unobserved composition


Values for each of these four components – observed price, unobserved price, observed com-
position and unobserved composition – in the specification for returns in (19) are calculated
using the parameter estimates for the wage equation and school and work payoff functions
and the simulation procedure described above and detailed in Appendix C. By extending the
classic Oaxaca decomposition to account for unobserved skills, we can quantify the extent
to which selection on unobserved skills contributes to the observed wage premia for different
skills, and how changes across cohorts in this selection process have affected the changes in
skill premia.
       Finally, we further decompose the observed price effects in specification (19) into the sum
of a direct and an indirect effect. We define the direct effect as the portion of the observed
price effect that is attributable to the skill of interest itself (i.e. S itself and its polynomial
terms, if applicable), with the indirect effect being the residual portion that is attributable
to the other skills that are imperfectly correlated with the skill of interest (e.g. full-time
work experience for S = years of schooling).42


6.2       Decomposition Results

In Figures 1 and 2, we summarize the findings of our decomposition analysis of the changes in
wage premia for different types of skills between the NLSY97 and NLSY79 Young cohorts and
  42
    Note that for the case of the high school and college graduation dummies, the direct price effect is simply
given by the across-cohort difference in the wage coefficients associated with these indicators, where the wage
coefficients come from the model specification that includes the random factors.


                                                      32
the NLSY79 Young and NLSY79 Old cohorts, respectively. Each figure contains a bar graph
with seven bars, which correspond to the seven different skill premia that we decompose.
Each bar contains five parts, which represent the relative contribution to the overall change in
the wage premium of each separate component of interest, namely: observed price directly
related to the skill, observed price indirectly related to the skill, observed composition,
unobserved price, and unobserved composition. To the right of each bar is the sum of all of
the five components of wage changes; it corresponds to the cross-cohort change in the skill
premium, or ∆t Rs as defined in (18).43
       Consider the decomposition of the across-cohort changes in the returns to additional
years of school across the NLSY79 Young and NLSY97 cohorts. Figure 1 shows that the
wage premium to an additional year of schooling has increased by 2 percentage points across
these two cohorts for those working full-time at age 29. This increase in the wage premium
for an additional year of schooling is almost completely acounted for by three equal-sized
effects. The first is the observed direct price effect, which is negative and is taken from the
estimated change in the returns to schooling recorded in the last column of Panel (b) of Table
10. The second is the observed indirect price effect, i.e., the combined effects of changes in
the returns to the work-related experiences (skills) that are correlated with years of schooling
and thus indirectly impact the wage premium to an additional year of schooling. Again, we
use the across-cohort changes to work-related experiences recorded in the last column of
Panel (b) of Table 10 to calculate this indirect price effect. This observed indirect price
effect is positive. Finally, there is an effect of changes in the composition of observed skills
across cohorts. This skill composition effect also is positive and is driven, in part, by the
rise in accumulated work experience associated with those with higher levels of schooling.
       Looking at the decomposition results for the other types of skill across the NLSY79
Young and NLSY97 cohorts displayed in Figure 1, we find that wage premia for most of
these skills declined across these two cohorts. The decline is especially pronounced for the
changes in premia for in-school work experience and the graduation attainment. This decline
is primarily driven by the decline across these cohorts in the amounts of both observed and
  43
   The quantities presented in Figures 1 and 2 are computed from simulated data. See Appendix C for
more details.



                                                33
unobserved skills attained by age 29, and indicates that those who worked in school (both
high-school and college, though more pronounced in high school) ended up, overall, with
lower amounts of productive skills. This latter finding is consistent with the idea that the
across-cohort increase in the amount of in-school work for a given amount of education may
have resulted from the increases in college education and tightening of credit to finance
higher education, thus leading the members of the NLSY97 cohort to work more while in
school in order to fund higher college costs.44
       The decline in the wage premia for graduating from either high school or college across
these two cohorts that is displayed in Figure 1 is heavily influenced by changes in the com-
position of unobserved skills, implying that those who completed degrees had lower amounts
of unobserved skills in the NLSY97 than they did in the NLSY79 young. Overall, with some
exceptions, we find that the decline in premia is mostly due to the general decline in the
composition of skills between the NLSY79 Young and NLSY97, especially as it relates to
unobserved skills. And finally, for each skill we find little to no role of unobserved price
effects. This reflects the relative stability over time in the returns to these skills as noted in
Table 11.
       The decomposition in wage changes across the NLSY79 Old and Young cohorts displayed
in Figure 2 also points to significant roles played by the unobserved skills for the NLSY79
Old and NLSY79 Young cohorts, though primarily in the opposite direction. Here we see
that those working in school and those graduating college had significantly higher levels
of skills (both observed and unobserved) in the NSLY79 Young than in the NLSY79 Old.
In particular, we find that most of the well-documented sharp increase in the college wage
premium in the 1980s was due to selection on unobservable skills.
       In summary, a key finding that emerges from our decomposition analysis of wage pre-
mia to different types of skills is that changes in the composition of both observable and
unobservable skills play an important role in explaining trends in skill premia. This is par-
ticularly true for unobserved skills, where changes in the composition of such skills make up
a large share of the across-cohort changes in the wage premia for in-school work experiences,
  44
    See Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2012) for summary of the trends and findings concerning credit con-
straints in education.



                                                 34
high-school graduation and college graduation.



7     Conclusion
This paper examines the returns to both schooling and various forms of work experience
for men from three birth cohorts, using longitudinal data from the 1979 and 1997 panels of
the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. To deal with selectivity of accumulated work
experience and schooling and its potential impact on estimating the wage returns to these
different types of experience, we develop and estimate a dynamic model of the schooling and
work decisions individuals make in their early adulthood and how they affect subsequent
wages for each of these cohorts. Building on previous work by Heckman, Lochner and
Todd (2006), our empirical framework generalizes the classic Mincerian model of returns to
human capital in four main ways: (i) it allows for a more flexible function of schooling and
work experiences, rather than the original linear-quadratic specification; (ii) it incorporates
additional controls for an individual’s background as well as degree sheepskin effects; (iii)
it differentiates among various forms of work experience that were actually attained by
the individual; and, importantly, (iv) it accounts for individual-specific multi-dimensional
unobservable heterogeneity to correct for the endogeneity of past human capital investment
decisions.
    Based on the estimates from this model, we produce several key findings. First, the failure
of previous estimates to account for the influences of accumulated actual work experience
and its endogenous determination results in sizable overstatements of the wage returns to
schooling or degree attainment. Second, we find that the returns to various types of school
and work experiences significantly differ both within and between cohorts. For example, we
find evidence that the returns to an extra year of in-school or full-time work are larger than
the returns to an extra year of schooling and have increased for more recent cohorts. Third,
we decompose the across-cohort changes in wage premia to schooling and various types of
work experience into secular changes in skill prices, and changes in the composition – both in
terms of observable and unobservable characteristics – of groups of individuals who acquire
different types and amounts of schooling and work experiences. Our results point to the


                                              35
existence of sizable composition effects, both in terms of observable and unobservable skills,
which play an important role in explaining across-cohort changes in skill premia.
   Our analysis highlights the need to account for dynamic selection and changes in com-
position of skills – both those that result from different schooling and accumulated work
experiences and those reflecting unobserved cognitive and non-cognitive skills – when ana-
lyzing secular changes in the wage returns to skills. An interesting future research avenue
would be to build on our analysis and estimate a dynamic generalized Roy model to quan-
tify the relative importance of across-cohort changes in wage returns to skills and non-wage
components – in particular, increasing costs of college education – in explaining changes in
the acquisition of schooling and early work experiences.




                                             36
References
Altonji, Joseph G., Prashant Bharadwaj, and Fabian Lange. 2009. “Constructing
 AFQT Scores that are Comparable Across the NLSY79 and the NLSY97.” Yale University.
Altonji, Joseph G., Prashant Bharadwaj, and Fabian Lange. 2012. “Changes in the
 Characteristics of American Youth: Implications for Adult Outcomes.” Journal of Labor
 Economics, 30(4): 783–828.
Arcidiacono, Peter, Esteban Aucejo, Arnaud Maurel, and Tyler Ransom. 2016.
 “College Attrition and the Dynamics of Information Revelation.” National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research Working Paper 22325.
Atrostic, Barbara K., Nancy Bates, Geraldine Burt, and Adriana Silberstein.
 2001. “Nonresponse in US Government Household Surveys: Consistent Measures, Recent
 Trends, and New Insights.” Journal of Official Statistics, 17(2): 209–226.
Aucejo, Esteban, and Jonathan James. 2017. “Catching up to Girls: Understanding
 the Gender Imbalance in Educational Attainment within Race.” Arizona State University
 and California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo Working Paper.
Aughinbaugh, Alison, and Rosella M. Gardecki. 2008. “Attrition in the National
 Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997.” Bureau of Labor Statistics Working Paper.
Bacolod, Marigee, and V. Joseph Hotz. 2006. “Cohort Changes in the Transition from
 School to Work: Evidence from three NLS surveys.” Economics of Education Review,
 25(4): 351–373.
Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand. 2014. “The Declining
 Fortunes of the Young Since 2000.” American Economic Review, 104(5): 381–386.
Belzil, Christian, and Jorgen Hansen. 2002. “Unobserved Ability and the Return to
 Schooling.” Econometrica, 70(5): 2075–2091.
Belzil, Christian, and Jorgen Hansen. 2017. “The Evolution of the US Family Income-
 Schooling Relationship and Educational Selectivity.” Working Paper.
Böhm, Michael J. 2013. “Has Job Polarization Squeezed the Middle Class? Evidence from
  the Allocation of Talents.” CEP Discussion Paper 1215.
Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner. 2012. “Increasing Time to
 Baccalaureate Degree in the United States.” Education Finance and Policy, 7(4): 375–424.
Cameron, Stephen V., and James J. Heckman. 1998. “Life Cycle Schooling and Dy-
 namic Selection Bias: Models and Evidence for Five Cohorts of American Males.” Journal
 of Political Economy, 106(2): 262–333.
Cameron, Stephen V., and James J. Heckman. 2001. “The Dynamics of Educa-
 tional Attainment for Black, Hispanic, and White Males.” Journal of Political Economy,
 109(3): 455–499.

                                           37
Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising
 Return to College for Younger Men?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2): 705–746.

Carneiro, Pedro, and Sokbae Lee. 2011. “Trends in Quality-Adjusted Skill Premia in
 the United States, 1960-2000.” American Economic Review, 101(6): 2309–2349.

Castex, Gonzalo, and Evgenia Kogan Dechter. 2014. “The Changing Roles of Educa-
 tion and Ability in Wage Determination.” Journal of Labor Economics, 32(4): 685–710.

Cunha, Flavio, Fatih Karahan, and Ilton Soares. 2011. “Returns to Skills and the
 College Premium.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43(5): 39–86.

Deming, David J. 2017. “The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market.”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4): 1593–1640.

Fang, Hanming. 2006. “Disentangling the College Wage Premium: Estimating a Model
  with Endogenous Education Choices.” International Economic Review, 47(4): 1151–1185.

Fortin, Nicole M. 2006. “Higher-Education Policies and the College Wage Premium:
  Cross-state Evidence from the 1990s.” American Economic Review, 96(4): 959–987.

Fortin, Nicole, Thomas Lemieux, and Sergio Firpo. 2011. “Decomposition Methods
  in Economics.” In Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol. 4A, , ed. Orley Ashenfelter and
  David Card, 1–102. Elsevier.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Long-Run Changes in the US Wage
 Structure: Narrowing, Widening, Polarizing.” National Bureau of Economic Research
 Working Paper 13568.

Heckman, James J., John Eric Humphries, and Gregory Veramendi. forthcom-
 ing. “Returns to Education: The Causal Effects of Education on Earnings, Health and
 Smoking.” Journal of Political Economy.

Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzúa. 2006. “The Effects of Cognitive
 and Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of
 Labor Economics, 24(3): 411–482.

Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, and Petra E. Todd. 2006. “Earnings Func-
 tions, Rates of Return and Treament Effects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond.” In
 Handbook of the Economics of Education. Vol. 1, , ed. Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch,
 307–458. Elsevier.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Lixin Colin Xu, Marta Tienda, and Avner Ahituv. 2002. “Are
 There Returns to the Wages of Young Men from Working While in School?” The Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 84(2): 221–236.

Hu, Yingyao, and Matthew Shum. 2012. “Nonparametric Identification of Dynamic
 Models with Unobserved State Variables.” Journal of Econometrics, 171: 32–44.


                                          38
Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-
 1987: Supply and Demand Factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1): 35–78.

Kotlarski, Ignacy. 1967. “On Characterizing the Gamma and the Normal Distribution.”
 Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 20(1): 69–76.

Lee, Donghoon, and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2010. “Accounting for Wage and Employment
  Changes in the US from 1968–2000: A Dynamic Model of Labor Market Equilibrium.”
  Journal of Econometrics, 156(1): 68–85.

Lee, Sang Yoon, Yongseok Shin, and Donghoon Lee. 2015. “The Option Value of
  Human Capital: Higher Education and Wage Inequality.” National Bureau of Economic
  Research Working Paper 21724.

Lochner, Lance, and Alexander Monge-Naranjo. 2012. “Credit Constraints in Edu-
  cation.” Annual Reviews of Economics, 4: 225–256.

Mincer, Jacob. 1974. Schooling, Experience and Earnings. New York:Columbia University
 Press for National Bureau of Economic Research.

Moretti, Enrico. 2011. “Local Labor Markets.” In Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol. 4B,
 , ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, 1237–1313. Elsevier.

Scott-Clayton, Judith. 2012. “What Explains Trends in Labor Supply Among U.S. Un-
  dergraduates?” National Tax Journal, 65(1): 181–210.

Taber, Christopher R. 2001. “The Rising College Premium in the Eighties: Return to
  College or Return to Unobserved Ability?” The Review of Economic Studies, 68(3): 665–
  691.

Valletta, Robert G. forthcoming. “Recent Flattening in the Higher Education Wage Pre-
 mium: Polarization, Skill Downgrading, or Both?” In Education, Skills, and Technical
 Change: Implications for Future U.S. GDP Growth. , ed. Charles Hulten and Valerie
 Ramey. University of Chicago Press.

Willis, Robert J., and Sherwin Rosen. 1979. “Education and Self-Selection.” Journal
 of Political Economy, 87(5): S7–S36.




                                          39
Tables

                Table 1: Local labor market conditions at various ages

                     NLSY79 NLSY79
          Experience   Old      Young NLSY97                     79Y–79O       97–79Y
          County Employment Rate:
           At age 16     0.72      0.75  0.88                    0.03∗∗∗       0.13∗∗∗
           At age 22     0.76      0.79  0.88                    0.03∗∗∗       0.09∗∗∗
           At age 26     0.81      0.84  0.88                    0.03∗∗∗       0.04∗∗∗
           At age 29     0.85      0.85  0.85                    0.00          0.00
          County Ave. Income per Worker:
           At age 16     12.04    12.40                 16.54 0.36∗∗∗          4.14∗∗∗
           At age 22     12.53    13.71                 18.13 1.18∗∗∗          4.42∗∗∗
           At age 26     13.96    14.83                 18.65 0.87∗∗∗          3.82∗∗∗
           At age 29     14.94    14.98                 18.52 0.04             3.54∗∗∗
          “Employment rate” in the respondent’s county of residence at each age is the
         number of employees reported by employers divided by population. Income per
         worker is the total wage and salary income of the county (in 1,000’s of 1982-84$)
         divided by the number of workers. Significance reported at the 1% (***), 5%
         (**), and 10% (*) levels.




                                                40
  Table 2: Median AFQT score and dispersion by final educational attainment

                                  NLSY79       NLSY79
                                   Old          Young NLSY97            79Y–79O       97–79Y
 Median AFQT score:
  HS Dropouts                         -0.97         -0.97       -0.77 0.00             0.19∗∗
  HS Graduates                         0.05         -0.13       -0.14 -0.17∗∗         -0.02
  Some College                         0.43          0.38        0.45 -0.05            0.07
  College Graduates                    1.22          1.18        1.05 -0.04           -0.12∗∗∗
  All Education Levels                 0.40          0.33        0.42 -0.07            0.08∗
 Standard deviation of AFQT score:
  HS Dropouts                 0.68                   0.78        0.94    0.10∗∗∗       0.16∗∗∗
  HS Graduates                0.79                   0.85        0.89    0.06∗         0.04
  Some College                0.81                   0.83        0.84    0.02          0.01
  College Graduates           0.52                   0.56        0.62    0.04          0.06∗∗∗
  All Education Levels        0.93                   0.96        0.96    0.03          0.00
 Sample Sizes:
  N HS Dropouts                         179           379        416
  N HS Graduates                        338           774        923
  N Some College                        391           939      1,358
  N College Graduates                   188           453        748
  N All Education Levels              1,096         2,545      3,445
 AFQT distribution normalized so that the distribution including all cohorts is mean-zero, vari-
ance one. Significance reported at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels. For median AFQT
score, the significance comes from bootstrapped standard errors of the median (500 replications).
For standard deviations of AFQT score, the significance comes from two-tailed F-tests of the
ratio of the variances. Sample sizes may differ from those reported in Table B.1 due to missing
AFQT scores.




                                               41
 Table 3: Family background characteristics by final educational attainment

                              NLSY79      NLSY79
                               Old         Young NLSY97            79Y–79O      97–79Y
 Mother’s education:
  HS Dropouts                     9.78        10.17       11.22 0.39             1.05∗∗∗
  HS Graduates                   11.12        10.91       11.93 -0.21            1.02∗∗∗
  Some College                   11.95        11.82       12.97 -0.13            1.15∗∗∗
  College Graduates              13.34        13.38       14.52 0.04             1.14∗∗∗
  All Education Levels           11.78        11.76       12.86 -0.02            1.10∗∗∗
 Father’s education:
  HS Dropouts                     8.88         9.89       11.08 1.01∗∗∗          1.19∗∗∗
  HS Graduates                   11.02        10.87       11.79 -0.15            0.92∗∗∗
  Some College                   12.60        12.21       12.94 -0.39∗           0.73∗∗∗
  College Graduates              14.10        14.38       14.98 0.28             0.60∗∗∗
  All Education Levels           12.09        12.14       12.97 0.06             0.82∗∗∗
 Family Income:
  HS Dropouts                    20.04        20.58       19.64     0.54        -0.94
  HS Graduates                   31.42        26.58       25.88    -4.84∗∗∗     -0.70
  Some College                   35.45        31.46       33.98    -3.99∗∗∗      2.52∗∗
  College Graduates              47.04        45.16       49.44    -1.88         4.28∗∗
  All Education Levels           34.95        31.87       33.82    -3.08∗∗∗      1.94∗∗∗
 Share lived in female-headed      HH
  HS Dropouts                      0.18          0.19       0.31    0.01         0.12∗∗∗
  HS Graduates                     0.13          0.14       0.25    0.01         0.11∗∗∗
  Some College                     0.11          0.14       0.24    0.03         0.10∗∗∗
  College Graduates                0.08          0.10       0.12    0.02         0.02
  All Education Levels             0.12          0.13       0.23    0.02         0.09∗∗∗
 Sample Sizes:
  HS Dropouts                      206          409         603
  HS Graduates                     373          800       1,202
  Some College                     420          978       1,696
  College Graduates                197          462         873
  All Education Levels           1,196        2,649       4,374
 Family income is in 1,000’s of 1982-84$. Education is highest grade of the respondent’s
biological parents. Female-headed household is from survey round 1 in NLSY79 and age 14
in NLSY97. Significance reported at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels. Sample sizes
may differ from those reported in Table B.1 due to missing variables of interest.




                                            42
  Table 4: Average end-of-panel experience by final educational attainment

                             NLSY79    NLSY79
                              Old       Young NLSY97         79Y–79O     97–79Y
Total months of schooling:
 HS Dropouts                   14.11        14.92    18.92    0.81        4.00∗∗∗
 HS Graduates                  23.47        22.53    25.03   -0.94∗       2.51∗∗∗
 Some College                  42.15        38.47    48.77   -3.68∗∗∗    10.31∗∗∗
 College Graduates             75.29        75.16    87.37   -0.12       12.21∗∗∗
 All Education Levels          39.96        40.59    50.31    0.63        9.71∗∗∗
Total months of work experience:
 HS Dropouts                 96.01       95.35       85.84 -0.66          -9.51∗∗∗
 HS Graduates               105.23      102.20      101.76 -3.03          -0.44
 Some College                97.61       99.54      100.41 1.93            0.87
 College Graduates           86.72       99.59      100.53 12.87∗∗∗        0.93
 All Education Levels        97.55       99.87       99.40 2.31∗∗         -0.46
Months of school only:
 HS Dropouts                   11.09         9.07    11.89   -2.02∗∗      2.82∗∗∗
 HS Graduates                  16.33        12.00    13.18   -4.33∗∗∗     1.18∗∗
 Some College                  23.10        16.94    19.44   -6.16∗∗∗     2.50∗∗∗
 College Graduates             42.35        33.22    33.68   -9.13∗∗∗     0.46
 All Education Levels          23.63        18.77    20.97   -4.87∗∗∗     2.20∗∗∗
Months of work in high school:
 HS Dropouts                   3.03          5.86     7.04   2.83∗∗∗      1.18∗
 HS Graduates                  7.13         10.53    11.85   3.39∗∗∗      1.32∗∗∗
 Some College                  6.33         10.55    12.24   4.22∗∗∗      1.69∗∗∗
 College Graduates             4.93         11.29    12.06   6.36∗∗∗      0.76
 All Education Levels          5.91         10.23    11.60   4.32∗∗∗      1.37∗∗∗
Months of work in college:
 Some College                  12.72        10.97    17.09   -1.74∗∗      6.12∗∗∗
 College Graduates             28.01        30.65    41.64    2.64       10.99∗∗∗
 All Education Levels          10.42        11.60    17.74    1.18∗       6.14∗∗∗
                                                        Continued on next page




                                       43
                     Table 4 – continued from previous page

                                NLSY79      NLSY79
                                 Old         Young NLSY97             79Y–79O       97–79Y
Months of part-time work:
 HS Dropouts                        16.87         18.69      21.57     1.82           2.87∗∗∗
 HS Graduates                       12.79         15.80      19.43     3.01∗∗∗        3.63∗∗∗
 Some College                       12.74         14.43      16.31     1.68∗∗         1.88∗∗∗
 College Graduates                   9.22         10.98       9.38     1.76∗∗∗       -1.60∗∗∗
 All Education Levels               12.49         14.41      15.73     1.92∗∗∗        1.32∗∗∗
Months of full-time work:
 HS Dropouts                        76.11         70.81      57.24    -5.30∗        -13.56∗∗∗
 HS Graduates                       85.31         75.87      70.48    -9.44∗∗∗       -5.39∗∗∗
 Some College                       65.82         63.59      54.77    -2.24          -8.82∗∗∗
 College Graduates                  44.56         46.67      37.45     2.11          -9.22∗∗∗
 All Education Levels               68.73         63.63      54.33    -5.11∗∗∗       -9.30∗∗∗
Sample sizes:
 N HS Dropouts                        177           348        301
 N HS Graduates                       338           722        693
 N Some College                       381           898       1029
 N College Graduates                  174           447        602
 N All Education Levels             1,070         2,415      2,625
Note: All counts begin at age 16, thus the average high school dropout had 14
months of high school enrollment after age 16 in the NLSY79 Old.
Significance reported at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.
Sample sizes may differ from those reported in Table B.1 due to survey attrition.




                                             44
                           Table 5: Graduation probabilities by age

                                        NLSY79         NLSY79
 Variable                                Old            Young NLSY97          79Y–79O       97–79Y
 At Age 26:
  Pr(Grad HS)                                0.87         0.88        0.90 0.00              0.02∗∗
  Pr(Start College)                          0.55         0.59        0.64 0.04∗∗            0.05∗∗∗
  Pr(Grad College)                           0.19         0.22        0.22 0.03              0.01
  Pr(Grad College | Start Col)               0.35         0.37        0.35 0.02             -0.02
  N                                         1,099        2,456       3,607
 At Age 29:
  Pr(Grad HS)                                0.87         0.89        0.91 0.01              0.02∗∗
  Pr(Start College)                          0.56         0.61        0.65 0.04∗∗            0.05∗∗∗
  Pr(Grad College)                           0.20         0.23        0.26 0.03∗∗            0.02∗
  Pr(Grad College | Start Col)               0.36         0.38        0.39 0.02              0.01
  N                                         1,064        2,400       1,930
 Notes: High school graduation includes earning either a GED or a diploma. Starting college refers to
enrolling in either a 2- or 4-year institution. Significance reported at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10%
(*) levels. Sample sizes may differ from those reported in Table B.1 due to survey attrition.




                                                  45
Table 6: Average growth in full-time wages due to various experiences by
final educational attainment

                   NLSY79 NLSY79
 Experience           Old    Young              NLSY97       79Y–79O       97–79Y
 High School Dropouts:
  Work in HS           0.050   0.079                0.048     0.029       -0.031∗
  Work part time      -0.045   0.026               -0.046     0.072∗∗∗    -0.073∗∗∗
  Work full time       0.034   0.052                0.050     0.018∗∗∗    -0.002
  N                    1,070   1,899                1,513
 High school graduates:
  Work in HS            0.038           0.024       0.070 -0.014           0.046∗∗∗
  Work part time        0.007          -0.029      -0.005 -0.036∗∗∗        0.024∗∗∗
  Work full time        0.036           0.058       0.058 0.023∗∗∗         0.000
  N                     2,223           4,295       4,550
 Some College:
  Work in HS              -0.005        0.072       0.024     0.076∗∗∗    -0.048∗∗∗
  Work in college          0.065        0.071       0.073     0.006        0.002
  Work part time          -0.032        0.035      -0.031     0.067∗∗∗    -0.066∗∗∗
  Work full time           0.054        0.068       0.066     0.013∗∗∗    -0.002
  N                        2,001        4,523       5,584
 College Graduates:
  Work in HS              -0.001        0.057      -0.006 0.057∗∗         -0.062∗∗∗
  Work in college          0.061        0.039       0.039 -0.022           0.001
  Work part time           0.016        0.041      -0.088 0.025           -0.129∗∗∗
  Work full time           0.106        0.114       0.097 0.007           -0.016∗∗
  N                          691        1,730       2,231
 All Education Levels:
  Work in HS            0.027          0.070        0.044     0.044∗∗∗    -0.026∗∗∗
  Work in college       0.080          0.109        0.092     0.028∗∗∗    -0.017∗∗∗
  Work part time       -0.019         -0.003       -0.055     0.017∗∗     -0.053∗∗∗
  Work full time        0.038          0.053        0.047     0.015∗∗∗    -0.006∗∗∗
  N                     5,985         12,447       13,878
 The sample is conditional on working full-time at age 29. Estimates weighted by NLSY
sampling weights. Estimates are coefficients from separate bivariate regressons of log
wage on each cumulative experience term. One monthly observation per year per in-
dividual is included in N . HS Graduates included in this table are those who never
attended college. “Some College” are those who attended college (either 2- or 4-year)
but did not graduate with a 4-year degree. College Graduates are those who graduated
with a 4-year degree but who never attended graduate school. Significance reported at
the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.




                                          46
Table 7: College and HS Wage Premium and dispersion at age 29 for full-time workers

                                        NLSY79         NLSY79
                                         Old            Young NLSY97          79Y–79O      97–79Y
 Average log wages:
  HS Dropouts                                1.86         1.81        1.75 -0.05∗∗∗        -0.05∗∗∗
  HS Graduates                               2.00         1.92        1.91 -0.09∗∗∗        -0.01
  Some College                               2.14         2.05        2.01 -0.09∗∗∗        -0.04∗∗∗
  College Graduates                          2.31         2.35        2.28 0.04∗∗∗         -0.08∗∗∗
 Average wage premium:
  High school Wage Premium                   0.14         0.11        0.16 -0.04∗∗          0.05∗∗∗
  Some College Wage Premium                  0.13         0.13        0.09 0.00            -0.04∗∗∗
  College Wage Premium                       0.31         0.44        0.37 0.13∗∗∗         -0.07∗∗∗
 Standard deviation of log wages:
  HS Dropouts                                0.39         0.38        0.35 -0.01           -0.03∗∗∗
  HS Graduates                               0.37         0.39        0.39 0.02∗∗∗          0.00
  Some College                               0.44         0.40        0.42 -0.04∗∗∗         0.02∗∗∗
  College Graduates                          0.39         0.37        0.43 -0.02∗∗∗         0.06∗∗∗
 Sample sizes:
  N HS Dropouts                             1,205        2,154       1,188
  N HS Graduates                            2,727        5,452       3,403
  N Some College                            2,820        6,528       5,317
  N College Graduates                       1,296        3,578       3,526
 Summary statistics weighted by NLSY sampling weights. All monthly log wage observations during
the last year of the panel are included in N . HS Graduates included in this table are those who never
attended college. “Some College” are those who attended college (either 2- or 4-year) but did not
graduate with a 4-year degree. College Graduates are those who graduated with a 4-year degree but
who never attended graduate school. “High school Wage Premium” refers to the log wage difference
between HS Graduates and HS Dropouts. “Some College Wage Premium” refers to the log wage
difference between “Some College” and HS Graduates. “College Wage Premium” refers to the log wage
difference between College Graduates and HS Graduates. Significance reported at the 1% (***), 5%
(**), and 10% (*) levels. For standard deviations of log wages, the significance comes from two-tailed
F-tests of the ratio of the variances.




                                                  47
            Table 8: Definitions of Activities by Educational Risk Sets

Activity (j r )                              Description
Ria = 1 (Pre-High School Graduate):
     1         School only, no HS diploma or GED
     2         Work in school, no HS diploma or GED
     3         Work PT (no school), no HS diploma or GED
     4         Work FT (no school), no HS diploma or GED
     5         Military, no HS diploma or GED
     6         Other, no HS diploma or GED
     7         Graduate from HS at age a (Attainment Activity)
Ria = 2 (High School Graduate):
     1         School only, has HS diploma or GED
     2         Work in school, has HS diploma or GED
     3         Work PT (no school), has HS diploma or GED
     4         Work FT (no school), has HS diploma or GED
     5         Military, has HS diploma or GED
     6         Other, has HS diploma or GED
     7         Graduate with bachelor’s degree at age a (Attainment Activity)
Ria = 3 (College Graduate):
     1         School only, has bachelor’s degree
     2         Work in school, has bachelor’s degree
     3         Work PT (no school), has bachelor’s degree
     4         Work FT (no school), has bachelor’s degree
     5         Military, has bachelor’s degree
     6         Other, has bachelor’s degree




                                        48
Table 9: Measures of wage returns to schooling across specifications, at age 29

                       NLSY79 NLSY79
 Specification           Old      Young NLSY97                       79Y–79O        97–79Y
 Panel (a): Return to Year of Schooling
   (i) Raw             0.054∗∗∗ 0.075∗∗∗ 0.068∗∗∗                     0.020∗∗∗     -0.007∗
  (ii) Mincer          0.022∗∗∗ 0.026∗∗∗ 0.042∗∗∗                     0.004         0.016∗∗∗
 (iii) HLT (2006)      0.107∗∗∗ 0.073∗∗∗ 0.058∗∗∗                    -0.034∗∗∗     -0.015∗∗∗
 (iv) + Actual Exper 0.035∗∗∗ 0.023∗∗∗ 0.006∗∗∗                       0.012∗∗∗     -0.017∗∗∗
  (v) + Background     0.026∗∗∗ 0.024∗∗∗ 0.006∗∗∗                    -0.002        -0.018∗∗∗
 (vi) + Unobserved     0.052∗∗∗ 0.024∗∗∗ 0.013∗∗∗                    -0.028∗∗∗     -0.011∗∗∗
 Panel (b) : Return to       Graduation from HS        (Sheepskin)
   (i) Raw                    0.160∗∗∗ 0.156∗∗∗         0.175∗∗∗ -0.004             0.019∗∗∗
  (ii) Mincer                 0.118∗∗∗ 0.084∗∗∗         0.060∗∗∗ -0.034∗∗∗         -0.024∗∗∗
 (iii) HLT (2006)             0.115∗∗∗ 0.091∗∗∗         0.060∗∗∗ -0.024∗∗∗         -0.031∗∗∗
 (iv) + Actual Exper          0.076∗∗∗ 0.066∗∗∗         0.042∗∗∗ -0.010∗∗∗         -0.024∗∗∗
  (v) + Background            0.081∗∗∗ 0.068∗∗∗         0.037∗∗∗ -0.013∗∗∗         -0.031∗∗∗
 (vi) + Unobserved           -0.019∗∗∗ 0.020∗∗∗         0.027∗∗∗   0.039∗∗∗         0.007∗
 Panel (c) : Return to       Graduation from College (Sheepskin)
   (i) Raw                    0.245∗∗∗ 0.420∗∗∗ 0.367∗∗∗     0.175∗∗∗              -0.053∗∗∗
                                    ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
  (ii) Mincer                 0.191     0.360     0.260      0.169∗∗∗              -0.100∗∗∗
 (iii) HLT (2006)             0.148∗∗∗ 0.319∗∗∗ 0.234∗∗∗     0.171∗∗∗              -0.085∗∗∗
 (iv) + Actual Exper          0.142∗∗∗ 0.303∗∗∗ 0.231∗∗∗     0.161∗∗∗              -0.072∗∗∗
                                    ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
  (v) + Background            0.136     0.253     0.209      0.117∗∗∗              -0.044∗∗∗
 (vi) + Unobserved            0.177∗∗∗ 0.231∗∗∗ 0.186∗∗∗     0.054∗∗∗              -0.046∗∗∗
 Panel (a) is the wage return at age 29 of one extra year of schooling.
 Panel (b) is the wage premium (sheepskin effect) of earning a high school diploma relative
to not earning a diploma.
 Panel (c) is the wage premium (sheepskin effect) of earning a bachelor’s degree relative to
a high school diploma.
 (i) Indicates raw premium, controlling only for type-of-work dummies (in-school, part-time,
full-time).
 (ii) Adds to (i) a quadratic in potential experience (= age − years of schooling − 6), a linear
term for years of schooling, and degree dummies.
 (iii) Increases flexibility similar to Heckman, Lochner and Todd (2006). Adds a cubic in
schooling, a linear interaction between schooling experience and potential experience, and
adds race/ethnicity indicators. Additionally, idiosyncratic error variance is allowed to be
heteroskedastic by type of work.
 (iv) Replaces potential experience in (iii) with actual work experience type (in-school, part-
time, full-time), military experience, and other experience. Also includes linear interaction
between schooling and actual work experiences, except for military and other.
 (v) Adds personal background characteristics and local labor market conditions.
 (vi) Adds person-specific random factors to account for dynamic selection. See Eq. (10)
 All standard errors are on the order of 0.002. Significance reported at the 1% (***), 5%
(**), and 10% (*) levels.



                                               49
Table 10: Measures of wage returns of work experiences at age 29 for
selection- & non-selection-correction specifications

                    NLSY79            NLSY79
 Variable              Old             Young       NLSY97 79Y–79O             97–79Y
 Panel (a): Full model without       controlling   for selection
  Year of School     0.026∗∗∗          0.024∗∗∗     0.006∗∗∗ -0.002          -0.018∗∗∗
                    (0.003)          (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.003)       (0.002)
  Work in HS         0.025∗∗∗          0.024∗∗∗    -0.003 ∗∗
                                                               -0.001        -0.027∗∗∗
                    (0.003)          (0.002)       (0.001)     (0.004)       (0.002)
  Work in College 0.067∗∗∗             0.043∗∗∗     0.040∗∗∗ -0.024∗∗∗       -0.003
                    (0.003)          (0.002)       (0.001)     (0.004)       (0.002)
  Work PT Only      -0.041∗∗∗         -0.022∗∗∗    -0.045 ∗∗∗
                                                                0.019∗∗∗     -0.023∗∗∗
                    (0.002)          (0.002)       (0.001)     (0.003)       (0.002)
  Work FT Only       0.034∗∗∗          0.035∗∗∗     0.035 ∗∗∗
                                                                0.001         0.001
                    (0.001)          (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.002)       (0.001)
 Panel (b): Full model controlling for selection
  Year of School     0.052∗∗∗ 0.024∗∗∗ 0.013∗∗∗                -0.028∗∗∗     -0.011∗∗∗
                    (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.001)            (0.003)       (0.002)
                           ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
  Work in HS         0.031      -0.010       0.050∗∗∗          -0.042∗∗∗      0.060∗∗∗
                    (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.001)            (0.004)       (0.002)
  Work in College 0.060∗∗∗ 0.049∗∗∗ 0.047∗∗∗                   -0.011∗∗∗     -0.002
                    (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.001)            (0.004)       (0.002)
  Work PT Only      -0.008∗∗∗ 0.001         -0.006∗∗∗           0.010∗∗∗     -0.007∗∗∗
                    (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.001)            (0.003)       (0.002)
                           ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
  Work FT only       0.030       0.029       0.034∗∗∗          -0.001         0.005∗∗∗
                    (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)            (0.001)       (0.001)
 Panel (a) refers to wage equation marginal effects without correcting for selection on
unobservables. This is specification (v) (“+Background”) in Table 9.
 Panel (b) refers to wage equation marginal effects correcting for selection on unobserv-
ables. This is specification (vi) (“+Unobserved”) in Table 9.
 Marginal effects are evaluated at the cohort-specific sample averages at age 29 for 1
additional year of each component of experience. Significance reported at the 1% (***),
5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.




                                           50
             Table 11: Full-time wage factor loading estimates

               NLSY79            NLSY79
 Variable         Old             Young       NLSY97       79Y–79O       97–79Y
 Cognitive      0.174∗∗∗          0.145∗∗∗     0.163∗∗∗    -0.030∗∗∗     0.018∗∗∗
               (0.001)           (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
 Non-Cognitive 0.114∗∗∗           0.108∗∗∗     0.117∗∗∗    -0.006∗∗∗     0.009∗∗∗
               (0.001)           (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
 Factor loading estimates are from the specification found in the “+ Unobserved” row
in Table 9. Significance reported at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels.




                                         51
Figure 1: Components of Changes in Skill Premia between NLSY79 Young and NLSY97
Cohorts




                  School                                                         0.020


             Work in HS                                                                  −0.055


        Work in College                                               −0.065


        Work Part−time                                              0.002


        Work Full−time                                             −0.009


           Graduate HS                                                      −0.020


           Graduate BA                                                         −0.028


                                −.1           −.05             0               .05                .1

                                      Obs. Price Direct               Obs. Price Indirect
                                      Obs. Composition                Unobs. Price
                                      Unobs. Composition



Notes: Above are results of our decomposition of the change in skill premia between the NLSY79 young
and NLSY97 cohorts. Numbers to the right of the bars correspond to the total of all components. Further
details regarding the decomposition method can be found in Section 6.




                                                  52
Figure 2: Components of Changes in Skill Premia between NLSY79 Old and NLSY79 Young
Cohorts




                  School                                  0.009


             Work in HS                                            0.016


        Work in College                                               0.035


        Work Part−time                                     0.037


        Work Full−time                                  −0.005


            Graduate HS                                     −0.054


           Graduate BA                                                                              0.109


                           −.1                    0                           .1                     .2

                                       Obs. Price Direct                      Obs. Price Indirect
                                       Obs. Composition                       Unobs. Price
                                       Unobs. Composition



Notes: Above are results of our decomposition of the change in skill premia between the NLSY79 old and
NLSY79 young cohorts. Numbers to the right of the bars correspond to the total of all components. Further
details regarding the decomposition method can be found in Section 6.




                                                   53
A      Data Appendix (for online publication)
This section details our method for constructing comparable variables across both NLSY
surveys, as well as how each variable was created. We divide our discussion into the following
groups of variables: personal and family background characteristics and cognitive ability;
local labor market conditions; earnings and educational degrees; school and work activity
variables; and finally we discuss efforts undertaken to maximize comparability across surveys.


A.1     Personal and family characteristics and cognitive ability

Personal characteristics observed in the data include the individual’s Armed Services Voca-
tional Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) subject test scores, race, nativity, and birth year. Family
background characteristics in the data are not time-varying and are measured at the first
interview. They include the education level of each of the individual’s biological parents,
family income at the start of the survey, maternal co-residence status and whether or not
the household had a female head when the respondent was age 14.


A.2     Local labor market conditions

We observe local labor market conditions at the county level. These include the percentage
of all residents who are employed in the individual’s county of residence (which we call the
“employment rate”), along with the income per worker in the county.45 To create these local
labor market variables, we make use of the restricted-access Geocode supplement of each of
the NLSY surveys.


A.3     Wages and educational degrees

The wage in our analysis is defined as the average hourly wage across all jobs worked in the
month, weighted by the hours worked at each job. Wages are deflated using the CPI-U with
a base year of 1982-84. We only include wages observed during employment spells (i.e. we
  45
    “Employment rate” is the number of employees reported by employers divided by population. Because
individuals can hold more than one job, the numbers are much higher than the corresponding national
employment-population ratio, which has ranged between 57% and 64% over the time period we consider.



                                                 54
discard wages reported when the individual was in the military or did not report working).
We trim outliers by dropping wages outside of the range $2-$50 in 1982-84 dollars.
   Educational attainment has three values, based on whether or not an individual holds
a high school diploma or bachelor’s degree. Individuals with neither are classified as high
school dropouts. Those who hold a GED or a high school diploma are considered high school
graduates. Those who hold a bachelor’s degree are considered college graduates.


A.4     School and work activity variables

In the analysis we make use of a monthly activity variable, which takes on six possible values
in each of three different educational attainment sets (discussed previously, and hereafter re-
ferred to as risk sets). The activity set contains the following choice alternatives: not working
while in school; working while in school; working part-time (not in school); working full-time
(not in school); military service; and all other activities (a residual category that includes
home production and unemployment). The activity variable thus takes on 18 possible pri-
mary values. For example, work in school in the first risk set would be work during high
school. Similarly, work in school in the second risk set would be work during college. In
addition to these activities, the individual can transition to another risk set by graduating
either high school or college. This results in two transition values that the activity variable
can take on, one for each of the first two risk sets. The full set of possibilities is displayed in
Table 8.
   The primary monthly activity variable within each risk set is constructed as follows:

   • Military if the person spent at least as many weeks in the military as working, and was
      not enrolled in school.

   • Full-time working if the person was not in school, reported working all weeks of the
      months, and worked 35 or more hours per week.

   • Part-time working if the person was not in school, and either reported positive weeks
      worked or more than 42 total hours worked in the month.




                                                55
   • Working while in school if the person was in school and worked at least one week in
      the month or at least 8 hours in the month.

   • School only if the person was in school but did not report any weeks worked and
      reported less than 8 total hours worked in the month.

   • “Other activities” if the person did not fall into any of the above categories.


A.5      Comparability across surveys and cohorts

As discussed previously, the two NLSY surveys are quite comparable in their methodology
and the types of information they collect. However, there are some key differences between
them, which we discuss here.
   Foremost among the differences is the age of respondents at the first interview. In the
first wave of the NLSY79, respondents are aged 14-21 (aged 14-17 for the NLSY79 young
and aged 18-21 for the NLSY79 old), in contrast to the NLSY97 where respondents are
aged 12-16 at the first interview. This difference in starting ages makes it more difficult to
create comparable pre-interview work and schooling histories, and ASVAB test scores.46 As
much as possible, we attempt to construct comparable measures of each variable of interest.
As a compromise, we start measuring work history at age 16 and discard the oldest group
of individuals in the NLSY79 old (i.e. those who were 20 or older at the time of the first
interview).
   The second difference between the two surveys has to do with attrition rates. In the
NLSY97, attrition rates are much higher than in the NLSY79. For example, after 12 inter-
views in the NLSY79, the non-response rate was 10%, compared with about 17% for the
NLSY97. While the higher attrition rate in the recent panel might be cause for concern,
Aughinbaugh and Gardecki (2008) show that the additional attrition in the NLSY97 does
not affect estimates of labor market outcomes. Furthermore, as discussed in Atrostic et al.
(2001), attrition rates increased in six different U.S. government surveys during the 1990s.
  46
     We follow the procedure outlined in Altonji, Bharadwaj and Lange (2012) to equate the ASVAB scores
for both test-taking age and medium. This procedure is outlined at length in Altonji, Bharadwaj and Lange
(2009)




                                                   56
We take these conclusions as evidence that differing attrition rates between the two NSLY
surveys is not a major problem for our analysis.




                                            57
B     Appendix Tables (for online publication)
The details of our sample selection can be found in Tables B.1 and B.2

                              Table B.1: Choice Sample Selection

                                                       NLSY79 NLSY79
               Category                                 Olda   Youngb           NLSY97
               Starting persons                          6,741   5,945            8,984
                Drop females                             3,355   2,928            4,599
                Drop older birth cohortsc                1,698       0                0
                Drop non-race oversamplesd                 492     251                0
                Drop other race                              0       0               40
               Resulting No. of persons (males)          1,196   2,666            4,559

               Survey Waves                                  15           15          15
               Survey person-yearse                      12,628       33,983      57,522
                Add retrospective data yearsf             2,920          675         843
               Potential person-years                    15,548       34,658      58,365

               Potential person-months                 186,576      415,896      688,903
                Drop missing interview monthsg           8,250       19,638      101,853
               Resulting person-months                 178,326      396,258      587,050

               Final No. of persons                      1,196        2,656        4,443
               Final No. of person-months              178,326      396,258      587,050
               Ave. No. of months per person             149.1        149.2        132.1
               Max. No. of months per person               156          156          156
           a
             Birth years 1957-1960.
           b
             Birth years 1961-1964.
           c
             Birth years 1957 and 1958.
           d
             Oversamples of military personnel and disadvantage white individuals are both
           excluded from the analysis.
           e
             This refers to the number of survey rounds available before an individual turns
           28.
           f
             This refers to adding retrospective data for the years 1974-1978 or 1993-1996
           (if applicable).
           g
             This refers to dropping any right-censored missing interview spells or any ob-
           servations during or after a spell of 3+ missed interviews.




                                                  58
                Table B.2: Wage Sample Selection

                                   NLSY79 NLSY79
    Category                         Old    Young NLSY97
    Potential wage observationsa    117,559 264,547 386,461
     Drop self-employed wages         6,502  13,278  23,699
     Drop outlying wagesb             1,693   4,669  27,581
     Drop non-reported wages          9,071  18,420  42,742
    Final wage observations         100,293 228,180 292,529
a
  Potential wage observations refers to the the number of person-months
choosing a work alternative.
b
  We drop wages below $2 and above $50 (in 1982-84$).




                                   59
C      Forward Simulation (for online publication)
Our decomposition exercise allows for unobservable skills and skill prices to explain changes
in the returns to education and work experience. In order to adequately characterize unob-
servable skills, we simulate our model and perform the decompositions on the simulated data.
We compute the simulated data through forward simulation, using the parameter estimates
of the likelihood function in (16). Specifically, we begin by drawing an unobserved factor
vector for each individual from the population distribution (a standard multivariate normal).
We then draw preference shocks and compute choice probabilities using the observed states
(i.e. the demographic, family background, and local labor market characteristics, along with
the unobserved factor drawn at the beginning of the simulation) and the parameter estimates
of the choice equations.47 Next, we update the state space and repeat T = 156 times.48 Fi-
nally, we draw idiosyncratic wage shocks and compute wages in each period that a work
activity is chosen. We perform this forward simulation 150 times for each individual in the
NLSY79 estimation samples, and 100 times for each individual in the NLSY97.49




  47
     In the simulation after t = 1, the choice probabilities are a function of the demographic, family back-
ground, and local labor market characteristics, the unobserved factors, and the endogenous experience vari-
ables.
  48
     See Table C.1 for a comparison of choice frequencies between the model and the data, as well as Table
C.2 for a comparison of wage premia in the model and the data.
  49
     The reason for this is that the NLSY97 has many more individuals than either of the NLSY79 samples.


                                                    60
           Table C.1: Choice frequencies in model and data

                                    Model                  Data
Activity                      79O    79Y    97     79O     79Y    97
Panel (a): Pre-high school   graduate risk set
    School only               12.61 7.89 8.71      10.69   7.89   9.80
    Work in HS                 3.08 6.27 7.20       3.72   5.98   7.79
    Work PT (no school)        3.53 4.69 3.66       2.67   3.41   3.19
    Work FT (no school)        8.60 6.72 4.31       9.81   8.44   5.80
    Military                   0.12 0.06 0.01       0.20   0.22   0.03
    Other                     11.71 8.91 6.76      7.29    6.83   6.73
    Graduate from HS           0.49 0.52 0.57      0.55    0.55   0.63

Panel (b): High school gradute risk set
    School only             3.45 4.17 4.60 4.22             4.23 5.23
    Work in College         3.72 4.36 9.37 5.47            5.79 10.16
    Work PT (no school) 7.45 8.85 10.54 6.05               6.26 7.26
    Work FT (no school) 32.03 30.63 27.60 32.50            30.51 24.96
    Military                0.93 1.39 0.56 2.75            4.70 2.69
    Other                   7.80 10.66 9.96 7.25           7.88 8.02
    Graduate with BA        0.07 0.07 0.11 0.10             0.11 0.14

Panel (c): College Graduate risk set
    School only             0.56 0.30       0.54   0.41    0.33   0.37
    Work in College         0.40 0.38       0.72   0.61    0.75   0.84
    Work PT (no school) 0.21 0.30           0.57   0.41    0.46   0.75
    Work FT (no school) 2.90 3.41           3.84   4.68    5.16   5.08
    Military                0.08 0.11       0.05   0.20    0.13   0.13
    Other                   0.25 0.31       0.31   0.43    0.37   0.41




                                    61
          Table C.2: Wage premia in model and data

                                Model                Data
Outcome                  79O        79Y   97   79O   79Y    97
Panel (a): Raw wage premia (any age)
    HS wage premium 0.18 0.22 0.27 0.18 0.20 0.22
    BA wage premium 0.26 0.41 0.39 0.26 0.44 0.40

Panel (b): Raw wage premia (full-time work at age 29)
    HS wage premium 0.25 0.17 0.16 0.22 0.20 0.21
    BA wage premium 0.25 0.37 0.32 0.26 0.38 0.30




                               62
