                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE DEATH OF A REGULATOR:
           STRICT SUPERVISION, BANK LENDING AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY

                                            João Granja
                                           Christian Leuz

                                        Working Paper 24168
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w24168


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2017




We thank John Barrios, Aytekin Ertan, Henry Eyring, Anil Kashyap, Anya Kleymenova, Randy
Kroszner, David Lucca (discussant), Daniel Paravisini, Raghu Rajan, Thomas Rauter, Stephen
Ryan, Amit Seru (discussant), Andrei Shleifer, Tobias Troger (discussant), and workshop
participants at the AFA, Chicago Booth, Duke, ETH-NYU-SAFE Law & Banking/Finance
Conference, FDIC, IESE, Imperial College, LSE, NBER Corporate Finance meetings, NYU,
Rice, Vanderbilt, University of Texas at Dallas, and University of Washington for their helpful
comments and suggestions. We also thank Hester Peirce for generously sharing qualitative
assessments about the regulatory transition collected from a survey of community bank managers,
and Tom Kim, Igor Kuznetsov, Maximillian Muhn, Fabian Nagel, Thomas Rauter and Steven
Vanhaverbeke for their excellent research assistance. Joao Granja gratefully acknowledges
support by the William Ladany Faculty Research Fund at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by João Granja and Christian Leuz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Death of a Regulator: Strict Supervision, Bank Lending and Business Activity
João Granja and Christian Leuz
NBER Working Paper No. 24168
December 2017, Revised July 2020
JEL No. E44,E51,G21,G28,G32,G38,K22,K23,L51,M41,M48

                                         ABSTRACT

An important question in banking is how strict supervision affects bank lending and in turn local
business activity. Supervisors forcing banks to recognize losses could choke off lending and
amplify local economic woes. But stricter supervision could also change how banks assess and
manage loans. Estimating such effects is challenging. We exploit the extinction of the thrift
regulator (OTS) to analyze economic links between strict supervision, bank lending and business
activity. We first show that the OTS replacement indeed resulted in stricter supervision of former
OTS banks. Next, we analyze the ensuing lending effects. We show that former OTS banks
increase small business lending by roughly 10 percent. This increase is concentrated in well-
capitalized banks, those more affected by the new regime, and cannot be fully explained by a
reallocation from mortgage to small business lending after the crisis. These findings suggest that
stricter supervision operates not only through capital but can also correct deficiencies in bank
management and lending practices, leading to more lending and a reallocation of loans.


João Granja
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
joaogranja@chicagobooth.edu

Christian Leuz
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction
A recurring story line in banking crises is the public backlash against bank supervisors for
their failure to take prompt and decisive action to unearth and correct problems of weak banks.
These allegations often play an important role in justifying policy interventions that overhaul
the regulatory oversight of the banking system, including tighter rules and stricter monitoring
of financial institutions (e.g., Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of
1989; Dodd-Frank Act of 2010). Despite the importance of such interventions, we have limited
evidence on the economic trade-offs associated with reforms that aim to limit regulatory
forbearance and promote stricter bank supervision.
     In this paper, we study a reform of the U.S. banking system that forced a large number
of banks to transition from a more lenient to a stricter supervisor. A stricter regulatory
stance with respect to loss recognition could put pressure on banks’ balance sheets, and in
turn, force them to cut lending (e.g., Agarwal, Lucca, Seru, and Trebbi (2014)). But the
transition to a stricter supervisor could also prompt banks to correct deficiencies in other key
areas of bank management, such as loan risk ratings, stress testing, risk and loan portfolio
management, leading to improvements in banks’ lending practices and possibly to increases
in lending. Thus, the economic consequences of stricter supervision, particularly for credit
supply, are worth studying, but typically difficult to identify, especially when supervisory
changes follow crises.
     Effective July 2011, Title III of Dodd Frank abolished the Office of Thrift Supervision
(OTS) and transferred its powers to other regulators, i.e., the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency (OCC) and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). This regulatory
change was prompted in part by a well-founded perception that lax prudential supervision
by the OTS played a significant role in the demises of Washington Mutual, IndyMac, and
Countrywide.1 The extinction of the OTS was a major change in prudential supervision in
the US banking system, affecting roughly 10% of all depository institutions with 8.5% of
all U.S. deposits. It applied to banks across a wide spectrum of capital and liquidity levels,
operating in different geographies.
     The extinction of the OTS is an unique opportunity to examine how bank supervision
shapes local access to credit and business activity. First, the associated changes in bank
supervision are economically meaningful and their timing is well defined. Second, in this
setting, it is possible to distinguish the effects of stricter supervision from local economic
shocks that also affect the performance of banks and local business activity because former
OTS banks operate in geographies in which competing banks have other supervisors. Third,
  1
    See Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs (2011) for details on the turf war between
FDIC and OTS and evidence on the regulatory failure and leniency of the OTS.


                                                    1
the transition is externally imposed on all thrifts, irrespective of their financial condition.
Moreover, we show that charter switches before and after the OTS extinction are rare and
do not influence our analysis. However, the setting also comes with challenges. The biggest
one is that the residential mortgage market was the epicenter of the financial crisis, and this
market represents the key area of lending for thrifts. Thus, it is important to control for
crisis-induced changes in lending markets and business models, which hit thrifts especially
hard.
    We begin our analysis by validating that the replacement of the OTS by the OCC and FDIC
in 2011 indeed implied (relatively) stricter supervision.2 We show that, after the transition,
former OTS banks experience significant changes in loan classifications, loss provisioning, and
loss recognition, which are areas of scrutiny in any supervisory exam. Former OTS banks
are also more likely to receive enforcement actions following the regulatory transition. Our
findings show that loan loss provisions, charge-offs, and nonperforming loan ratios of former
OTS banks exhibit sharp “on-impact” increases following the OTS extinction, relative to
control banks without changes in supervision. These sharp increases for several measures are
indicative that the supervisory change prompted former OTS banks to recognize losses and
problem loans. For instance, the ratio of nonperforming loans increases by approximately 0.4
percentage points for former OTS banks upon transition, which represents roughly 30% of
the average ratio of nonperforming loans for all depository institutions.
    Next, we analyze the economic effects of stricter bank supervision on lending. Forcing
thrifts to increase loan loss provisions and recognize problem loans could induce them to
de-lever to conserve capital, which likely hurts lending and could create a credit crunch.
This is the capital channel shown in prior work (e.g., Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap, 2008).
However, a more rigorous supervisory approach could also question thrifts’ existing practices,
prompting them to improve their lending and risk management systems, implement stress
testing, and adopt alternative or more diversified lending strategies.3 Such changes, prompted
by stricter supervision, could lead to more lending (e.g. Hirtle, Kovner, and Plosser, 2018)
but also a reallocation of lending toward areas that require better screening and monitoring
capabilities. In the end, it is an empirical question, which channel dominates and hence
whether stricter supervision hurts or boosts lending and local business activity.
    We examine this empirical question using the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) small
   2
     To be clear, we do note claim that the OCC and FDIC are flawless, but rather that, on average, they
enforce the same banking regulations more strictly than the OTS. On this point, see also the Online Appendix
of Agarwal et al. (2014) for evidence that the OTS performs relatively worse than other regulators.
   3
     A SageWorks poll of former OTS bankers (SageWorks, 2013) shows that over 50 percent of responding
bankers indicated that they had to strengthen their risk rating system as a result of feedback from OCC
examiners, 38 percent indicated that they had to implement stress testing, and 25 percent indicated that they
had to diversify their lending portfolios. We provide further evidence on such changes in Section 7.2.


                                                     2
business lending data set, which contains information on new small business loans originated
by each reporting banks in each U.S. county during a year. This data set is especially well
suited to study how the OTS extinction shaped bank lending because its reporting guidelines
did not change over time, thus, providing consistent and fairly granular information on new
loans originated both before and after the transition. Furthermore, small business loans are a
substantial fraction of the commercial and industrial lending portfolio of commercial banks
and thrifts representing, on average, more than 50% of all commercial and industrial (C&I)
loans in the balance sheets of banks.
    We show that former OTS banks increase the total amount of small business loans
originations by roughly 10% relative to the period prior to the OTS extinction. We obtain
this result after the inclusion of county-by-year fixed effects and bank-by-county fixed effects.
Thus, the lending effect is not driven by former OTS banks being located in counties with
better economic conditions (and higher loan demand) but instead implies an increase in the
supply of small business loans by former OTS banks relative to the supply of other banks
operating in the same county and year. We show that these effects occur right after the
extinction of the OTS and that they are unlikely to be driven by systematic differences in
the location of former OTS banks within a county. Furthermore, we rule out a number of
other potential explanations for our main results, namely that our results are driven by: (i)
business model differences between former OTS banks and control banks; (ii) differences
in the frequency of mergers and acquisitions; (iii) other regulatory changes included in the
Dodd-Frank Act. Importantly, we also conduct a battery of tests to show that our results are
not explained by a pull-back of other banks, notably the Top-4 banks, given the evidence in
Chen, Hanson, and Stein (2017).
    Having established that former OTS banks increase their small business lending following
the extinction of the OTS, we proceed to examine the economic channels that explain this
increase in lending. By the time of this regulatory transition most former OTS banks had
already weathered the 2008–2009 financial crisis and were, at least on average, well-capitalized.
Thus, unlike other settings where such interventions coincide with systemic financial distress,
the OTS setting provides significant variation in the capitalization of former OTS banks prior
the supervisory change. This feature enables us to differentiate effects by bank capitalization
and observe the effects of OTS extinction when the capital channel is less likely to be the
dominant force. Consistent with this reasoning, we find that the positive lending effect of
stricter supervision is concentrated in former OTS banks with above-average capitalization
ratios prior to the OTS extinction. Thrifts with below-average capital ratios exhibit a decline
in their small business lending, consistent with a capital crunch.
    The fact that many former OTS banks had sufficient loss-absorbing capacity to deal with


                                               3
a sudden increase in loss recognition explains why we do not observe a credit crunch for well-
capitalized banks, but it does not necessarily imply that these banks increase lending following
the OTS extinction. One potential explanation that we put forth is that thrifts experienced
significant shake-ups in internal bank management practices that resolved lingering deficiencies
and culminated in a greater ability to extend credits, especially in the area of small business
lending where borrowers are typically hard to evaluate.
    To examine this conjecture, we start by establishing that the regulatory transition was
indeed associated with significant changes in banks’ internal management practices. We first
provide descriptive evidence from regulatory documents and 10-Ks, showing that immediately
following the regulatory transition, the OCC demanded significant improvements in multiple
areas of bank management for former OTS banks. Such improvements included, but were
not limited to, better loan and collateral documentation, new risk rating systems and early
problem loan identification, and even went as far as forcing the board to ensure competent
management. Further, we provide differences-in-differences analyses documenting that former
OTS banks saw abnormally high executive and board turnover and were more likely to adopt
formal risk modeling following the OTS extinction.
    Next, we use these findings and show that increases in commercial lending around the OTS
extinction were more pronounced in former OTS banks that underwent significant changes in
internal management practices. In particular, we show that increases in small business lending
are concentrated in former OTS banks that (i) show above-median board turnover following
the regulatory transition; (ii) replace executive directors following the transition; and (iii)
adopt formal risk modeling after the OTS extinction. This collection of results is consistent
with the explanation that stricter supervision triggered broad changes and improvements in
the internal management practices of former OTS banks, which in turn increased their supply
of small business loans.
    Another (and not mutually exclusive) conjecture is that the OCC and FDIC were accus-
tomed to a different portfolio mix and saw the high concentration of former OTS banks in
residential loans with concern. The OCC and FDIC could, therefore, have pushed former OTS
banks to reduce their exposures to residential lending and to diversify towards commercial
lending. To explore this conjecture, we first analyze the mortgage originations of former
OTS banks. We find a broader trend away from residential lending for these banks after the
financial crisis. In addition, former OTS banks reduce their origination of mortgage loans fol-
lowing the regulatory transition. The latter reduction is consistent with a supervisor-induced
shift in lending strategies away from residential lending and toward commercial lending. To
drill deeper, we exploit the idea that some local OCC field offices had greater experience
supervising commercial banks with larger concentrations of residential loans. These local


                                               4
OCC field offices are arguably more familiar or comfortable with the business models of former
OTS banks and hence less likely to steer them away from mortgages toward commercial
lending. We find that the increase in small business lending after the supervisory transition is
indeed less pronounced in jurisdictions where the OCC field offices oversee commercial banks
with significant concentrations in residential lending.
    Given we find evidence consistent with a portfolio reallocation in the direction of supervisor
preferences, we explore whether a supervisor-induced change away from residential lending
for former OTS banks can account for most or all of the increase in small business lending
documented earlier. Towards this end, we include variables for the level of residential lending
as well as changes in the supply of mortgages in the small business lending analyses around
the OTS extinction. The idea is to see if the OTS effect on business lending is substantially
attenuated in the presence of these variables. The results indicate that the main coefficients are
not attenuated when we include a battery of different indicators of bank supply of mortgages
in the main empirical specification. We interpret these results as suggesting that a reallocation
from mortgage to small business lending after the crisis cannot fully explain the main results.
Thus, it appears that there are two supervisory effects coming out of the OTS extinction.
    Our paper is most closely related to the findings in Agarwal et al. (2014). They exploit
the mandatory rotation of the federal and state regulators in the on-site supervision of
state-chartered banks and find that the institutional design and incentives of bank regulators
affect the supervisory assessments and banks’ corrective actions. However, in this setting, it
is difficult to observe how changes in regulatory strictness shape bank lending and economic
outcomes over a longer horizon as the supervision by the stricter federal regulators is, by
construction, short-lived. We contribute to this line of research by examining the effects of
strict supervision on lending and business activity around a regulatory change.
    More broadly, we contribute to a large literature that analyzes the impact of bank regulators
on lending (e.g. Eisenbach, Lucca, and Townsend, 2017; Hirtle et al., 2018; Kandrac and
Schlusche, 2018; Altavilla, Boucinha, Peydró, and Smets, 2020) and their role in facilitating
regulatory forbearance (Kroszner and Strahan, 1996; Brown and Dinç, 2005; Brown and
Dinç, 2011; Costello, Granja, and Weber, 2016; Lucca, Seru, and Trebbi, 2014; Bonfim,
Cerqueiro, Degryse, and Ongena, 2016). Our work is also related to papers that examine how
evergreening affects the allocation of capital in an economy (e.g. Caballero et al., 2008; Bian,
Haselmann, Kick, and Vig, 2017). We examine the economic consequences of a well-defined
change in the strictness of bank supervision. The novel message of our paper is that stricter
supervisors can induce changes in bank management that increase bank lending suggesting
that its economic effects go beyond the capital channel.
    Finally, our paper contributes to the emerging literature on the economic effects of the


                                                5
Dodd-Frank Act. Examining the effects of Dodd Frank has been challenging because its
provisions are often difficult to isolate from one another as well as concurrent macroeconomic
changes. We follow a recent stream of literature (e.g., Dimitrov, Palia, and Tang, 2015;
Buchak, Matvos, Piskorski, and Seru, 2018a; Buchak, Matvos, Piskorski, and Seru, 2018b;
Cortés, Demyanyk, Li, Loutskina, and Strahan, 2019) that exploits granular datasets as well
as pre-determined variation in banks’ exposure of different geographic regions to overcome
these challenges. In doing so, we provide novel evidence on the economic consequences of a
key element of the Dodd-Frank Act, i.e., the provisions in Title III that eliminated the OTS.4


2      Institutional Setting
Savings and Savings & Loans banks, also called thrifts, specialize in supplying residential
mortgages to U.S. consumers. These banks are required by their charter to invest 65 percent
of their asset portfolio in qualified thrift investments, which include residential real-estate
loans, home-equity loans, mortgage-backed securities, credit card, and small business loans. In
return for these restrictions, these banks enjoyed favorable regulatory treatment that included
privileged access to financing through the Federal Home Loan Banks, preemption of state
law, and unlimited interstate branching.
    The Savings & Loans (S&L) crisis in the 1980s and early 1990s hit the thrift industry hard
and was blamed, in part, on lenient supervision (e.g., Kane, 1989). The OTS was created
in the aftermath of the S&L crisis to replace the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB)
as the primary regulator of the thrift industry. Initially, the OTS was perceived as strict,
cracking down on insolvent thrifts that had been left unscathed by the FHLBB (Wayne, 1992).
    Over the next decades, however, sweeping industry and regulatory changes undermined the
competitive advantages of the thrift charter. Federal thrifts were the first financial institutions
entitled to open new branches across state borders and benefited from the preemption of state
law pursuant to the Depression-era Home Owners’ Loan Act (HOLA). The passage of the
Riegle-Neal Act of 1994 eroded this regulatory advantage, giving the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency (OCC) the power to adopt preemption rules for national banks. In 1995,
several unsuccessful bills proposed to abolish the OTS and to consolidate the regulation for
thrifts and commercial banks, arguing that the thrift charter had become obsolete (MacDonald,
Schwartz, and Day, 2011). The Treasury Department’s 2008 blueprint for a modernized
    4
      In studying how supervision affects loan loss provisioning, our paper is also related to studies on the
timeliness of loan loss provisioning and its economic effects (e.g., Beatty and Liao, 2011; Bushman and Williams,
2012; Bhat, Ryan, and Vyas, 2018). Further, the paper relates to the broader literature on enforcement of
financial regulation (e.g., La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes, and Shleifer, 2006; Jackson and Roe, 2009; Christensen,
Hail, and Leuz, 2016.)


                                                       6
financial regulatory structure also recognized that the thrift charter no longer had a special role
in providing residential mortgage loans to US consumers. The business models of commercial
banks and thrifts had converged substantially and the commercial banks’ share of the U.S.
residential mortgage market surpassed that of the thrifts. As a result, the blue print concluded
that the thrift charter had lost its raison d’etre and recommended phasing it out.
    Consistent with these developments, the number of thrifts regulated by the OTS declined
from 1,628 in 1994 to 815 in 2007. Between 1998 and 2010, 120 thrifts converted to commercial
banks whereas only 43 commercial banks converted to a thrift charter (MacDonald et al.,
2011). These trends resulted in a decline in the share of depository institutions regulated by
the OTS from 12.5% in 1994 to less than 9.5% in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis. At
the same time as its share of the regulatory market declined, the OTS became increasingly
associated with initiatives that promoted the reduction of regulations and “red tape.” This
pro-industry stance is epitomized in its five-year strategic plan released in 2007, which stated
that the “OTS listens to, learns from, and collaborates with the institutions it regulates and
the public it serves on how best to address their needs.”
    The failures of two large OTS-regulated entities, Washington Mutual and IndyMac Federal
Savings Bank during the 2008–2009 financial crisis occurred against this backdrop of greater
regulatory competition and perceived regulatory leniency by the OTS.5 These failed banks
jointly represented approximately 3.2% of all US branch deposits and are two of the largest
bank failures ever. Countrywide Financial, which changed its charter in 2006 to be supervised
by the OTS, was forced to merge with Bank of America to avoid failure (Appelbaum and
Nakashima, 2008a). Following the public and media backlash against the OTS due to its
failure to properly supervise these institutions (Appelbaum and Nakashima, 2008b), President
Obama asked Congress to fold the OTS into the OCC.
    Subsequently, Title III of the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 stipulated the closure of the OTS
and the transfer of OTS powers and duties to the Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC. The
transfer of functions occurred on July 21, 2011, one year after the passage of the Dodd-Frank
Act. Under the Act, the OCC and FDIC acquired supervisory and rulemaking authority over
federally-chartered thrifts and state-chartered thrifts, respectively. In total, 649 federal thrifts
automatically transitioned to the OCC, whereas 59 state-chartered thrifts transitioned to
the FDIC on July 21st, 2011.6 The Dodd-Frank Act included other provisions that could
   5
     There is significant evidence of regulatory leniency by the OTS. For example, the Office of the Inspector
General found that the OTS not only authorized but also directed the backdating of capital contributions
from holding companies at IndyMac and BankUnited, thereby allowing these thrifts to stay above the
“well-capitalized” threshold (Office of Inspector General, 2009).
   6
     These numbers result from our computations based on Summary of Deposits data collected on June
30th of each year. No thrifts banks were automatically transferred to the Federal Reserve, but following the
regulatory transition a small number of former OTS banks switched their charter from the OCC to the FED.


                                                      7
potentially affect the operations and lending portfolios of banks. For instance, it created a new
regulator, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), which is responsible for the
area of consumer financial protection and supervises banks whose assets are above $10 billion.
It also eliminated restrictions to de novo interstate branching in states that had not been
removed following the passage of Riegle-Neal Act. These other rules were not implemented at
the same time as Title III as they were enacted at the time of the passage of Dodd-Frank into
law. Nevertheless, we evaluate and report on the robustness of our results to the adoption of
these other Dodd-Frank provisions in the Online Appendix.
    As Agarwal et al. (2014) show, there is significant variation in regulatory strictness across
US regulators. Industry documents and SEC filings of many thrift holding companies suggest
that the OCC supervision was perceived as relatively more demanding than OTS supervision,
affecting key areas of bank and loan management. In the area of loss recognition, the OTS
did not require partial or complete charge-offs for troubled loans. Charge-offs were required at
foreclosure only. Thrifts were allowed to establish specific valuation allowances for estimated
losses on troubled real-estate loans. By contrast, the OCC required earlier charge-off as
soon as a loan was deemed uncollectible. In addition, the regulatory transition also implied
significant changes in how banks determined their Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses and
hence their provisioning, which in turn could have significant impact on bank profitability
around the transition (e.g., Peirce, Robinson, and Stratmann, 2014). These changes made
it, among other things, harder for thrifts to renew or evergreen loans. The 2012 10-K of
Bank Financial, a SEC-registered thrift holding company, illustrates these changes by stating:
"The OCC maintains a number of operating policies and practices that are different from the
OTS, including in the areas of loan classification and the timing of charge-offs...we revised
our classification of asset policies and practices to complete our transition to the OCC’s loan
risk rating practices. The OCC’s practices will make it more difficult to renew performing
classified loans...at December 31, 2011 approximately $3.5 million of our non-accrual loan
balances reflected our decision to liquidate or not renew performing classified loans."7
    A potential concern is that former OTS banks responded to the stricter OCC supervisory
standards by voluntarily switching charter to other regulators. We examine avoidance behavior,
in Table 1, which details the operating status and charter of the 708 former OTS banks
See Table 1 for more details. We check below that such switches do not influence our results.
   7
     There are many examples of thrift holding companies discussing the transition from the OTS to the OCC
in their 10-Ks, expressing more demanding requirements. For instance, the 2012 10-K of WSFS Financial
Inc. states: "Lastly, in late 2011, ... we undertook a project to reduce the number of Pass grades in our loan
rating system with a goal of recalibrating our loan rating classifications to current OCC and FRS standards ...
This resulted in the elimination of our last Pass grade or our "pass/watch" grade. The result of this grade
elimination resulted in $67 million being reclassified to Criticized or Classified, with none going to nonaccrual
status. The impact of this project contributed to an incremental $2.1 million to the provision and allowance
for loan losses in 2011."


                                                       8
that mandatorily transitioned from the OTS to the OCC/FDIC on July 21st, 2011. By our
computation, 39 of the 649 former OTS institutions that automatically transitioned to the
OCC switched to the Federal Reserve or the FDIC by June 30, 2012, and in the four years
that followed the OTS extinction an additional 49 institutions decided to switch from the
OCC to another primary regulator. This small flow from the OCC to the other regulators
suggests that the other supervisors are perceived as similar and that regulatory shopping is
unlikely to be a substantive force affecting our empirical analyses.8 Table 1 further suggests
that the attrition rates due to merger, failure, or closure in the OTS sample are similar to
those of the sample of commercial bank, alleviating concerns about survivorship bias.


3       Data and Key Variables
We obtain data on the financial characteristics of all commercial banks and savings banks
operating in the United States from the Quarterly Reports of Condition and Income and
from the Thrift Financial Reports that banks file with the FDIC and the OTS, respectively.
Financial information on savings banks prior to 2012 is obtained from the Thrift Financial
Report data available for download from SNL Financial. To build consistent time-series of
financial characteristics and financial ratios for thrifts, we rely on the TFR-to-Call mapping
prepared by the OTS staff using the Research Information System (RIS) Data Warehouse
Dictionary maintained by the FDIC.9
    We collect data on all enforcement actions issued by the main federal regulators (OTS,
OCC, FDIC, and FED) from their regulatory websites. We use BoardEx to obtain data on
board turnover of publicly-listed banks. We follow Bhat et al. (2018) and conduct textual
analysis of all publicly-listed banks’ 10-Ks to create a proxy for whether banks employ or
introduce (new) credit risk models to assist their management and lending practices.
    Small business lending data for each commercial and savings bank come from the Com-
munity and Reinvestment Act (CRA) small business loans database provided by the Federal
Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) pursuant to Regulations 12 parts 25,
228, 345, and 195 of the aforementioned Act. This data set contains information on the total
number and volume of small business loans originated by each reporting financial institutions
in each US county during a calendar year. We focus on local lending within the counties
covered by each bank’s branch network because as shown in Granja, Leuz, and Rajan (2018),
lending in counties outside banks’ branch networks is cyclical and volatile. Since 2005, all
    8
     We check and find that state-chartered thrifts transitioning to the FDIC and federal thrifts transitioning
to the OCC saw similar increases in their provisioning and nonperforming loan ratios following the OTS
extinction (Table OA.1).
   9
     The document is available online at the following address: http://www.ots.treas.gov/_files/4830092.pdf


                                                      9
commercial and savings banks whose total assets exceed $1 billion dollars must report this data
to the FFIEC. The CRA small business lending dataset also includes aggregate information
on the total number and volume of small business loans originated by all reporting institutions
at the census-tract level during each calendar year, which we use in robustness analyses. We
collect information on mortgage originations of banks through the Home Mortgage Disclosure
Act (HMDA) data set. The HMDA provides geographic and demographic information on all
mortgage applications that a bank receives over a calendar year and we use that information
to study portfolio reallocation in former OTS banks.
    To provide evidence on local economic effects of the OTS extinction, we use county-level
data on entry and exit of establishments in a given year from the Census Bureau’s Statistics
on US Businesses (SUSB) dataset. The SUSB is carried out on March 12th of each year.
Following Chen et al. (2017), we call the entry and exit rate from March 12th of year X
to March 12th of year X+1, the entry and exit rate of year X. In the context of our main
analysis, we compute the entry and exit rates at the county level for all counties included in
the SUSB.


4     Descriptive Statistics
The abolishment of the OTS affected 708 federal and state-chartered thrifts whose primary
regulator as of June 30, 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision (Table 1). Panel A of Table
2 presents descriptive statistics for the key variables in our analyses, separately for commercial
banks and former OTS banks. On average, commercial banks are substantially greater than
thrifts. However, the median and the quartiles are larger for thrifts. These differences exist
because the larger systemically important financial institutions organize as commercial banks,
creating a substantial right skew in the size distribution of commercial banks.
    The lending portfolio of former OTS banks is tilted toward residential mortgage lending,
which comprises approximately 40% of their asset portfolio. This portfolio allocation suggests
that former OTS banks are still influenced by their historical role in the supply of residential
mortgage loans to US consumers. Commercial banks have more diversified loan portfolios
with C&I loans and commercial real estate (CRE) loans accounting for 9.5% and 23% of their
total assets, respectively. These loan categories account for only 3.3% and 17.2% of the total
assets of thrifts. These patterns highlight important differences across two groups of banks,
which we address explicitly in our empirical analyses.
    In spite of the differences in the composition of the loan portfolios across commercial banks
and thrifts, the average loan quality of the lending portfolios does not differ substantially
across the two groups. The average nonperforming loan ratios of commercial and former OTS


                                               10
banks over the sample period are 1.2% and 1.3%, respectively, and their ratios of provisions
to total assets are also very similar. The capital ratios of former OTS banks are, nevertheless,
substantially higher than the ratios of commercial banks. The relatively high capitalization
rate of former OTS banks is an important feature of our setting and allows us to examine the
effects of strict supervision through channels other than (low) capitalization.
    In Panel B of Table 2, we report additional descriptive statistics for the sample of CRA-
reporting banks. We see that commercial banks originate on average more small business loans
than former OTS banks, which is consistent with the discussion above. The patterns in the
size distribution between commercial and former OTS banks are similar in the CRA-reporting
sample, although they are not as pronounced when measured in terms of total deposits
and number of branches. We also compare the mean annual house-price appreciation in
counties where commercial banks and former OTS banks originate loans and find that the
house-price appreciation is, on average, higher for commercial banks. These statistics suggest
that controlling for differences in loan demand across counties is important for our analysis.


5     OTS Extinction and Strict Supervision
In this section, we provide evidence that the transition from the OTS to the OCC and FDIC
indeed resulted in stricter supervision of former OTS banks. We begin by examining the
evolution of loan loss ratios and enforcement actions at former OTS banks. Aside from loan
loss provisioning for potential losses, a key role for banking supervisors is to ensure that
delinquent loans are adequately classified and that incurred loan losses are properly recognized.
Thus, a sharp increase in various loan loss ratios following the OTS extinction would indicate
that the new supervisors are stricter, correcting weaknesses in the loan loss accounting of
former OTS banks. Moreover, when banks fail to take actions or to address deficiencies,
regulators can issue formal enforcement actions forcing such banks to take corrective actions.
An increase in enforcement actions issued to former OTS banks following the regulatory
transition is, therefore, a direct measure that the OCC and FDIC actively and perhaps
forcefully prompted changes at former OTS banks.
    We begin with a simple descriptive analysis. In Figure 1, we plot the average loan loss
provision and average nonperforming loan ratios of banks that were formerly regulated by the
OTS and those of all other commercial banks. Throughout most of the pre-crisis years, the
average provisioning ratios of commercial banks exceeded those of former OTS banks, with
the exception of the provisioning effort of OTS banks during the third quarter of 2008. After
the extinction of the OTS, however, there is an increase in provisioning of former OTS banks
relative to that of other commercial banks. This wedge persists until the fourth quarter of


                                               11
2012 and then disappears as the provisioning ratios of former OTS banks converge to those of
other commercial banks. There is a similar pattern in the time series of the nonperforming
loan ratios for both groups. The nonperforming loan ratio is systematically lower for former
OTS banks throughout the crisis year but increases sharply with the OTS extinction and
remains above that of commercial banks until the end of the sample period. These figures
suggest that the loan loss recognition of former OTS banks was more lenient and then became
stricter around the regulatory change.
    To formally examine whether the OTS extinction is associated with stricter supervision,
we estimate the following linear regression model:

                         Yi,t = βOT Si × P ostt + θXi,t + γi + δt + i,t                    (1)

where Yi,t is the loan loss provisioning ratio, nonperforming loans ratio, charge-off ratio of
bank i in quarter t or a dummy variable indicating that bank i received an enforcement
action during quarter t, respectively. OTS is a dummy variable that takes the value of one
if the bank was formerly regulated by the OTS and Post is a dummy variable taking the
value of one following the OTS extinction in the third quarter of 2011, inclusive. As the
average size and loan portfolio composition of former OTS banks and commercial banks
are very different, we also include a vector Xi,t containing financial characteristics such as
size, portfolio composition and bank capitalization. A concern is that the assets of former
OTS banks have worse unobserved quality (e.g. lower collateral values) than those of other
banks. We deal with this possibility by including bank fixed effects, γi , which control for
time-invariant, unobserved characteristics of each bank. We also add quarter fixed effects, δt ,
to control for changes in aggregate economic conditions, which could be correlated with the
extinction of the OTS. We cluster standard errors at the level of banks’ county headquarters.
    Table 3 reports the results of this analysis and confirms the interpretation of Figure 1.
The results indicate that the regulatory transition is associated with statistically significant
increases in all loan loss accounting ratios. The loan loss provision ratios, nonperforming
loan ratios, and charge-off ratios of former OTS banks increase by .018, .369, and .026
percentage points, respectively, after the OTS extinction. In every case, these magnitudes are
economically meaningful and correspond to an increase between 20 and 30 percent relative to
the unconditional average of the respective variable over the entire sample period. We also
analyze whether the OCC and FDIC are more likely to issue enforcement actions against
former OTS banks compared to the OTS prior to the regulatory transition. Columns (7) and
(8) report results that once again indicate that former OTS banks faced stricter supervision
following the OTS extinction. Former OTS banks become 0.2 percentage points more likely to
receive an enforcement action following the OTS extinction. This increase compares with an

                                               12
average quarterly rate of enforcement actions of 0.7 percent over the entire sample period. We
further note that conditioning on measures of size, portfolio composition, and capitalization
does not attenuate the coefficients of interest relative to the specifications that do not include
any additional controls for bank characteristics. This observation suggests that it is unlikely
that differences in business models between former OTS and commercial banks drive our
results. We expect that the change in supervisory strictness manifests in loan loss accounting
ratios starting with the first supervisory examination cycle following the OTS extinction.
Towards this end, we investigate whether the OTS extinction generates a sharp “on-impact”
effect on the accounting and loan loss recognition variables. To trace out the effects around
the OTS extinction over time we estimate the following linear regression model:

                                 X
                        Yi,t =       βt (OT Si × δt ) + θXi,t + γi + δt + i,t                (2)
                                 t

which expands the model of equation (1) with an interaction of the OTS dummy with a set
of quarter dummies that take the value of one in each quarter of the sample period.
    Figure 2 plots the series of coefficients, βt , and corresponding standard errors. The plots
suggest that, during and after the financial crisis period, the OTS was more permissive than
the regulators of commercial banks, consistent with anecdotal evidence. The provisioning
ratio and especially the nonperforming loan ratios of former OTS banks were significantly
below those of commercial banks with the same characteristics. These ratios experienced
a sharp turnaround immediately following the OTS extinction. At that point, both the
provisioning and nonperforming loan ratios see significant relative increases for thrifts. The
plots also suggest that the accounting and reporting adjustments are completed around the
start of 2013, when the provisioning efforts of thrifts converge to those of other commercial
banks and the difference in the levels of nonperforming loan ratios across banks plateaus.
This normalization around 2013 is also a first indication that the thrifts are not taking new
or greater risks after the regulatory transition.
    We perform a battery of robustness tests to confirm that the regulatory transition drives
the documented effects. In the Online Appendix, we find that the effect of the OTS extinction
persists when we restrict attention to the subsamples that were exposed to areas with high
and low house price declines suggesting that the effect is not confined to the subsample of
banks that experienced a greater economic shock during the crisis. We also add interactions
between the Post dummy and the financial characteristics vector, X, and find that the
results and inferences remain similar. Some attenuation of the main coefficient of interest is
expected if the regulatory transition also affects banks’ financial characteristics (e.g., lending
composition). Thus, it is not clear that these interactions should be included in the model,


                                                  13
which is why we perform this test as sensitivity analysis only. We also find that the results
are statistically and economically similar in the subsample of federally-charted thrifts, which
were automatically transferred to the OCC upon the OTS extinction, and in the subsample
of state thrift charters, which were automatically transferred to the FDIC, again alleviating
concerns that banks’ charter choices influence our results.
    Overall, we interpret the evidence as confirming the anecdotal evidence reported in Section
2 and as supporting the notion that the transition of former OTS banks to the OCC or the
FDIC implied stricter supervision.


6     OTS Extinction and Bank Lending
In this section, we analyze how the supervisory transition affected bank lending. We use a
data set of small business loans collected under the Community Reinvestment Act. This data
set is especially well suited to examine the evolution of C&I lending around the regulatory
transition. The reporting guidelines of this data set did not change around the regulatory
transition and, therefore, it offers consistent information on new loans originated during a
year. Moreover, it provides information on the number and amounts of new loans originated
over time rather than slow-moving stocks of existing loans. Finally, the small business lending
portfolio comprises, on average, more than 50% of all C&I loans in the balance sheets of
banks. Thus, small business loans are an economically meaningful fraction of the total lending
portfolio of commercial banks and thrifts.
    A simple plot of the time-series of small business loan originations by former OTS banks
and commercial banks presented in Figure 3 shows that total small business lending of thrifts
increases following the OTS extinction. Although commercial banks also grew their total
small business lending, their increase is rather modest. The small business lending of former
OTS banks outpaces that of their commercial bank counterparts after the OTS extinction
(but exhibits very similar trends before). This simple plot already suggests a positive effect of
the regulatory transition on small business lending. Of course, Figure 3 does not address that
lending of thrifts could increase more rapidly because of differences in banks’ business models
or because former OTS banks are located in areas that experienced higher growth in demand
for small business credit relative to areas where commercial banks are located.
    We control for these effects by exploiting information on the amount of small business
loans that CRA-reporting banks originate by county during a calendar year. Thus, we are
able to compare the small business lending of thrifts in a county relative to the small business
lending of commercial banks that operate in the same county during the same year. The
empirical strategy relies on the idea that banks operating in the same counties are subject


                                               14
to similar shocks to and trends in credit demand. Hence, by comparing lending of former
OTS banks and commercial banks in the same county and year, we should be able to isolate
the effect of the OTS extinction on the supply of credit. We estimate this effect with the
following specification:

              Ln(T otalLoans)i,c,t = βOT Si × P ostt + θXi,c,t + γc,t + δi,c + i,c,t         (3)

where Ln(T otalLoans)i,c,t is the natural logarithm of the total amount of small business loans
originated by bank i in county c in calendar year t. OTS is a dummy variable that takes the
value of one if the bank was regulated by the OTS prior to the OTS extinction and Post is
a dummy variable that takes the value of one following the OTS extinction starting in the
calendar year 2011. Xi,c,t is a vector of characteristics of the bank that includes quadratic
controls for the branch presence and total deposits collected by a bank in a county. The
county-by-year fixed effects, γc,t , control for unobserved common shocks that affect a county
during a calendar year. In addition, we introduce bank-by-county fixed-effects, δi,c , which
control for unobserved time-invariant characteristics of each bank in each county, including
differences in banks’ business models. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. The
inclusion of county-by-year and bank-by-county fixed effects ensures that we examine the
evolution of a bank’s lending within a given county and at the same time compare loan
originations for thrifts and commercial banks in the same county and year. Therefore, the
results are not driven by changes in the samples of thrifts and commercial banks across time
and counties or by greater demand for small business loans in counties where former OTS
banks are located.
    We report the results of this analysis in Table 4. In Column (1) we estimate a specification
that includes year, bank, and county fixed effects. In Column (2), we present our preferred
specification, expressed by equation (3), which includes county-by-year and bank-by-county
fixed effects. The coefficient on the main variable of interest, OT Si × P ostt , is statistically
significant in all specifications and the coefficient estimates are economically meaningful.
In our preferred specification, Column (2), the OTS extinction is associated with an 8.8%
increase in the volume of small business loans originated by former OTS banks. The decline
in the magnitude of the main coefficient between Columns (1) and (2) suggests that not
properly controlling for differences in potentially unobserved demand shocks across thrifts
and commercial banks inflates the estimated effect of OTS extinction.
    We recognize that bank size and holdings of C&I loans can differ substantially across
thrifts and commercial banks. As a result, commercial banks could respond differently to
economic shocks, for instance, because they specialize in different types of loans. Thus, a
potential concern is that commercial banks are not an adequate control group for former OTS

                                                15
banks, i.e., they do not satisfy the parallel-trends assumption. To gauge and mitigate this
concern, we use coarsened exact matching (Iacus, King, and Porro, 2012) to ensure that we
compare the lending of former OTS banks with the lending of commercial banks of similar
size and similar share of C&I holdings. The results reported in column (3) suggest that, if
anything, the magnitude of the estimated effect increases when we match on these dimensions.
     Another concern is that former OTS banks and commercial banks locate in different areas
within a county, which would not be addressed by the fixed effects in the model. We address
this concern in two ways. First, we compute a bank- and county-specific house price index that
captures house price changes in the zip codes, in which a bank has branches. We re-estimate
the model including this additional control. As this variable reflects systematic differences in
the location strategies of former OTS and commercial banks within a county at the zip level,
it should help to absorb potential unobserved heterogeneity in within-county loan demand.
The results, reported in Columns (4)-(6), are quantitatively very similar to those in Columns
(1)-(3). Importantly, we see little attenuation in the OTS coefficient, suggesting that our
results are not driven by within-county differences in local credit demand.
     Second, we draw on Nguyen (2019) and exploit an alternative CRA dataset that contains
aggregate information on the total small business loans originated at the finer census-tract
level by all CRA-reporting banks. We compare changes in aggregate small business lending
in census tracts with a significant share of deposits held by former OTS banks with changes
in aggregate small business lending in other census tracts within the same county but with a
smaller share of deposits held by former OTS banks. The results, reported in Table OA.5 of
the Online Appendix, suggest that aggregate small business lending increases significantly in
census tracts with larger exposures to branches of thrifts relative to census tracts with lower
exposures. This finding corroborates our results in Table 4 and again mitigates concerns
about within county differences in loan demand.
     Next, we augment the model of equation (3) to include a series of interactions between the
OTS dummy and the year dummies. This analysis serves two purposes: i) it examines whether
the relation between the OTS extinction and small business lending is relatively sharp around
the regulatory transition rather than an ongoing trend towards small business lending, and
ii) it addresses concerns that the effects could reflect mean reversion in the performance of
former OTS banks. We plot the series of coefficients and corresponding standard errors from
estimating this model in Figure 4. The plot shows that i) there are no significant pre-trends,
which suggests that commercial banks operating in a county are an adequate control group
for thrifts operating in the same county, and that ii) the main coefficients increase sharply
following the OTS extinction. These patterns supports the interpretation that the increase in
small business lending is a direct cause of the regulatory change in supervision, rather than


                                              16
mean reversion in the performance of former OTS banks.
    In light of the evidence presented in Chen et al. (2017) that the largest banks pulled back
from small business lending following the Great Recession, another significant concern is
that our main results are driven not by larger small business lending of thrifts, but rather
by reduced lending of the top commercial banks. The lending trends presented in Figure
3 already make this explanation unlikely as they show that both thrifts and commercial
banks increased their origination of small business loans and that thrifts increased small
business lending at a faster pace. To properly analyze this issue, we re-estimate the empirical
specification of equation (3) but restrict the sample and exclude the top-4 banks as in Chen
et al. (2017) and the top-20 largest small business lenders in our sample, most of which
were subject to formal stress tests by the Federal Reserve (e.g. Cortés et al., 2019).10 We
report our results in Table 5. The reported coefficients not only remain statistically significant
but have very similar magnitudes. This finding is remarkable considering that the top-4
and top-20 banks represent a considerable fraction of our sample. The fact that our results
are essentially unchanged after removing these observations suggests that the effect of the
regulatory transition on thrifts’ small business lending is not an artifact of business lending
trends for large banks in the control group.
    Additionally, we examine whether the relation between the OTS extinction and thrifts’
small business lending survives a battery of robustness tests. Specifically, we confirm that
the results are robust to (i) controlling for the total assets of banks, the interaction of this
variable with the Post dummy and weighing the observations by total amounts lent by banks
in the county (Table OA.6), (ii) controlling for the participation of the bank in Troubled
Asset Relief Program (TARP) (Table OA.7) (iii) adjusting for mergers and acquisitions of
banks to make sure the results are not driven by changes in sample composition (Table OA.8),
(iv) controlling for the impact of other Dodd-Frank provisions that might have affected small
business lending such as the creation of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau or the
removal of the remaining interstate branching regulations (Table OA.9), (v) accounting for
the potential parallel impact of the regulatory transition on the stringency of the Community
and Reinvestment Act (CRA) examinations of thrifts (Table OA.10), and (vi) alternative
definitions of the dependent variable to address potential issues with its skewness (Table
OA.11).
    Overall, we conclude that the change in supervision led to an increase in small business
lending by former OTS banks. Furthermore, we refer back to Figure 2 and note that despite
this increase in lending following the OTS extinction, the non-performing loan ratios of former
  10
     In the Online Appendix, Table OA.7, we further examine whether controlling for the evolution of lending
by the top-4 banks changes our results. It does not.



                                                    17
OTS banks are converging, albeit slowly, to those exhibited by the commercial banks. This
convergence suggests that thrifts’ additional lending is not at the expense of greater loan
delinquencies. We revisit the implications of this additional C&I lending in Section 7.4.


7        Potential channels
7.1        Bank Capitalization and Credit Crunch
The lending results, together with the earlier loss recognition results, are seemingly inconsistent
with a large literature showing that financial institutions cut lending in response to loan losses
that negatively affect their balance sheets and capital (e.g. Peek and Rosengren, 2000; Ivashina
and Scharfstein, 2010; Gambacorta and Marques-Ibanez, 2011; Chodorow-Reich, 2013; Bord,
Ivashina, and Taliaferro, 2017; Granja and Moreira, 2019). Based on this literature, stricter
supervision that forces banks to recognize existing loan losses and to expand their loan
provisioning is expected to lead to less lending, for instance, because banks need to conserve
capital to avoid costly regulatory interventions. We call this effect the capital channel.
    However, the descriptive statistics for our sample show that most thrifts that survived
the financial crisis were relatively well-capitalized at the time their regulatory transition and
hence were able to easily absorb the extra loan loss provisioning and recognition imposed by
their new supervisors. Thus, in our setting, the capital channel is less likely to be prevalent.
This is different from many other settings in the literature, in which regulatory interventions
coincide with banks’ financial distress or systemic crises. Thus, the OTS extinction allows
us to study whether there are the effects of stricter supervision that go beyond the capital
channel. To illustrate that the latter channel is nevertheless present for some banks in our
setting, we examine whether the impact of regulatory strictness on bank lending depends on
thrifts’ loss-absorbing capacity, using variation in their capitalization prior to OTS extinction.
    In Columns (1) and (2) of Table 6, we stratify the sample based on the Tier 1 Capital
ratio reported by each financial institution in the last quarter of 2010. The results are striking:
thrifts with above-median regulatory capital (within the sample of former OTS banks) increase
small business lending while thrifts with below-median ratios significantly reduce their total
small business lending following the OTS extinction. In columns (3) and (4), we repeat the
empirical exercise but partition the sample based on the Tier 1 leverage ratios defined as Tier
1 Capital divided by total assets rather than risk-weighted assets as in the commonly used
Tier 1 Capital Ratio. The results further support the idea that well-capitalized thrifts increase
small business lending while less well-capitalized thrifts do not.11 These results reconcile our
  11
       In Table OA.12 of the Online Appendix, we show that the effects of the OTS extinction are concentrated


                                                      18
findings with the literature on the capital channel but should, nonetheless, be interpreted with
caution as the regulatory capital of banks could capture other unobservable characteristics
related to banks’ willingness to lend.
    We further explore the interplay between the capital ratios of former OTS banks and the
impact of strict supervision on bank lending by examining how such impact varies across
different levels of bank capitalization. We create six groups based on each bank’s Tier 1
capital ratio as of the fourth quarter of 2010. The groups stratify banks based on whether
their Tier 1 Capital ratio is below 10, between 10 and 12.5, between 12.5 and 15, between 15
and 17.5, between 17.5 and 25, and more than 25 percent, respectively. Next, we augment
the model of equation (3) to include a series of interactions between the former OTS bank
indicator and dummy variables that take the value of one for the capitalization group to
which a given bank belongs.
    We plot the results of this analysis in Figure 5. The results further support our conjecture
that less well-capitalized banks decrease lending following the transition to a stricter regulator
that puts pressure on their capital ratios. In the group of banks with Tier 1 capital ratio
below ten percent, former OTS bank decrease small business lending substantially following
the regulatory transition. Banks with Tier 1 capital ratios between 10 and 12.5 percent also
see their small business lending decline, albeit not nearly as much. The estimated impact of
the regulatory transition on small business lending is positive for all other groups.
    The results for less well-capitalized banks are largely consistent with prior literature that
emphasizes the role of bank capital for lending. Based on this literature, banks that are capital
constrained are likely to scale back lending when they are forced to recognize losses or build
up provisions. Our results, therefore, indicate that the consequences of a policy intervention
that mandates bank supervisors to enforce the recognition of loan losses depends on the ability
of financial institutions to absorb losses in their portfolios. These results, therefore, suggest
caution in implementing such policies when the financial system as a whole is substantially
undercapitalized.


7.2     Changes in Bank and Loan Management
The capital channel that we examined in the previous subsection explains the significant
decline in small business lending of less well-capitalized former OTS banks. However, it cannot
explain why former OTS banks that are well capitalized increase their small business lending
following the OTS extinction. We posit that the transition to the OCC and FDIC induced a
in areas where commercial banks, as local competitors, were more capital constrained and, therefore, less
willing to extend credit, which in turn allowed former OTS banks to expand their lending after the regulatory
transition.


                                                     19
significant shake-up of management and lending practices for former OTS banks regardless
of their capitalization. This shake-up resolved lingering deficiencies in bank management
that were left unaddressed by the OTS. Stricter supervision forced thrifts to resolve such
deficiencies, which in turn improved their ability to extend credits to hard-to-evaluate small
business borrowers. In this subsection, we explore this channel. We first examine whether the
regulatory transition is associated with significant changes in bank management practices
and then study to what extent such organizational changes are associated with increases in
bank lending.
    In Section 2 and in the Online Appendix to this paper, we offer anecdotal evidence that the
new supervisory regime induced significant changes in key areas of loan and risk management.
Many thrifts purchased new software solutions or hired consultants to assist with the new
OCC requirements (Bayer, 2014). In Figure OA.1, we report a bar chart from a poll of former
OTS bankers conducted by Sageworks (SageWorks, 2013) showing that over 50 percent of
responding bankers indicated that they had to strengthen their risk rating system as a result
of feedback from OCC examiners and 38 percent indicated that they had to implement stress
testing.12 Moreover, an examination of OCC enforcement actions received by former OTS
banks also shows that the OCC forced these banks to make wide-ranging and fundamental
changes pertaining to (i) banks’ key management personnel and executive directors, (ii) loan
portfolio management (e.g., the procedures to document loan collateral or to ensure that
credit extensions are granted only after obtaining satisfactory credit information), and (iii)
credit risk management (e.g., the procedures for establishing loan officer accountability, credit
risk training and stress testing).13
    To make sure these are not just isolated examples, we investigate more formally whether
the regulatory transition led to palpable changes in bank management for former OTS banks
using three proxies. First, we examine whether the regulatory transition is associated with
greater rates of board turnover, defined as the ratio between the sum of entry of new directors
and exit of existing directors and the average number of directors in the bank during the year.
Second, we analyze if the transition is associated with a higher likelihood of exit of executive
directors of former OTS banks. An increase in management turnover is indicative that the
new regulators pressured for changes in the composition of the board, either explicitly through
enforcement actions (see Figure OA.2) or implicitly through conversations with current
management, the board, or shareholders. Finally, we follow Bhat et al. (2018) and create
a disclosure-based proxy for the use of formal credit risk modeling by financial institutions.
  12
     https://www.sageworks.com/blog/post/2013/11/14/biggest-areas-of-change-transitioning-from-OTS-to-
OCC.aspx
  13
     In the appendix to this paper (Figure OA.2), we illustrate such requirements with passages taken from
formal written agreements completed during 2012 between the OCC and multiple former OTS banks.


                                                   20
Changes in this proxy following the OTS extinction would be indicative that former OTS
banks updated their risk modeling and credit risk management in response to the regulatory
transition.
    We present the results of this analysis in Figure 6 and Panel A of Table 7. Figure 6 plots
the evolution of board turnover and risk modeling for thrifts and commercial banks separately.
The results are striking. Prior to the OTS extinction, thrifts’ board turnover rates and use
of credit risk models are consistently below those of commercial banks. Following the OTS
extinction, however, these patterns flip and thrifts see greater rates of board turnover and
increased use of credit risk modeling. Panel A of Table 7 presents regression results using
the difference-in-differences framework of equation (1) on the outcome variables described
above. These variables are available only at the bank level, with annual frequency and for
the subset of publicly-listed banks, which explains the lower number of observations for this
analysis. We find that the OTS extinction is associated with significantly higher rates of
board turnover (Columns (1) and (2)) and of executive director exit (Columns (3) and (4)),
relative to commercial banks over the same time period. In particular, the exit rates of
executive directors increase by four percentage points, which compares with an unconditional
likelihood of exit of an executive director around eight percent. Finally, in Columns (5) and
(6), we find that former OTS banks significantly increase the use of credit risk models by
eight percentage points following the regulatory transition. Overall, this collage of evidence
suggests that the forced transition of thrifts to stricter supervisors triggered significant and
wide-ranging changes to multiple areas of bank loan and risk management as well as their
management team.
    Next, we examine whether such changes in management and lending practices could
explain the documented increase in small business lending of former OTS banks following the
regulatory transition. The idea is to build on the results of Figure 6 and Panel A of Table
7 and to assess whether the lending effects are stronger in the subset of former OTS banks
that saw greater board and executive director turnover and that adopted more formal risk
modeling following the regulatory transition.
    Again, the analysis is limited to a smaller sample of publicly-listed banks. Despite this
smaller sample, the empirical results presented in Panel B of Table 7 largely support the
conjecture that the increases in small business lending are more pronounced in the subset of
former OTS banks that experienced changes in their management, lending, and risk modeling
practices. Specifically, the results in Columns (1)–(4) suggest that the increase in small
business lending following the regulatory transition was more pronounced in the subsample of
former OTS banks that experienced greater board turnover and saw at least one member of
its executive team exit following the regulatory transition. Furthermore, the results reported


                                              21
in Columns (5) and (6) suggest that the increase in small business lending is larger for banks
that adopted (new or more extensive) credit risk modeling after the OTS extinction.
    Our results are silent on what precluded the OTS from addressing these bank management
deficiencies prior to its demise. Perhaps it lacked resources to detect and correct these issues
at former OTS banks. Perhaps it took a softer stance than the other regulators because it was
captured by special interests or because it wanted to hide its own past failures.14 Regardless
of what explains the inaction of the OTS, our findings suggest that the transition to stricter
supervisors triggered a broad set of changes to the internal management practices of thrifts
and that these improvements, in turn, played a key role for the observed increase in small
business lending. In addition, one might ask why the thrifts themselves did not address
their deficiencies in bank management prior to the regulatory transition, especially if these
shortcomings constrained their lending. Our analysis does not provide a definitive answer,
but points to frictions in bank management and governance as a potential explanation.15
The turnover analyses are consistent with the notion that entrenched executives and board
members are an important part of the story. Regardless of what was holding back the
thrifts, the novel message of our paper is that stricter supervisors can induce changes in bank
management that increase bank lending.


7.3     Lending Portfolio Reallocation
Former OTS banks were significantly more concentrated in residential lending than other
commercial banks. The regulatory transition meant that former OTS banks were “passed”
from a regulator that was familiar with their business model (i.e., the OTS) to new regulators
(i.e., the OCC and FDIC) that were less familiar and perhaps even uncomfortable supervising
financial institutions with a large portfolio concentration in residential lending. Hence, an
alternative (but not mutually exclusive) explanation for our results is that the OCC and FDIC
pushed former OTS banks to change their lending strategies toward a lending portfolio mix
that was closer in line with that of the commercial banks that they supervised. Consistent
with this possibility, the poll of former OTS bankers conducted by Sageworks that we refer to
in Figure OA.1 reports that approximately 25% of respondents identified “diversification of
portfolio/change in lending strategy” as the biggest area of change that resulted from the
  14
     We do not have data on the resources and capabilities of the OTS, which would be necessary to shed light
on whether lack of resources explains the differences across supervisory approaches. In Tables OA.3 of the
Online Appendix, we report empirical analyses showing that the corrective actions imposed by the OCC were
more pronounced in banks headquartered in states that were formerly under the jurisdiction of the Western
Division of the OTS, whose regional director, Darrel W. Dochow, received significant negative attention for
having cozy ties with the thrifts that his regional division monitored (e.g. Story and Morgenson, 2011).
  15
     For instance, bank managers could be fairly insulated from competition due to scarce managerial talent in
local labor markets or due to legal restrictions to bank competition (e.g., Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2003).


                                                     22
supervisory transition.
    This conjecture implies that former OTS banks reduced their exposure to the residential
lending market following the regulatory transition. We examine whether there is empirical
support for this idea using the HMDA data set. We estimate an empirical specification
akin to equation (3), comparing changes in mortgage lending by former OTS banks with
changes in mortgage lending by commercial banks operating in the same narrowly-defined
geographic regions (census tracts).16 The results, reported in Table 8, show that former
OTS banks originate fewer mortgage loans following the regulatory transition. Depending on
the specification, we estimate that the origination of mortgage loans by former OTS banks
declines, on average, between four and fifteen percent after the regulatory transition, relative
to commercial banks in the same census tract and year.17 These results are consistent with
the idea that former OTS banks shifted some lending from mortgages to small businesses.
    Next, we tighten the analysis to more firmly establish that the observed portfolio realloca-
tion reflects supervisory pressures to make thrifts conform to lending strategies that fit the
mold of what the new supervisors typically oversee. Towards this end, we exploit pre-existing
cross-sectional variation in the similarity between the average portfolio mix of commercial
banks supervised by a local OCC field office and the average portfolio mix of former OTS
banks located in the same area, all prior to OTS extinction. The idea is that bank examiners
of local OCC field offices have different degrees of comfort and familiarity with the portfolios
of former OTS banks depending on how (dis)similar these portfolios are to the portfolios of
the other (commercial) banks that they supervise.
    We assign each commercial bank and each former OTS bank to the closest OCC field office.
We then compute, for each OCC field office, the difference between the pre-OTS extinction
portfolio mix of national banks supervised by the OCC and former OTS banks that are close
by and would likely be in the same jurisdiction. Specifically, we compute the difference, at
the end of 2010, between the average share of C&I loans of all commercial banks supervised
by a local OCC field office (national banks) and the average share of C&I loans of former
OTS banks that we assign to the same local OCC field office. Using a similar procedure, we
compute a similar measure of distance in portfolio allocation using the share of residential
loans. We then stratify our sample based on whether a bank is supervised by a local OCC
field office with above- or below-median distance in the respective portfolio allocations and
  16
     We use census tracts because this finer geographic demarcation is available from HMDA. We also estimate
models comparing at the county level and the results are quantitatively and qualitatively similar.
  17
     Further empirical analyses reported in the Online Appendix (Figures OA.4 and OA.5 and Table OA.13)
suggest that the decline in mortgage lending is not necessarily sharp around the regulatory transition, unlike
what we see for small business lending. Moreover, we find that rejection rates for mortgage applications
increase between 0.2 and 1 percentage points, but the effect is not always statistically significant. Thus, the
results for mortgages are less aligned with the OTS extinction.


                                                      23
re-estimate the main results of Table 4 in each of these subsamples.
    We report the results from this empirical analysis in Table 9. In Columns (1) and (2), we
partition the sample based on whether a bank is in the jurisdiction of an OCC field office
with large or small difference in the average shares of C&I lending between commercial banks
and former OTS banks. In Columns (3) and (4), we partition the sample in a similar way,
but using differences in residential lending shares. The results in Columns (1) and (2) of
Table 9 suggest that the positive impact of the regulatory transition on small business lending
is concentrated in former OTS banks located in the jurisdictions of local OCC field offices
that supervised commercial banks, which have much larger concentrations of C&I lending
compared to the thrifts. For former OTS banks located in jurisdictions of local OCC field
offices where commercial (national) banks and thrifts have relatively similar shares of C&I
lending shares on their lending portfolios, the regulatory transition does not have a positive
effect.18
    Similarly, the results in Columns (3) and (4) suggest that the impact of the OTS extinction
on small business lending is more pronounced when the former OTS banks are located in
the jurisdictions of local OCC field offices where the difference in residential lending shares
between commercial banks and thrifts are larger.
    As with previous sample splits, these results should be interpreted with caution as the
split variable could capture other unobservable characteristics related to banks’ willingness to
lend. Nevertheless, the results in Table 9 are consistent with the idea that OCC field offices
accustomed to a different modus operandi are more likely to push former OTS banks to adapt
their lending strategies, so that they are closer in line with the portfolio mix of the commercial
banks the OCC field office supervises. This finding is interesting because it suggests that
supervisory preferences or familiarity could play a role in regulatory outcomes.
    Given this evidence consistent with a supervisor-induced portfolio reallocation away from
residential lending, we analyze whether this explanation can account for most or all of the
thrifts’ increase in small business lending. Towards this end, we include variables for the level
of residential lending as well as changes in the supply of mortgages in the small business
lending analyses around the OTS extinction. The idea is to see if the OTS effect on small
business lending is substantially attenuated in the presence of these variables. The results
reported in Table 10 indicate that the coefficient of interest is not attenuated when we include
a battery of different indicators for thrifts’ supply of mortgages. The lack of attenuation is
  18
     The significantly negative coefficient in Column (2) is accounted by a relatively greater share of banks
with poor capitalization in that subsample, which are scaling back lending as shown in Table 6. If we focus on
well-capitalized banks and split as in Table 9, then the coefficient on OTS×Post is positive in both partitions,
but still larger in the partition with a large difference in CI. We checked that other splits in the paper do not
exhibit such imbalances with respect to capitalization.



                                                      24
consistent with the evidence in Figure OA.1 suggesting that only 25% thrifts report pressures
to diversify their portfolios. This relatively small fraction could explain why some thrifts
exhibit a supervisor-induced reallocation from mortgage to small business lending, but the
latter cannot account for the thrifts’ overall increase in small business lending. That is, only
thrifts that, on the margin, had high exposure to residential mortgages or whose OCC field
offices were less familiar with their business models ended up diversifying their portfolios.


7.4     Other Effects of the Regulatory Transition
In this section, we take a deeper look into what type of small business lending is unlocked
after the regulatory transition. The purpose of the analysis is to evaluate changes in the
characteristics of the loans originated by former OTS banks and to see if those changes are
consistent with the economic channels that we proposed to explain the surge in small business
lending following the OTS extinction.

7.4.1   Regulatory Transition and Lending Rates

Our analysis shows an increase in the small business loans originated by former OTS banks
and also a decline in the origination of mortgage loans. But, up until now, we have focused on
the volume and have not examined what happens to the loan interest rates set by former OTS
banks relative to those set by commercial banks. Here, we examine the evolution of the loan
rates around the regulatory transition for different types of loan products. The RateWatch
dataset of loan interest rates obtains weekly advertised loan rates on multiple loan products
from a survey of 100,000 bank branches. We use loan rate information on the most common
residential loan product, the 30-Year Fixed Rate Mortgage with principal amount of $175,000,
and the most common commercial loan product, the commercial equipment secured loan with
a $250,000 principal amount to better understand what the regulatory transition meant for
loan pricing.
    We implement a difference-in-differences empirical specification similar to that used in
previous analyses to gauge the impact of the regulatory transition on the interest rates for
residential and commercial lending. We report the results of this analysis in Table 11. We find
that following the regulatory transition, former OTS banks increase their advertised mortgage
lending rates relative to commercial banks by approximately 9–10 basis points, whereas they
reduce their interest rates on commercial lending products relative to commercial banks by
23–30 basis points.
    These results mirror our findings for the loan volumes and are consistent with our
interpretation that following the regulatory transition, former OTS banks expanded their


                                              25
supply of commercial loans and contracted their supply of residential mortgages. The rate
results also do not suggest that the new business loans are riskier and, hence, that the
regulatory transition induced thrifts to make riskier business loans.

7.4.2    Regulatory Transition and Local Business Activity

A remaining question is whether the documented increase in small business lending after
thrifts’ regulatory transition reflects more lending to new firms or more lending to firms with
existing relationships. The economic mechanism related to bank management implies that
the increase in small business lending is not driven by thrifts’ evergreening bad loans with
existing business customers but rather that they expand their commercial lending activities
to new customers and potentially to new businesses in the same county. That is, under the
bank management channel, we expect to see thrifts cut their troubled lending and make new
and better loans.
    While we cannot directly observe the identities of loan recipients, we can investigate
how greater exposure to former OTS banks following the OTS extinction is associated with
changes in the aggregate entry and exit rates of businesses at the county level. Entry of new
businesses is likely to be sensitive to changes in the availability of credit to small businesses
as their owners are typically credit constrained. At the same time, business exits could be
an indication that banks are less willing to extend or rollover existing credits for troubled
borrowers. Thus, corresponding increases in the entry and exit rates in counties with greater
exposure to former OTS banks would be consistent with the idea that thrifts are terminating
delinquent loans and financing new businesses following the OTS extinction.
    We compute the exposure of a county to former OTS banks as the share of deposits in
a county that is held in branches of former OTS banks as of June 30, 2010.19 We plot the
spatial distribution of the county exposure to former OTS banks in Figure OA.6. We draw
two insights from the plot. First, it suggests that spatial correlation or regional clustering is
not a great concern in this setting. The counties with high exposure to former OTS banks
are scattered throughout the United States. Second, the plot shows that more than half
of the U.S. counties have no exposure to former OTS banks. As these counties comprise a
majority of the sample and could be structurally different from counties with OTS exposure,
we exclude them from the analysis.
    We calculate the entry (exit) rate as the ratio of new entrants (exits) in the county to the
number of existing businesses in the county. We formally examine the relation between these
two variables using the following regression specification:
  19
    We compute the county exposure to former OTS banks using the deposit levels of 2010, rather than those
of an earlier year to avoid including WaMu and Indymac in these computations.


                                                   26
                        Yc,t = βShareOT Sc × P ostt + θXc,t + γc + δt + c,t                              (4)

where Yc,t represents the entry and exit rate of new establishments in county c during year t,
ShareOTS is the share of deposits held in branches of former OTS banks as of June 30th,
2010, Post is a dummy variable taking the value of one following the OTS extinction during
the calendar year 2011, inclusive. Xc,t is a vector of characteristics comprising the number
of bank branches and level of deposits held in the county, the number of establishments in
the county, and the size composition of the establishments operating in the county measured
by the number of establishments in the county that employ 1–4, 5–9, 10–19, 20–49, 50–99,
100–249, and 250–499 people. The year fixed effects, δt , control for overall trends in the
evolution of entry and exit rates and the county fixed effects, γc , control for time-invariant,
unobservable characteristics of each county. As before, we cluster the standard errors at the
county level.
    We report the results of this analysis in Table 12. We present results for an OLS
specification as well as a weighted least squares (WLS) specification, in which we weigh each
observation by the level of employment in the county. We find considerable increases in
business dynamism in counties most exposed to OTS banks. The main coefficients of interest,
β, are statistically significant and suggest that the OTS extinction is positively related to
local entry and exit rates for business establishments. The economic magnitudes are also
meaningful: the semi-elasticities of the entry and exit rates of establishments in response to
a standard deviation increase in the share of former OTS deposits in the county are 0.60%
and 0.55%, respectively. These findings suggest that the increase in small business lending
does not simply translate into greater flow of credit to all existing establishments, but rather
is consistent with a pattern in which former OTS banks reduce the extent to which they
evergreen loans of troubled incumbents and instead supply credit to new businesses.20,21
  20
     We further examine if the effects occur sharply around the OTS extinction in Figure OA.7. Consistent
with the notion that stricter supervision increased lending and business dynamism, we find that greater
exposure to former OTS banks is significantly and positively associated with corresponding increases in the
entry and exit rates following the OTS extinction, but not prior to the regulatory transition.
  21
     To examine whether these effects can be meaningfully attributed to an expansion of small business lending
by former OTS banks, we also investigate if the results are particularly pronounced in industries that are
more dependent on external sources of financing. We sort industries by below- and above-median levels of
dependence on external financing. Using data on entry and exit rates at the industry-county level, we find
that the effect of greater county exposure to former OTS banks on entry rates is greater in industries that
require greater access to external sources of finance. We report these results in Table OA.14.




                                                     27
8    Conclusion
    An important question in banking is how strict supervision affects bank lending and in
turn local business activity. Bank supervisors face a tradeoff between, on one hand, protecting
the financial system by forcing banks to correct weaknesses in their loan management, to
recognize troubled loans, and to ensure adequate provisioning for future loan losses and, on
the other hand, causing a credit crunch for the real economy by being too strict with banks,
especially shortly after a financial crisis.
    We study this tradeoff by examining the elimination of the OTS, which was stipulated by
the Dodd-Frank Act and took place shortly after the Great Recession. The OTS extinction
meant that former OTS banks were transferred to the OCC and the FDIC, which have a
much stricter regulatory approach, affecting key areas of bank management, including loan
loss recognition, loan risk ratings, stress testing, and risk management. This forced regulatory
transition allows us to analyze the economic links between strict prudential supervision, bank
lending and business activity.
    We confirm first that the regulatory transition resulted in stricter supervision, documenting
significant changes in loan loss recognition and loan provisioning shortly after the OTS
extinction. Next, we analyze bank lending and do not find evidence that stricter supervision
led to a credit crunch, except for those former OTS banks that were thinly capitalized. On
average, former OTS banks increase their lending to small businesses following the regulatory
transition by approximately 10 percent. The increase is concentrated in well-capitalized banks
as well as in banks that underwent significant changes in internal management practices. In
particular, we show that increases in small business lending are concentrated in former OTS
banks that (i) show above-median board turnover following the regulatory transition; (ii)
replace executive directors following the transition; and (iii) adopt formal risk modeling after
the OTS extinction. This collection of results is consistent with the explanation that stricter
supervision triggered broad changes and improvements in the internal management practices
of former OTS banks, which in turn increased their supply of small business loans.
    In addition, we find that thrifts reduce their origination of mortgage loans following the
regulatory transition. For at least some, this reduction is consistent with a supervisor-induced
reallocation from residential to small business lending. However, this reallocation does not
explain the overall increase in small business lending and appears to be a separate effect.
Overall, our evidence shows that stricter supervision operates not only through capital but
can also spur improvements in loan and risk management, leading to more lending and a
reallocation of loans.
    There are two important caveats to our analysis. First, we document economic effects for


                                               28
the years after the regulatory transition. But we do not know how the elimination of the OTS
will play out in the long run. It is, for instance, an open question whether the decline in the
number of supervisors and corresponding increase in regulatory concentration benefits the
financial system in the long haul. Second, the US banking system features many small banks.
Our analysis is, therefore, more likely to be relevant for smaller and perhaps less sophisticated
banks. However, there are several banking systems around the world that feature a significant
fraction of smaller banks (e.g., Germany and Italy), for which our findings could be relevant.




                                               29
References
Agarwal, S., E. Benmelech, N. Bergman, and A. Seru (2012). Did the community reinvestment
  act lead to risky lending? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Agarwal, S., D. Lucca, A. Seru, and F. Trebbi (2014). Inconsistent regulators: Evidence from
  banking. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (2), 889–938.

Altavilla, C., M. Boucinha, J.-L. Peydró, and F. Smets (2020). Banking supervision, monetary
  policy and risk-taking: Big data evidence from 15 credit registers.

Appelbaum, B. and E. Nakashima (2008a). Banking regulator played advocate over enforcer.
 The Washington Post. Published: 11 November 2008.

Appelbaum, B. and E. Nakashima (2008b). Regulator let indymac bank falsify report: Agency
 didn’t enforce its rules, inquiry finds. Washington Post. Published: 23 December 2008.

Bayer, E. (2014). Reducing the alll reserve for thrifts. Banking Administration Institute.
  Published : Jan 29, 2014.

Beatty, A. and S. Liao (2011). Do delays in expected loss recognition affect banks’ willingness
  to lend? Journal of Accounting and Economics 52 (1), 1–20.

Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2003). Enjoying the quiet life? corporate governance and
  managerial preferences. Journal of Political Economy 111 (5), 1043–1075.

Bhat, G., S. G. Ryan, and D. Vyas (2018). The implications of credit risk modeling for banks’
  loan loss provisions and loan-origination procyclicality. Management Science.

Bian, B., R. Haselmann, T. Kick, and V. Vig (2017). The political economy of bank bailouts.
  IMFS Working Paper Series.

Bonfim, D., G. Cerqueiro, H. Degryse, and S. Ongena (2016). Evergreening and the misallo-
  cation of credit in portugal. Manuscript, Banco de Portugal.

Bord, V., V. Ivashina, and R. Taliaferro (2017). Large banks and the transmission of financial
  shocks. Working Paper.

Brown, C. O. and I. S. Dinç (2005). The politics of bank failures: Evidence from emerging
  markets. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (4), 1413–1444.

Brown, C. O. and I. S. Dinç (2011). Too many to fail? evidence of regulatory forbearance
  when the banking sector is weak. The Review of Financial Studies 24 (4), 1378–1405.

                                              30
Buchak, G., G. Matvos, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru (2018a). Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and
  the rise of shadow banks. Journal of Financial Economics 130 (3), 453–483.

Buchak, G., G. Matvos, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru (2018b). The limits of shadow banks.
 Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bushman, R. M. and C. D. Williams (2012). Accounting discretion, loan loss provisioning,
 and discipline of banks’ risk-taking. Journal of Accounting and Economics 54 (1), 1–18.

Caballero, R. J., T. Hoshi, and A. K. Kashyap (2008). Zombie lending and depressed
  restructuring in japan. American Economic Review 98 (5), 1943–77.

Chen, B. S., S. G. Hanson, and J. C. Stein (2017). The decline of big-bank lending to small
  business: Dynamic impacts on local credit and labor markets. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Chodorow-Reich, G. (2013). The employment effects of credit market disruptions: Firm-level
  evidence from the 2008–9 financial crisis. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1),
 1–59.

Christensen, H. B., L. Hail, and C. Leuz (2016). Capital-market effects of securities regulation:
  Prior conditions, implementation, and enforcement. The Review of Financial Studies 29 (11),
 2885–2924.

Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs (2011). Wall street and the
  financial crisis: Anatomy of a financial collapse. Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations.
  Section IV C. (4) OTS Turf War Against FDIC, 196.

Cortés, K. R., Y. Demyanyk, L. Li, E. Loutskina, and P. E. Strahan (2019). Stress tests and
  small business lending. Journal of Financial Economics.

Costello, A., J. Granja, and J. Weber (2016). Do strict regulators increase the transparency
  of the banking system. Working Paper.

Dimitrov, V., D. Palia, and L. Tang (2015). Impact of the dodd-frank act on credit ratings.
  Journal of Financial Economics 115 (3), 505–520.

Eisenbach, T., D. Lucca, and R. Townsend (2017). The economics of bank supervision.
  Technical report, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Gambacorta, L. and D. Marques-Ibanez (2011). The bank lending channel: lessons from the
 crisis. Economic Policy 26 (66), 135–182.

                                               31
Granja, J., C. Leuz, and R. Rajan (2018). Going the extra mile: Distant lending and credit
  cycles. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Granja, J. and S. Moreira (2019). Product innovation and credit market disruptions. Available
 at SSRN 3477726 .

Hirtle, B., A. Kovner, and M. C. Plosser (2018). The impact of supervision on bank
  performance.

Iacus, S. M., G. King, and G. Porro (2012). Causal inference without balance checking:
  Coarsened exact matching. Political analysis 20 (1), 1–24.

Ivashina, V. and D. Scharfstein (2010). Bank lending during the financial crisis of 2008.
  Journal of Financial economics 97 (3), 319–338.

Jackson, H. E. and M. J. Roe (2009). Public and private enforcement of securities laws:
  Resource-based evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 93 (2), 207–238.

Kandrac, J. and B. Schlusche (2018). The effect of bank supervision on risk taking: Evidence
 from a natural experiment. Working Paper.

Kane, E. J. (1989). The high cost of incompletely funding the fslic shortage of explicit capital.
 Journal of Economic Perspectives 3 (4), 31–47.

Kroszner, R. S. and P. E. Strahan (1996). Regulatory incentives and the thrift crisis: Dividends,
  mutual-to-stock conversions, and financial distress. the Journal of Finance 51 (4), 1285–1319.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2006). What works in securities laws?
 The Journal of Finance 61 (1), 1–32.

Lucca, D., A. Seru, and F. Trebbi (2014). The revolving door and worker flows in banking
  regulation. Journal of Monetary Economics 65, 17–32.

MacDonald, C., J. Schwartz, and J. Day (2011). After the ots: Should thrifts convert to
 commercial banks? Bloomberg Law Reports.

Nguyen, H.-L. Q. (2019). Are credit markets still local? evidence from bank branch closings.
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11 (1), 1–32.

Office of Inspector General (2009). Safety and soundness: Ots involvement with backdated
  capital contributions by thrifts. Audit Report.



                                               32
Peek, J. and E. S. Rosengren (2000). Collateral damage: Effects of the japanese bank crisis
  on real activity in the united states. American Economic Review 90 (1), 30–45.

Peirce, H., I. Robinson, and T. Stratmann (2014). How are small banks faring under dodd-
  frank? Working Paper.

SageWorks (2013). Poll: Biggest areas of change when transitioning from ots to occ. SageWorks.

Story, L. and G. Morgenson (2011). Financial finger-pointing turns to regulators. The New
  York Times, A1. Published Nov 22, 2011.

Wayne, L. (1992). Thrift office’s eager terminator. The New York Times. Published: Jan 21,
 1992.




                                             33
                                                                                                                                                     Figure 1: Loan Loss Recognition over Time
     Figure 1 plots the average loan loss provision ratio (loan loss provision divided by total assets) and average nonperforming loan ratio (nonperforming loans divided by total
     assets) of former OTS banks and all other commercial banks during the period 2005Q1 to 2015Q4. Data are from the FFIEC Call Reports and from the Thrift Financial Reports.
     The shaded period is the financial crisis as defined by the NBER recession period.


                                                                                                Average Provisions (% Total Assets)                                                                                                                                                           Average Non-Performing Loans (% Total Assets)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .03




                           .004
                                                                      NBER Recession                                                                                                                                                                                           NBER Recession

                                                                      Commercial Banks                                                                                                                                                                                         Commercial Banks

                                                                      Former OTS Banks                                                                                                                                                                                         Former OTS Banks




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .025




                                                                                                                                    OTS Extinction




                                        .003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .02




34
                     .002
                                                                                                                                                                                                            .01        .015




       Provision Ratio (% Total Assets)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OTS Extinction




                           .001
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Non-Performing Loans Ratio (% Total Assets)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .005




                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3




                                                q1
                                                      q3
                                                            q1
                                                                  q3
                                                                          q1
                                                                                q3
                                                                                      q1
                                                                                            q3
                                                                                                    q1
                                                                                                          q3
                                                                                                                q1
                                                                                                                       q3
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                      q1
                                                                                                                                                            q3
                                                                                                                                                                  q1
                                                                                                                                                                        q3
                                                                                                                                                                              q1
                                                                                                                                                                                    q3
                                                                                                                                                                                          q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q3




                                                                                                                              1q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1q




                                                                                                                                     11




                                               05
                                                     05
                                                           06
                                                                 06
                                                                         07
                                                                               07
                                                                                     08
                                                                                           08
                                                                                                   09
                                                                                                         09
                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                                             14
                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15




                                                                                                                            01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           01




                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2




                                               20
                                                     20
                                                           20
                                                                 20
                                                                        20
                                                                               20
                                                                                     20
                                                                                           20
                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                    Quarter                                                                                                                                                                                                Quarter
                                                                                                       Figure 2: OTS Extinction and Loan Loss Recognition over Time
     Figure 2 plots the estimated impact of OTS supervision on the loan loss provision ratio and nonperforming loan ratio in each quarter of the sample period using OLS regressions.
     The shallow circles represent the series of coefficients βt from interacting a set of dummy variables representing each quarter in the sample with a dummy variable taking the
     value of one if the depository institution’s primary supervisor in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision in the following model specification:
                                   P
     Yit = γt + θi +                      t
                                              βt OT SExtinctionit × γt + δXit + it and the vertical bands represent 90% confidence intervals for the point estimates in each quarter. The figure on the
     left represents the series of coefficients in a model, for which the loan loss provision ratio is the dependent variable. The figure on the right represents the series of coefficients
     in a model that uses nonperforming loan ratio as the dependent variable. The shaded period is the financial crisis as defined by the NBER recession period.


                                                                    Estimated Impact on Loan Loss Provision Ratio                                                                                                                                           Estimated Impact on Nonperforming Loans Ratio




          .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .5




          .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OTS Extinction




          .3




35
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .3




        0 .2
          .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  .1




       Betat
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Betat




          -.1
          -.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.1




          -.3
          -.4
                                                                                                                         OTS Extinction
                      Vertical bands represent +/- 1.96 * St. Error of each point estimate                                                                                                                     Vertical bands represent +/- 1.96 * St. Error of each point estimate




          -.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.3




                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4




                 q2
                         q4
                                  q2
                                           q4
                                                     q2
                                                              q4
                                                                        q2
                                                                                 q4
                                                                                             q2
                                                                                                   q4
                                                                                                         q2
                                                                                                               q4
                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                  q2
                                                                                                                                                        q4
                                                                                                                                                              q2
                                                                                                                                                                    q4
                                                                                                                                                                          q2
                                                                                                                                                                                q4
                                                                                                                                                                                      q2
                                                                                                                                                                                            q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1q




                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11




                05
                       05
                                06
                                          06
                                                   07
                                                            07
                                                                      08
                                                                               08
                                                                                        09
                                                                                                  09
                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                         05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   01




                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2




                20
                      20
                              20
                                        20
                                                 20
                                                          20
                                                                    20
                                                                             20
                                                                                      20
                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                         Quarter                                                                                                                                                                                  Quarter
Figure 3: Total Annual Origination of Small Business Loans by Thrifts and Commercial
Banks

Figure 3 plots an index of the total volume of small business loans originated by former OTS banks and commercial banks.
Former OTS Banks are banks that reported the OTS as their primary regulator during 2010. Commercial Banks are all other
banks that report to the CRA dataset. To avoid that composition effects influence the figure, we define a balanced sample using
only commercial banks and former OTS banks that were part of the CRA-reporting sample for the entire sample period.




                                                           Annual Origination of Small Business Loans by Former OTS Banks and Commercial Banks
                                               1.5
             Small Business Loans (2010=100)
                                               1.25
                                               1




                                                                                                          OTS Extinction




                                                                                                                                          Commercial Bank

                                                                                                                                          Former OTS Banks
                                               .75

                                                      05




                                                               06




                                                                        07




                                                                                 08




                                                                                          09




                                                                                                   10




                                                                                                                           11




                                                                                                                                12




                                                                                                                                     13




                                                                                                                                               14




                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                   20
                                                      20




                                                               20




                                                                       20




                                                                                20




                                                                                         20




                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                  Year




                                                                                                36
           Figure 4: Small Business Lending and OTS Extinction: Impact over Time
Figure 4 plots the estimated impact of OTS supervision on small business lending in each year of the sample period. The shallow
circles represent the series of coefficients βt from expanding the model specification in Column (3) of Table 4 to include a set of
interaction variables between year dummies and a dummy variable taking the value of one if the depository institution’s primary
regulator in 2010 was the Office of Thrift Supervision and the vertical bands represent 90% confidence intervals for the point
estimates in each quarter. Data on small business lending come from the Community Reinvestment Act Small Business Lending
Dataset.


                                                                                                  Individual Bank Level
               .5




                          Vertical bands represent +/- 1.65 * St. Error of each point estimate
               .4
               .3
               .2
             β
               .1
               0




                                                                                                                 OTS Extinction
               -.1
               -.2

                     05




                                      06




                                                          07




                                                                             08




                                                                                                 09




                                                                                                          10




                                                                                                                                  11




                                                                                                                                       12




                                                                                                                                            13




                                                                                                                                                 14




                                                                                                                                                      15
                     20




                                    20




                                                        20




                                                                           20




                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                          Year




                                                                                                       37
      Figure 5: Small Business Lending and OTS Extinction: Impact by Capitalization
Figure 5 plots the impact of OTS supervision on small business lending across different levels of capitalization defined by the
Tier 1 capital ratio of each bank in the fourth quarter of 2010. The shallow circles represent the series of coefficients βi from
expanding the model specification in column (3) of Table 4 to include a set of interaction variables between a dummy variable
taking the value of one if the depository institution’s primary regulator in 2010 was the Office of Thrift Supervision and each
of six indicator variables that take the value of one if the Tier 1 capital in the fourth quarter of 2010 is below 10, between 10
and 12.5, between 12.5 and 15, between 15 and 17.5, between 17.5 and 25, and more than 25 percent, respectively. The vertical
bands represent 90% confidence intervals for the point estimates in each Tier1 bin. Data on small business lending come from
the Community Reinvestment Act Small Business Lending Dataset and data on Tier 1 capital ratios come from Call Reports
and Thrift Financial Reports.



                                               Estimated Impact on Bank Lending by Tier1 Bin
                     1
                     .5
                     0
             Betai
                     -.5
                     -1
                     -1.5




                                                                          Vertical bands represent +/- 1.96 * St. Error of each point estimate
                            0




                                         .5]




                                                               ]




                                                                                           .5]




                                                                                                                                    ]




                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                             15




                                                                                                                                  25
                            <1




                                                                                                                                                 >2
                                      ,12




                                                                                        ,17
                                                          .5,




                                                                                                                               .5,
                                   [10




                                                       [12




                                                                                     [15




                                                                                                                            [17




                                                                   Tier 1 Category




                                                                     38
                         Figure 6: Impact of Regulatory Transition on Board Turnover and Credit Risk Modeling over Time
     Figure 6 plots the average board turnover (sum of entries and exits of board directors divided by average number of board directors) and share of banks using formal risk models
     and disclosing this practice in their 10-Ks (defined as mentions of the words "risk" and "model" within ten words of each other in the annual 10-K of the bank), separately
     for former OTS banks and commercial banks during the period 2005–2015. Data are from the FFIEC Call Reports and from the Thrift Financial Reports, regulatory filings,
     BoardEx, and 10-Ks of publicly traded banks.


                                                    Board Turnover                                                                                         Risk Models




                                                                                                               .6




       .12
                       Commercial Banks                                                                                       Commercial Banks




       .11
                       Former OTS Banks                                                                                       Former OTS Banks




       .1
                                                                                                                                                                              OTS Extinction




       .09




39
                                                                                                               .5




       .08
       .07
       .06
       .05
                                                                                                               .4




       .04
       .03
       .02
       .01
                                                                          OTS Extinction




       0
                                                                                                               .3




                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                                                         11




             05
                  06
                             07
                                          08
                                               09
                                                         10
                                                                                           12
                                                                                                13
                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                    05
                                                                                                                         06
                                                                                                                                    07
                                                                                                                                                 08
                                                                                                                                                      09
                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                              15




                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                         20




             20
                  20
                            20
                                          20
                                               20
                                                        20
                                                                                           20
                                                                                                20
                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                              20




                                                       Quarter                                                                                               Quarter
                                 Table 1: Transition Matrix for Former OTS Banks and Commercial Banks

     Table 1 reports on the status of former OTS banks that mandatorily transitioned regulators following the OTS extinction. The Table shows how many former OTS banks
     voluntarily changed to other charters as of June 30th of the subsequent years and how many former OTS banks dropped out of the sample due to failure, merger, or closure.
     The numbers for each year are cumulative counts since June 30, 2011. We also report a similar migration analysis to the control group of commercial banks.

                                                        Former - OTS Banks                                                         Commercial Banks


                      Mandatory                                                                                     Commercial
                       Transition                                                                                     banks
                       from OTS                                                                                     supervised
                           to                Voluntary change to different Regulator or              Drop out          by         Voluntary change to         Drop out
                      OCC/FDIC                 institution class after OTS extinction:                               OCC or         other regulator
                           on                                                                                         FDIC
                      07/21/2011



                         708        Cum. ∆ Cum. ∆      Cum. ∆     Cum. ∆              Cumulative                      OCC -         FRB               Cumulative
40




                    OTS regulated    from     to          to         to       % of    number of    % of               Federal    Commercial    % of   number of    % of
                        Banks       OCC to   OCC -      FDIC -      FRB     voluntary banks that drop out             Charter        or     voluntary banks that drop out
         Date        required to    FDIC - Commercial Commercial Commercial changes     Failed,   within                           Saving    changes    Failed,   within
                      switch to     Mutual   Bank        Bank    or Savings  within    Merged, each year                           Banks      within   Merged, each year
                    OCC or FDIC     Savings                        Banks    each year     or                                                each year or Closed
                      regulator      Bank                                               Closed



       6/30/2011          708          0           0            0            0                                         5590           0                     0
       6/30/2012          633          16           5           17           6            6.02%    32      4.38%       5361          35        0.63%       194       3.47%
       6/30/2013          579          27           6           24           9            3.25%    63      4.73%       5093          67        0.62%       430       4.37%
       6/30/2014          522          36          11           28           13           3.41%    98      5.43%       4845          106       0.82%       639       4.05%
       6/30/2015          480          35          15           34           19           2.45%    125     4.43%       4586          133       0.63%       871       4.69%



      % of banks
      06/30/2015
     Compared to        67.80%       4.94%       2.12%        4.80%        2.68%                  17.66%              82.04%       2.38%                  15.58%
       6/30/2011
                             Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for Sample Banks

Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the main sample used in the analysis. Panel A presents financial characteristics
and ratios of the entire sample of banks using call report and thrift financial report data. Panel B reports summary statis-
tics for the sample of Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) Small Business Lending reporting banks. Total Assets are total
assets of the depository institution (measured in $000s) (RCFD2170). Share Residential is the ratio of residential real es-
tate loans (RCON1797+RCON5367+RCON5368) and total assets (RCFD2170). Share C&I is the ratio of commercial and
industrial loans (RCFD1766) and total assets (RCFD2170). Share CRE is the ratio of commercial and real estate loans
(RCON1415+RCON1460+RCON1480+RCFD2746) and total assets (RCFD2170). Loan Loss Provision Ratio is defined as the
ratio between Loan Loss Provisions (RIAD4230) and total assets (RCFD2170). Charge-Off Ratio is the ratio of total charge-offs
(RIAD435) and total assets (RCFD2170). Nonperforming Loan Ratio is defined as the sum of total loans that are 90 days past
due and still accruing (RCFD1407) and total nonaccrual loans (RCFD1407) divided by total assets (RCFD2170). ALLL Ratio
is the ratio of the allowance for loan and lease losses (RIAD3123) and total assets (RCFD2170). Total SBL Originations is the
total amount of small business loans (measured in $000s) originated by a bank over a calendar year. Number Branches is the
total number of branches operated by a bank as of June 30th of each year. Total Deposits is the total deposits held in domestic
branches of a bank as of June 30th of each year (measured in $000s). HPI is the average of the HPI of each zip code where the
bank has a branch weighted by the share of county deposits that the bank holds in that zip code. The zipcode HPI is calculated
using the all-transactions indexes at the zip code level provided by the Federal Housing Finance Agency.

Panel A: Banks’ Financial Characteristics and Ratios
                                       Count             Mean            Std. Dev.         p25          p50            p75
 Commercial Banks
 Total Assets                         276,222          1,980,338         31,310,266       66,037      142,466        337,932
 Share CRE                            265,682             0.233             0.170          0.091       0.207          0.346
 Share C&I                            273,895            0.095             0.0885          0.041       0.075          0.122
 Share Residential                    265,682              0.17             0.129          0.082       0.151          0.234
 Tier1 Capital Ratio                  265,681            22.27              120.3         11.27        13.91          18.48
 Loan Loss Provision Ratio            267,250            0.0011           0.00369            0        0.00034        0.00096
 Charge-Off Ratio                     265,680            0.0011           0.00350            0        0.00020        0.00084
 Nonperforming Loan Ratio             273,827             0.012            0.0197         0.0013       0.0056         0.0145
 ALLL Ratio                           264,776            0.010             0.0069         0.0064      0.0087         0.0116
 Former OTS Banks
 Total Assets                          24,689          1,175,943          5,858,742       79,662      167,900        427,344
 Share CRE                             24,689            0.172               0.152         0.050        0.137         0.258
 Share C&I                             24,689            0.033              0.051            0         0.012          0.048
 Share Residential                     24,689            0.418               0.209         0.271        0.426         0.568
 Tier1 Capital Ratio                   24,689            29.63               66.96        13.61         18.38         28.13
 Loan Loss Provision Ratio             24,689           0.0010             0.00313           0        0.00021        0.00081
 Charge-Off Ratio                      24,688           0.0009              0.0026           0        0.00009        0.00067
 Nonperforming Loan Ratio              24,689            0.013              0.0210        0.0017       0.0064         0.0164
 ALLL Ratio                            22,486            0.007             0.0067         0.0031       0.0058        0.0091


Panel B: Small Business Loan and Deposit Market Characteristics of CRA Reporting Banks
                               Count              Mean               Std. Dev.          p25           p50             p75
 Commercial Banks
 Total SBL Originations        8,505           214,504                963,641           21,938       55,692        125,576
 Number Branches               8,505            350.6                  1,626.7            36           74             173
 Total Assets                  8,505        4,138,426,192          54,375,080,904     1,642,812    5,828,784      28,301,078
 Total Deposits                8,505          7,741,388              51,713,920        515,872     1,023,661      2,192,585
 HPI                           8,298            1.114                   0.137           1.039        1.107          1.189
 Former OTS Banks
 Total SBL Originations         668                56,886             115,515           5,302        24,070          59,403
 Number Branches                668                 275.3              639.0              55           111            213
 Total Assets                   668             132,904,676         687,671,861       4,068,040    10,161,059     34,254,948
 Total Deposits                 668              3,666,661           7,167,811         928,023     1,343,974       2,987,659
 HPI                            646                 1.094              0.143            1.002        1.090           1.182


                                                                   41
                                  Table 3: OTS Extinction and Loan Loss Recognition: Impact of Stricter Supervision

     Table 3 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating the effect of the OTS extinction on loan loss recognition. The dependent variables are the Loan Loss Provision
     Ratio, Nonperforming Loan Ratio, Charge-Off Ratio, and ALLL Ratio, respectively. Loan Loss Provision Ratio is defined as the ratio between Loan Loss Provisions (RIAD4230)
     and total assets (RCFD2170). Nonperforming Loan Ratio is defined as the sum of total loans that are 90 days past due and still accruing (RCFD1407) and total nonaccrual
     loans (RCFD1407) divided by total assets (RCFD2170). Charge-Off Ratio is the ratio of total charge-offs (RIAD435) and total assets (RCFD2170). Enf. Act is an indicator
     variable if the bank received a cease and desist or a consent order during the quarter. OTS is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depository institution’s
     primary regulator in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision. Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all quarters between
     2011:Q3 and 2015:Q4 and zero for all quarters between 2005:Q1 and 2011:Q2. Ln(Assets) is the natural logarithm of total assets (RCFD2170). Share Residential is the ratio
     of residential real estate loans (RCON1797+RCON5367+RCON5368) and total assets (RCFD2170). Share C&I is the ratio of commercial and industrial loans (RCFD1766)
     and total assets (RCFD2170). Share CRE is the ratio of commercial and real estate loans (RCON1415+RCON1460+RCON1480+RCFD2746) and total assets (RCFD2170).
     Tier1 Capital Ratio is the bank’s Tier 1 capital ratio (RCFD7206). Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the county, assigning banks
     to counties by the location of their headquarters. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                      (1)          (2)                   (3)           (4)                   (5)       (6)      (7)       (8)




42
                                                    Loan Loss Provision Ratio          Nonperforming Loan Ratio            Charge-Off Ratio       Enf. Act
                      OTS × Post                     0.018***     0.018***              0.333***      0.369***              0.023*** 0.026*** 0.002*** 0.003***
                                                    (0.002)      (0.002)               (0.017)      (0.019)                (0.002) (0.002) (0.000) (0.000)
                      Ln(Assets)                                  0.003                              -0.016                           0.011***           0.004***
                                                                 (0.003)                            (0.046)                         (0.004)            (0.001)
                      Residential Share                           0.020                              1.299***                         0.051**            0.003
                                                                 (0.014)                            (0.207)                         (0.023)            (0.003)
                      C&I Share                                   0.144***                           -0.793***                       -0.056**           -0.012**
                                                                 (0.022)                            (0.232)                         (0.022)            (0.006)
                      CRE Share                                   0.108***                            0.147                          -0.061***          -0.005
                                                                 (0.012)                            (0.145)                         (0.014)            (0.003)
                      Tier1 Capital Ratio                         0.000                              -0.000                          -0.000             -0.000
                                                                 (0.000)                            (0.000)                         (0.000)            (0.000)
                      Observations                  343712       341700                350287       341700                 342142 341698 352720 341701
                      Adjusted R2                    0.294        0.294                 0.507         0.510                 0.304     0.304    0.018     0.017
                      Quarter Fixed-Effects           Yes          Yes                   Yes           Yes                   Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes
                      Bank Fixed-Effects              Yes          Yes                   Yes           Yes                   Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes
                          Table 4: OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending

Table 4 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating the effect of the OTS extinction on the supply of small business
lending by former OTS banks. The dependent variable Ln(Total Loans) is the total amount of small business loans (i.e., loans
whose principal amount is below $1 million) originated by a depository institution in a county over a calendar year. OTS is an
indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depository institution primary regulator in the first and second quarter of
2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision. Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all years between 2011 and
2015 and zero for all years between 2005 and 2010. Ln(HPI) is the natural logarithm of a house price index (HPI) calculated for
each bank and each county where that bank has a branch network presence. The HPI is calculated using the all-transactions
indexes at the zip code level provided by the Federal Housing Finance Agency. We calculate the HPI for each bank in each
county by weighting the HPI of each zip code where the bank has a branch by the share of county deposits that the bank holds
in that zip code. The index is designed to capture potential and absorb potential systematic differences in the location strategies
of former OTS and commercial banks within a county location. Baseline controls include linear and quadratic terms for the
number of branches and the total amount of deposits of each bank in each county. Standard errors are presented in parentheses,
and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                    (1)         (2)  (3)      (4)      (5)                     (6)
                                                                   Ln(Total Loans)
             OTS × Post                           0.206*** 0.088** 0.152*** 0.204*** 0.094**                 0.158***
                                                 (0.041) (0.039) (0.041) (0.041) (0.039)                    (0.042)
             Ln(HPI)                                                         0.266*** 0.206                  0.450**
                                                                            (0.041) (0.159)                 (0.203)
             Observations                        139277 130989 116550 129310 123123                         109740
             Adjusted R2                          0.755    0.864    0.881    0.754    0.865                  0.883
             Baseline Controls                     Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes                    Yes
             Year Fixed Effects                    Yes      No       No       Yes      No                     No
             County Fixed Effects                  Yes      No       No       Yes      No                     No
             Bank Fixed Effects                    Yes      No       No       Yes      No                     No
             County-Year Fixed Effects             No       Yes      Yes      No       Yes                    Yes
             Bank-County Fixed Effects             No       Yes      Yes      No       Yes                    Yes
             Coarsened Exact Matching              No       No       Yes      No       No                     Yes




                                                               43
    Table 5: OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending: Excluding the Largest Banks

Table 5 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating the effect of the OTS extinction on the supply of small business
lending by former OTS banks after excluding the top 4 banks in the United States (columns (1)–(3)) or alternatively excluding
the top 20 banks by volume of small business lending over the entire period of analysis (columns (4)–(6)). The dependent
variable Ln(Total Loans) is the total amount of small business loans (i.e., loans whose principal amount is below $1 million)
originated by a depository institution in a county over a calendar year. OTS is an indicator variable that takes the value of
one if the depository institution primary regulator in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision.
Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all years after 2011 (inclusive). Baseline controls include linear and
quadratic terms for the number of branches and total amount of deposits of each bank in each county. Standard errors are
presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.



                                             (1)        (2)          (3)  (4)        (5)                             (6)
                                                                   Ln(Total Loans)
      OTS × Post                           0.226*** 0.134*** 0.152*** 0.199***      0.119***                       0.147***
                                          (0.040) (0.040) (0.041)       (0.040)    (0.042)                        (0.043)
      Observations                        115891 106988      95445       84719      73760                          61495
      Adjusted R2                          0.755    0.859    0.875       0.761      0.853                          0.865
      Baseline Controls                     Yes      Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes                            Yes
      Year Fixed Effects                    Yes      No       No          Yes        No                             No
      County Fixed Effects                  Yes      No       No          Yes        No                             No
      Bank Fixed Effects                    Yes      No       No          Yes        No                             No
      County-Year Fixed Effects             No       Yes      Yes         No         Yes                            Yes
      Bank-County Fixed Effects             No       Yes      Yes         No         Yes                            Yes
      Coarsened Exact Matching              No       No       Yes         No         No                             Yes
      Excluded Observations?               Top4     Top4     Top4     Top20 SBL Top20 SBL                       Top20 SBL




                                                                44
         Table 6: OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending: Role of Capitalization

Table 6 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions. Columns (1) and (2) repeat the analysis of Column (2) of Table 4 after
stratifying the sample based on above- and below-median levels of Tier 1 Capital Ratio of the former OTS banks subsample
prior to the OTS extinction and Columns (3) and (4) repeat the analysis of Column (2) of Table 4 after stratifying the sample
based on above- and below-median levels of the Tier 1 leverage ratio (Tier 1 Capital divided total non-risk weighted assets) of
the former OTS banks subsample prior to the OTS extinction. The dependent variable Ln(Total Loans) is the total amount of
small business loans (i.e., loans whose principal amount is below $1 million) originated by a depository institution in a county
over a calendar year. OTS is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depository institution primary regulator
in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision. Post is an indicator variable that takes the value
of one for all years between 2011 and 2015 and zero for all years between 2005 and 2010. Baseline controls include linear and
quadratic terms for the number of branches and total amount of deposits of each bank in each county. Standard errors are
presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.




                                              (1)             (2)       (3)                                   (4)
                                                                Ln(Total Loans)
                                         High Tier1 Low Tier1 High T1 Lev. Ratio                     Low T1 Lev. Ratio
     OTS × Post                            0.265***   -0.227***        0.382***                            -0.062
                                          (0.061)    (0.070)          (0.077)                             (0.063)
     Observations                          19197      88309            13984                               93989
     Adjusted R2                           0.838       0.868           0.865                                0.859
     Baseline Controls                      Yes         Yes             Yes                                  Yes
     County-Year Fixed Effects              Yes         Yes             Yes                                  Yes
     Bank-County Fixed Effects              Yes         Yes             Yes                                  Yes




                                                               45
              Table 7: OTS Extinction, Changes in Bank Management, and Lending
Panel A of Table 7 reports coefficients of OLS regressions investigating the direct effect of the OTS extinction on changes in
bank and loan management. Board Turnover is the ratio between the number of entries and exits in the board of the bank and
the average number of board members over the year, Exec.Exit is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if an executive
director of the bank exits during the year, and Risk Model is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the bank discloses
risk modeling, i.e., the 10-K mentions the words "risk" and "model" within ten words of each other, similar to Bhat et al., 2018.
OTS is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depository institution’s primary regulator in the first and second
quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision. Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all quarters
between 2011:Q3 and 2015:Q4 and zero for all quarters between 2005:Q1 and 2011:Q2. The empirical specifications of Columns
(2), (4), and (6) include baseline controls for Ln(Assets), Share Residential, Share C&I, Share CRE, and Tier1 Capital Ratio,
which we define in Table 3. These variables are measured at an annual frequency as of the fourth quarter of the respective year.
We control for the board size non-parametrically by including board size fixed-effects in equations (1)–(4) and we also control
for the natural logarithm of number of words in the 10-K in Columns (5) and (6). Panel B of this Table investigates the role
that changes in bank management play in mediating the association between the OTS extinction and small business lending.
Columns (1) and (2) of Panel B repeat the analysis of Column (2) of Table 4 after stratifying the sample based on below- and
above-median post-OTS extinction board turnover. Columns (3) and (4) of Panel B repeat the analysis of Column (2) of Table
4 after stratifying the sample based on whether an executive director of the bank left the company following the regulatory
transition. Columns (5) and (6) of Panel B repeat the analysis of Column (2) of Table 4 after stratifying the sample based on
whether the bank adopted credit risk modeling after the regulatory transition. We code a bank as adopting risk modeling if it
discloses risk modeling (as defined in Panel A) in at least one year after the OTS extinction but not in any of the years prior
to the regulatory transition. All variables in this analysis are defined in Table 4. Baseline controls include linear and quadratic
terms for the number of branches and total amount of deposits of each bank in each county. Standard errors are presented in
parentheses, and are clustered at the county level. In Panel A, we assign banks to counties by the location of their headquarters.
***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



            Panel A: Changes in Bank and Loan Management following OTS Extinction
                                                 (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)
                                               Board Turnover       Exec. Exit        Risk Model
                 OTS × Post                     0.021*** 0.021*** 0.040*** 0.040*** 0.076*** 0.084***
                                               (0.004) (0.004) (0.011) (0.012) (0.022) (0.023)
                 Observations                   3462     3436     3462     3436     3790     3749
                 Adjusted R2                    0.072    0.073    0.041    0.036    0.668    0.669
                 Baseline Controls               No       Yes      No       Yes      No       Yes
                 Quarter Fixed-Effects           Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
                 Bank Fixed-Effects              Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes



         Panel B: Bank Lending following OTS Extinction: Role of Management Changes
                                            (1)               (2)             (3)         (4)               (5)             (6)
                                                                           Ln(Total Loans)
                                      Low Brd Turn.      Hi Brd Turn.     No Exec.Exit     Exec.Exit     No Model      Model Adopt
  OTS × Post                               0.145             0.386***         0.073          0.806*** 0.359***            1.045***
                                          (0.121)           (0.138)          (0.087)        (0.261)   (0.106)            (0.357)
  Observations                             13043             12584            27217          1691      11922               563
  Adjusted R2                              0.864             0.850            0.865          0.800     0.838              0.851
  Baseline Controls                         Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes       Yes                Yes
  County-Year Fixed Effects                 Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes       Yes                Yes
  Bank-County Fixed Effects                 Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes       Yes                Yes




                                                                46
                   Table 8: OTS Extinction and Mortgage Lending (Census Tract)

Table 8 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating the effect of the OTS extinction on the volume of mortgage loans.
The dependent variable, Ln(Total Mortgage Loans), is the total amount of mortgage loans originated by a depository institution
in a census tract over a calendar year. OTS is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the primary regulator of the
depository institution in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision. Post is an indicator variable
that takes the value of one for all years after 2011 (inclusive). Baseline controls include linear and quadratic terms for the
number of branches and total amount of deposits of each bank in each county. Standard errors are presented in parentheses,
and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                        (1)       (2)       (3)
                                                                       Ln(Total Mortgage Loans)
                         OTS × Post                                   -0.037** -0.129*** -0.159***
                                                                     (0.017)    (0.021)   (0.022)
                         Observations                                5289970 4835833 4818314
                         Adjusted R2                                  0.527      0.672     0.650
                         Baseline Controls                              Yes       Yes       Yes
                         Year Fixed Effects                             Yes       No        No
                         Census-Tract Fixed Effects                     Yes       No        No
                         Bank Fixed Effects                             Yes       No        No
                         Census-Tract×Year Fixed Effects                No        Yes       Yes
                         Bank×Census Tract Fixed Effects                No        Yes       Yes
                         Coarsened Exact Matching                       No        No        Yes




                                                               47
         Table 9: OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending: Portfolio Reallocation

Table 9 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating the effect of the OTS extinction on small business lending after
partitioning the sample based on the difference in the portfolio allocations of commercial banks and former OTS banks within
the jurisdiction of each OCC field office. Columns (1) and (2) repeat the empirical specification of Column (2) of the main table
in the paper after partitioning the sample based on whether a bank belongs to the jurisdiction of an OCC field office with below-
or above-median differences in the C&I lending shares of commercial banks (national banks) and former OTS banks. Columns
(3) and (4) repeat the empirical specification of Column (2) of the main table in the paper after partitioning the sample based
on whether a bank belongs to the jurisdiction of an OCC field office with below- or above-median differences in the real estate
lending shares of commercial banks (national banks) and former OTS banks. OTS is an indicator variable that takes the value
of one if the depository institution primary regulator in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision.
Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all years between 2011 and 2015 and zero for all years between
2005 and 2010. Baseline controls include linear and quadratic terms for the number of branches and total amount of deposits of
each bank in each county. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and *,
represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                              (1)                    (2)                (3)                                    (4)
                                                                            Ln(Total Loans)
                                      Large Diff. C&I        Small Diff. C&I Large Diff. Residential              Small Diff. Residential
 OTS × Post                                0.194***              -0.214**              0.197***                           -0.014
                                          (0.047)               (0.085)               (0.060)                            (0.055)
 Observations                              56035                 54049                 54711                              55640
 Adjusted R2                               0.859                  0.864                0.859                               0.863
 Baseline Controls                          Yes                    Yes                  Yes                                 Yes
 County-Year Fixed Effects                  Yes                    Yes                  Yes                                 Yes
 Bank-County Fixed Effects                  Yes                    Yes                  Yes                                 Yes




                                                                48
Table 10: OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending: Controlling for Mortgage Lending

Table 10 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating the effect of the OTS extinction on small business lending after
controlling for changes in the volume of mortgage originations and the likelihood of rejection for mortgage applications. The
dependent variable Ln(Total Loans) is the total amount of small business loans (i.e., loans whose principal amount is below $1
million) originated by a depository institution in a county over a calendar year. OTS is an indicator variable that takes the
value of one if the primary regulator of the depository institution in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift
Supervision. Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all years after 2011 (inclusive). % Residential + CRE
is the percentage of the portfolio of loans that is allocated to residential and CRE loans. Ln(Mortgage Originations is natural
logarithm of the volume of mortgage loans originated by a bank in each county during the year obtained from the HMDA data
set. Av. Bank Mort. Rej. Rate is the average fraction of mortgage applications that a bank rejects during a year computed
from the HMDA data set. Av. Bank-County Mort. Rej. Rate is the average fraction of mortgage applications that a bank
rejects in a county during a year computed from the HMDA data set. Baseline controls include linear and quadratic terms for
the number of branches and total amount of deposits of each bank in each county. Standard errors are presented in parentheses,
and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                               (1)         (2)   (3)       (4)       (5)
                                                                           Ln(Total Loans)
              OTS × Post                                     0.088** 0.087** 0.089** 0.094** 0.095**
                                                            (0.039) (0.038) (0.038) (0.038) (0.038)
              % (Residential + CRE)                                   -0.256** -0.552*** -0.586*** -0.592***
                                                                     (0.099) (0.101) (0.101) (0.101)
              Ln(Mortgage Originations)                                         0.101*** 0.100*** 0.101***
                                                                               (0.005) (0.005) (0.005)
              Av. Bank Mort. Rej. Rate                                                   -0.325*** -0.340***
                                                                                        (0.029) (0.031)
              Av. Bank-County Mort. Rej. Rate                                                       0.042
                                                                                                  (0.028)
              Observations                                  130989 129389 125314 124959 124959
              Adjusted R2                                    0.864    0.865     0.866    0.866      0.866
              Baseline Controls                               Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes
              County-Year Fixed Effects                       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes
              Bank-County Fixed Effects                       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes




                                                                49
                                Table 11: OTS Extinction and Lending Rates

Table 11 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating the effect of the OTS extinction on interest rates of the most
common mortgage lending and commercial lending product in the RateWatch dataset. The dependent variables are Rate 30
Yr. and Rate Com. Equip.. Rate 30 Yr. is the interest rate reported by a rate setter office of a depository institution on a 30
year fixed rate mortgage loan with principal amount of $175k. Rate Com. Equip. is the interest rate reported by a rate setter
office of a depository institution on a loan secured by commercial equipment whose loan principal amount is $250k. OTS is an
indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depository institution primary regulator in the first and second quarter of
2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision. Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all months after July
2011 (inclusive). Baseline controls include linear and quadratic terms for the number of branches and total amount of deposits
of each bank in each county. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and
*, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                   (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)
                                                                 Rate 30 Yr. Fixed Rate Com. Equip.
                   OTS × post                                     0.090** 0.104** -0.231*    -0.304**
                                                                 (0.039)  (0.044)  (0.139)  (0.146)
                   Observations                                  128404    128168   14038    13978
                   Adjusted R2                                    0.895     0.909   0.742    0.775
                   Baseline Controls                               Yes       Yes     Yes      Yes
                   Bank Fixed Effects                              Yes       No      Yes       No
                   Branch (Rate-Setter) Fixed Effects              No        Yes     No       Yes
                   Month Fixed Effects                             Yes       Yes     Yes      Yes




                                                                50
          Table 12: OTS Extinction and Entry and Exit of Local Business Establishments

Table 12 reports the coefficients of OLS and WLS regressions. The specifications Columns (2) and (4) present coefficients from
specification where each county observation is weighted by the total employment in that county. The dependent variable in
Columns (1) and (2), Ln(Entry Rate), is the natural logarithm of the entry rate of new establishments in a given county and
year. Entry rate is the ratio between the number of new establishments and the number of existing establishments at the
beginning of the year. The dependent variable in Columns (3) and (4), Ln(Exit Rate), is the natural logarithm of the exit rate
of establishment in a given county and year. Exit rate is defined as the ratio between the number of establishment that exit the
market and the total number of establishments at the beginning of the year. Share OTS is the share of county deposits held in
former OTS institution as of June 30th, 2010. Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all years between 2006
and 2013 and zero for all years between 2006 and 2010. Baseline controls include linear and quadratic terms for the total number
of branches and total amount of deposits held in each county and controls for the logarithm of the number of establishments
in the county that employ 1–4, 5–9, 10–19, 20–49, 50–99, 100–249, 250–499 people, and total number of establishments in the
county.




                                                          (1)      (2)             (3)       (4)
                                                         Ln(Entry Rate)            Ln(Exit Rate)
                          Share OTS × Post              0.055* 0.064**          0.090*** 0.056**
                                                        (0.031) (0.025)          (0.026)   (0.022)
                          Observations                   9,593    9,593           9,593     9,593
                          Adjusted R-squared             0.792    0.936           0.738     0.919
                          Baseline Controls               Yes      Yes             Yes       Yes
                          Employment Weighted             No       Yes             No        Yes
                          Year Fixed Effects              Yes      Yes             Yes       Yes
                          County Fixed Effects            Yes      Yes             Yes       Yes




                                                               51
Online Appendix for "The Death of a Regulator: Strict Supervision,
                        Bank Lending, and Business Activity"



A       Table of Contents:

Figure OA.1: Sageworks Survey of Bankers
Figure OA.2: Example Passages from OCC Enforcement Action on Former OTS Banks
Figure OA.3: Small Business Lending and OTS Extinction: Estimated Impact over Time in the Census
                 Tract sample
Figure OA.4: OTS Extinction and Mortgage Lending (Census Tract): Estimated Impact over Time
Figure OA.5: OTS Extinction and Mortgage Lending (Likelihood of Application Rejection): Impact over
                 Time
Figure OA.6: Geographic Distribution of OTS Deposit Share
Figure OA.7: OTS Extinction and Business Entry and Exit Rates: Impact over Time
Table OA.1: OTS Extinction and Loan Loss Recognition - Transition to OCC or FDIC
Table OA.2: OTS Extinction and Strict Supervision: The Role of Local Economic Conditions
Table OA.3: OTS Extinction and Strict Supervision: Heterogeneity across OTS Divisions
Table OA.4: OTS Extinction and Strict Supervision: Interaction of Post with Composition Variables
Table OA.5: OTS Extinction and Aggregate Small Business Lending by Census Tract
Table OA.6: Robustness - OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending Interaction with Size and Weighting
                Observations
Table OA.7: Robustness - OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending controlling for Top 4 Banks and
                TARP Recipient Banks
Table OA.8: Robustness - OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending - Proforma Banks after Mergers
                and Acquisitions
Table OA.9: Robustness - OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending - Impact of Other Dodd-Frank
                Provisions
Table OA.10: Robustness - OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending - CRA Ratings
Table OA.11: Robustness - OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending - Addressing Skewness in the
Dependent Variable
Table OA.12: OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending: Local Credit Supply by Competitors
Table OA.13: OTS Extinction and Mortgage Lending (Likelihood of Application Rejection)
Table OA.14: OTS Extinction, Entry and Exit and Dependence on External Sources of Finance

                                                 52
     OCC examiners, however, have a reputation for using a more rigorous
     examiners are also more accustomed to examining “national” banks w
     estate (CRE) and commercial and industrial (C&I) lending whereas man
     residential mortgage lending, which carries a different kind of risk and

     In a recent webinar by Sageworks, OTS to OCC: What ALLL Challenge
     resulted from the transition to the OCC.
                                       Figure OA.1: Sageworks Survey
      Fifty-two percent of responding bankers said they had to strengthen t
Figure OA.1 is a bar chart obtained from a survey of bankers that asked “What have been the biggest areas of change that you

      while
have had           38as percent
          to institute                    and 33
                         a result of the transition     percent
                                                    to OCC?”.          indicated
                                                              The survey was made in the the
                                                                                         context biggest
                                                                                                 of a webinar bychanges
                                                                                                                 Sageworks were th
covering the topic of “OTS to OCC: What ALLL Challenges Still Exist”.
      testing-analysis.aspx) and an increase to their ALLL(" attr(href) "), respectiv

                                                                                                                               For ban
                                                                                                                               strength
                                                                                                                               and wel

                                                                                                                               To bette
                                                                                                                               transitio
                                                                                                                               whitepa




     tags : allowance for loan and lease losses (https://www.sageworks.com
     (https://www.sageworks.com/blog/?tag=/ALLL), stress testing (https://ww
     (https://www.sageworks.com/blog/?tag=/OCC), OTS (https://www.sagew
     tag=/examiners), bank regulations (https://www.sageworks.com/blog/?ta
     (https://www.sageworks.com/blog/?tag=/commercial+and+industrial+len


                                                            53


     Related posts
                                (3)     Within forty-five (45) days of the date of this Agreement and within ten (10) days

                         of the end of each calendar quarter thereafter, the Compliance Committee shall submit a written

                         progress report to the Board setting forth in detail:


        Figure OA.2: Example
                         (a) a passages       from
                               description of the actionOCC     Enforcement
                                                        needed to                     Action
                                                                  achieve full compliance        on Former OTS
                                                                                          with each

                                          Article of this Agreement;
In this appendix, we show passages from OCC Enforcement Actions and formal written agreements between the OCC and
former OTS banks. Panel A shows the third section of the formal written agreement between the OCC and Delanco Federal
Savings Bank of November 21st, 2012  (b) actions  takenDelanco’s
                                          requiring      to comply Board
                                                                    with eachtoArticle
                                                                                ensure of this Agreement;
                                                                                          competent       and
                                                                                                       management      by means of hiring new
managers or providing additional training to existing managers that continue in their position. Panel B shows shows the sixth
section of the formal written agreement    between
                                     (c) the          the status
                                             results and   OCCofandthoseAmory
                                                                          actions.Federal Savings & Loans Association of July 19th, 2012
requiring Amory’s management to implement new loan portfolio management practices. Panel C shows shows the sixth section
of the formal written agreement
                              (4) between    the
                                     The Board     OCC
                                                shall      anda Community
                                                      forward                   Bank, Staunton,
                                                                 copy of the Compliance              Virginia
                                                                                           Committee's          of August
                                                                                                       report, with any    9th, 2012 requiring
Community Bank’s management to implement new credit risk management practices.
                       additional comments by the Board, to the Assistant Deputy Comptroller within ten (10) days of

                receiving such report.
     Panel A: Formal     Written Agreement between OCC and Delanco, FSB.
                                                                     ARTICLE III

                                              BOARD TO ENSURE COMPETENT MANAGEMENT

                                (1)      The Board shall ensure that the Bank has competent management in place on a
                               (3)     For incumbent officers in the positions mentioned in Paragraph 1 of this Article,
                        full-time basis in its Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, and Vice President of
                       the Board shall within forty-five (45) days assess each of these officer’s experience, other
                        Commercial Lending positions to carry out the Board’s policies, ensure compliance with this
                       qualifications and performance compared to the position’s description, duties and
                        Agreement, applicable laws, rules and regulations, and manage the day-to-day operations of the
                       responsibilities.
                        Bank in a safe and sound manner.
                               (4)
                                (2)    IfWithin
                                         the Board
                                                sixtydetermines
                                                      (60) days,that an officer
                                                                 the Board  shallwill continue
                                                                                  review       in his/her position
                                                                                          the capabilities         but that
                                                                                                           of the Bank’s
                       the officer’s depth
                        management         of skillspresent
                                       to perform     needs and
                                                            improvement,
                                                                anticipatedthe Board
                                                                            duties andwill
                                                                                       thewithin
                                                                                           Board sixty (60) days whether
                                                                                                 will determine  develop

                       and implementchanges
                        management   a writtenwill
                                               program,  with
                                                   be made,   specificthe
                                                            including  time frames,
                                                                          need      to improve
                                                                               for additions    thedeletions
                                                                                             to or  officer’sfrom
                                                                                                              supervision
                                                                                                                  current
                       and management of the Bank. At a minimum, the written program shall include:
                        management.
                                                                   4
                                       (a)   an education program designed to ensure that the officer has skills and

                                             abilities necessary to supervise effectively;


                                       (b)   a program to improve the effectiveness of the officer;
     Panel B: Formal Written Agreement between OCC and Amory Federal Savings & Loans
                        (c) objectives by which the officer’s effectiveness will be measured; and
              Association.
                                       (d)                      ARTICLE
                                             a performance appraisal       VIfor evaluating performance according to
                                                                     program

                                                    LOANdescription
                                             the position’s PORTFOLIO
                                                                    andMANAGEMENT
                                                                       responsibilities and for measuring

                              (1)     The Board shall, within
                                           performance        sixty
                                                         against the(60) days,goals
                                                                     Bank’s    develop, implement, and thereafter ensure
                                                                                    and objectives.

                       Bank adherence to a written program to improve the Bank's loan portfolio management. The
                        Upon completion, a copy of the written program shall be submitted to the Assistant Deputy
                       program shall include, but not be limited to:
                        Comptroller.
                                      (a)    procedures to ensure satisfactory and perfected collateral documentation;

                               (5)     If a position
                                      (b)            mentioned
                                              procedures        in Paragraph
                                                          to ensure           1 of this
                                                                    that extensions  of Article is vacant
                                                                                        credit are granted,now
                                                                                                            by or in the or
                                                                                                               renewal

                       future, including if theotherwise,
                                                Board realigns
                                                          to anyan existingonly
                                                                 borrower   officer’s
                                                                                 after responsibilities and a position
                                                                                       obtaining and analyzing   current and

                       mentioned in Paragraph 1 of this Article
                                           satisfactory         becomes vacant, the Board shall within forty-five (45)
                                                        credit information;

                                      (c)                               5
                                              procedures to ensure conformance with loan approval requirements;

                                      (d)     a system to track and analyze exceptions;

                                      (e)                               54 with Call Report instructions;
                                              procedures to ensure conformance

                                      (f)     procedures to ensure the accuracy of internal management information

                                              systems;
      capital program on an annual basis, or more frequently if necessary. Copies of the reviews and

      updates shall be submitted to the Assistant Deputy Comptroller.

             (3)     The Board shall ensure that the Bank has processes, personnel, and control

      systems to ensure implementation of and adherence to the program developed pursuant to this
Panel C: Formal Written Agreement between OCC and Community Bank, Staunton,Virginia.
      Article.

                                                  Article VI

                                        CREDIT RISK MANAGEMENT

             (1)     Within sixty (60) days, the Board shall develop, implement, and thereafter ensure

      Bank adherence to a written program to improve the Bank’s credit risk management consistent

      with the guidance set forth in the OCC Handbook “Rating Credit Risk”. The program shall

      include, but not be limited to:

                     (a)     procedures to ensure accurate and timely risk grades, including loss

                             recognition and identification of nonaccrual loans;

                     (b)     procedures for early problem loan identification;

                     (c)     procedures for establishing loan officer and credit administration

                             accountability for failure to assign accurate and timely risk grades on

                             loans, including recognition of nonaccrual status under their respective

                             supervision;

                     (d)     implementation of an effective credit risk training program for all lending

                             staff, internal loan review staff, financial analysts, and members of the

                             Directors Loan Committee;

                     (e)     stress testing of higher risk loan concentration categories (non-owner

                             occupied, commercial real estate (CRE), land, and construction loans),




                                                        55
Figure OA.3: Small Business Lending and OTS Extinction: Estimated Impact over Time in
the Census Tract sample

Figure OA.3 plots the average impact of OTS supervision on small business lending in each year of the sample period. The
shallow circles represent the series of coefficients βt from expanding the model specification in column (2) of Table OA.5 to
include a set of interaction variables between year dummies and the share of deposits held in former OTS institution in each
census tract as of June 30th, 2010. Data on small business lending is from the Community Reinvestment Act Small Business
Lending Dataset



                                                                         Aggregate Census Tract Level
                             Vertical bands represent +/- 1.65 * St. Error of each point estimate
            .1
            .05
        β
            0
            -.05




                                                                                                           OTS Extinction
            -.1

                   05




                        06




                                         07




                                                             08




                                                                                 09




                                                                                                    10




                                                                                                                            11




                                                                                                                                 12




                                                                                                                                      13




                                                                                                                                           14




                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                            20
                   20




                        20




                                       20




                                                           20




                                                                               20




                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                    Year




                                                                                              56
Figure OA.4: OTS Extinction and Mortgage Lending (Census Tract): Estimated Impact
over Time

Figure OA.4 plots the average impact of OTS supervision on mortgage lending in each year of the sample period. The shallow
circles represent the series of coefficients βt from expanding the model specification in column (4) of Table ?? to include a
set of interaction variables between year dummies and a dummy variable taking the value of one if the depository institution’s
primary regulator in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision and the vertical bands represent
90% confidence intervals for the point estimates in each quarter.



                                                                     Mortgage Lending (Bank-Census Tract Analysis)
            .2
            .1
            0
        β
            -.1
            -.2




                                                                                                         OTS Extinction
            -.3
            -.4




                   Vertical bands represent +/- 1.65 * St. Error of each point estimate
                  05




                                     06




                                                        07




                                                                            08




                                                                                          09




                                                                                                    10




                                                                                                                          11




                                                                                                                               12




                                                                                                                                    13




                                                                                                                                         14




                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                          20
                  20




                                   20




                                                      20




                                                                          20




                                                                                          20




                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                Year




                                                                                               57
Figure OA.5: OTS Extinction and Mortgage Lending (Likelihood of Application Rejection):
Impact over Time

Figure OA.5 plots the average impact of OTS supervision on the rejection rate of mortgage loans in each year of the sample
period. The shallow circles represent the series of coefficients βt from the following model specification: Rejectibct = αbc + γct +
        P
δXi +    t
             βt OT Sb × Y eart + t , where i indexes for the mortgage application i in census tract c to bank b during year t. The
vector Xi includes a number of characteristics of the applicantion, namely loan occupancy status, property type, lien status,
loan-to-income ratio, applicant’s ethnicity, and applicant’s race. OTS is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the
depository institution’s primary regulator in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision and the
vertical bands represent 90% confidence intervals for the point estimates in each quarter. Year is a series of indicator variables
that takes the value of one for each year between 2005 and 2015.
                               Vertical bands represent +/- 1.65 * St. Error of each point estimate




                                                                                                           Rejection Rate
                   .02
                   .01
                   0
               β
                   -.01
                   -.02

                          05




                                           06




                                                               07




                                                                                   08




                                                                                                      09




                                                                                                                10




                                                                                                                                        11




                                                                                                                                             12




                                                                                                                                                  13




                                                                                                                                                       14




                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                        20
                          20




                                         20




                                                             20




                                                                                 20




                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                               Year
                                                                                                                       OTS Extinction




                                                                                                             58
                                                Figure OA.6: Geographic Distribution of OTS Deposit Share
     Figure OA.6 represents the fraction of total bank deposits in a county accounted for by depository institutions whose primary regulator was the OTS in 2010. Data on branch
     deposits of OTS banks is from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s Summary of Deposits Database.



                                          Share of Deposits held in Branches of former OTS banks (2010)
                                                                                  All U.S. Counties




59
                    % OTS Deposits
                    (62.1511,100]
                    (39.12139,60.01862]
                    (26.27989,38.35742]
                    (17.99437,26.15051]
                    (11.41202,17.91127]
                    (6.329289,11.36158]
                    (2.06878,6.273052]
                    [1.00e-06,2.048996]
                                                                    Figure OA.7: OTS Extinction and Business Entry and Exit Rates: Impact over Time
     Figure OA.7 plots the average impact of exposure to OTS commercial banks on entry and exit of (business) establishments at the county level in each year of the sample period.
     In the left figure, the shallow circles represent the series of coefficients βt from expanding the model specification in column (2) of Table 12 to include a set of interaction variables
     between year dummies and the share of deposits held in former OTS institution in each county as of June 30th, 2010. and the vertical bands represent 90% confidence intervals
     for the point estimates in each quarter. In the right figure, the shallow circles represent the series of coefficients βt from expanding the model specification in column (4) of
     Table 12 to include a set of interaction variables between year dummies and the share of deposits held in former OTS institution in each county as of June 30th, 2010. Data on
     entry and exit of businesses at the county level is from the Census Bureau’s Statistics of US Businesses and data on the share of deposits in former OTS institutions is from the
     FDIC’s Summary of Deposits.

                                                                                                  Entry Rate                                                                                                                               Exit Rate




           .2
                                                                                                                                                    .2
                      Vertical bands represent +/- 1.65 * St. Error of each point estimate                                                                     Vertical bands represent +/- 1.65 * St. Error of each point estimate




60
           .1
                                                                                                                                                    .1




           0
                                                                                                                                                    0




       β
                                                                                                                                                β




           -.1
                                                                                                                                                    -.1




                                                                                                                OTS Extinction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OTS Extinction




           -.2
                                                                                                                                                    -.2




                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11




                 06
                                          07
                                                                      08
                                                                                             09
                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                          06
                                                                                                                                                                                   07
                                                                                                                                                                                                               08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13




                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20




                 20
                                        20
                                                                    20
                                                                                             20
                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                    Year                                                                                                                                     Year
                                Table OA.1: OTS Extinction and Loan Loss Recognition - Transition to OCC or FDIC



     Table OA.1 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating whether the effect of the OTS extinction on loan loss recognition depends on whether the new regulator of
     the former OTS banks was the OCC or the FDIC. The dependent variables are the Loan Loss Provision Ratio, Nonperforming Loan Ratio, Charge-Off Ratio, and ALLL Ratio.
     Loan Loss Provision Ratio is defined as the ratio between Loan Loss Provisions (RIAD4230) and total assets (RCFD2170). Nonperforming Loan Ratio is defined as the sum of
     total loans that are 90 days past due and still accruing (RCFD1407) and total nonaccrual loans (RCFD1407) divided by total assets (RCFD2170). Charge-Off Ratio is the ratio
     of total charge-offs (RIAD435) and total assets (RCFD2170). Enf. Act is an indicator variable if the bank received a cease and desist or a consent order during the quarter.
     OTS → OCC is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depository institution’s primary regulator in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift
     Supervision and it transitioned to the OCC following the OTS extinction. OTS → FDIC is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depository institution’s
     primary regulator in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision and it transitioned to the FDIC following the OTS extinction. Post is an indicator
     variable that takes the value of one for all quarters after 2011Q3 (inclusive). Ln(Assets) is the natural logarithm of total assets (RCFD2170). Share Residential is the ratio of
     residential real estate loans (RCON1797+RCON5367+RCON5368) and total assets (RCFD2170). Share C&I is the ratio of commercial and industrial loans (RCFD1766) and
     total assets (RCFD2170). Share CRE is the ratio of commercial and real estate loans (RCON1415+RCON1460+RCON1480+RCFD2746) and total assets (RCFD2170). Tier1
     Capital Ratio is the Tier 1 capital ratio of the financial institution (RCFD7206). Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the county, where
     banks are assigned into counties by the location of their headquarters. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




61
                                                                    (1)                                 (2)                            (3)                  (4)
                                                         Loan Loss Provision Ratio          Nonperforming Loan Ratio            Charge-Off Ratio        Enf. Act
                           OTS → OCC × Post                        0.016***                            0.393***                       0.026***             0.003***
                                                                  (0.002)                            (0.019)                        (0.002)              (0.000)
                           OTS → FDIC × Post                       0.041***                            0.073***                       0.026***             0.001**
                                                                  (0.002)                            (0.021)                        (0.002)              (0.000)
                           Ln(Assets)                              0.002                              -0.024                          0.011***            0.004***
                                                                  (0.003)                            (0.040)                        (0.004)              (0.001)
                           Residential Share                       0.014                               1.215***                       0.044**             0.003
                                                                  (0.014)                            (0.214)                        (0.021)              (0.003)
                           CRE Share                               0.137***                            0.429***                      -0.024*               0.001
                                                                  (0.010)                            (0.134)                        (0.012)              (0.003)
                           C&I Share                               0.170***                           -0.602***                      -0.030               -0.007
                                                                  (0.020)                            (0.215)                        (0.020)              (0.006)
                           Tier1 Capital Ratio                     0.000                              -0.000                         -0.000               -0.000
                                                                  (0.000)                            (0.000)                        (0.000)              (0.000)
                           Observations                           312734                             312734                         312732               312735
                           Adjusted R2                             0.279                               0.515                          0.300                0.015
                           Quarter Fixed-Effects                    Yes                                 Yes                            Yes                  Yes
                           Bank Fixed-Effects                       Yes                                 Yes                            Yes                  Yes
                           Table OA.2: OTS Extinction and Strict Supervision: The Role of Local Economic Conditions



     Table OA.2 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating whether the effect of the OTS extinction depends on the exposure of the bank to areas with significant
     house price decline in the 2007–2010 period. We stratify the sample based on a bank-specific measure of exposure to house price declines in the 2007-2010 period. The house
     price decline measure is computed as the weighted average on the house price declines in the counties where banks have a branch presence and the weighted are defined by
     the share of deposits of each bank in the county in 2007. The Hi. HPI decline sample is defined as banks whose weighted house price index fell by more than 17% between
     2007 and 2010. The Med. HPI decline sample is comprised of banks whose weighted house price index fell between two and seventeen percent between 2007 and 2010. The
     Low HPI decline sample are those banks whose weighted house price index either rose or fell less than two percent between 2007 and 2010. The dependent variables are the
     Nonperforming Loan Ratio and Enf. Act. Nonperforming Loan Ratio is defined as the sum of total loans that are 90 days past due and still accruing (RCFD1407) and total
     nonaccrual loans (RCFD1407) divided by total assets (RCFD2170). Enf. Act. is an indicator variable if the bank received a cease and desist or a consent order during the
     quarter. Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all quarters after 2011Q3 (inclusive). Ln(Assets) is the natural logarithm of total assets (RCFD2170). Share
     Residential is the ratio of residential real estate loans (RCON1797+RCON5367+RCON5368) and total assets (RCFD2170). Share C&I is the ratio of commercial and industrial
     loans (RCFD1766) and total assets (RCFD2170). Share CRE is the ratio of commercial and real estate loans (RCON1415+RCON1460+RCON1480+RCFD2746) and total
     assets (RCFD2170). Tier1 Capital Ratio is the Tier 1 capital ratio of the financial institution (RCFD7206). Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at
     the level of the county, where banks are assigned into counties by the location of their headquarters. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
     respectively.




62
                                                         Nonperforming Loan Ratio                                                      Enf. Act.
                                            Hi. HPI Shock Med. HPI Shock Low HPI Shock                         Hi. HPI Shock        Med. HPI Shock         Low HPI Shock
               OTS × Post                         0.383***         0.227***         0.305***                         0.008***             0.000                 0.004***
                                                (0.052)          (0.021)          (0.024)                          (0.001)              (0.000)               (0.001)
               Ln(Assets)                        -0.055           -0.023           -0.080                            0.005***             0.003**               0.004**
                                                (0.057)          (0.052)          (0.057)                          (0.001)              (0.001)               (0.002)
               Residential Share                  1.675***         0.750***         0.599**                          0.011               -0.006                 0.007
                                                (0.388)          (0.183)          (0.255)                          (0.009)              (0.004)               (0.007)
               CRE Share                          0.828***         0.392**          0.611**                          0.001                0.005                -0.000
                                                (0.270)          (0.164)          (0.260)                          (0.006)              (0.004)               (0.006)
               C&I Share                         -1.161***        -0.788**          0.439                           -0.020               0.001                  0.002
                                                (0.422)          (0.309)          (0.324)                          (0.013)              (0.008)               (0.009)
               Tier1 Capital Ratio               -0.000           -0.000           -0.003***                        -0.000               -0.000                -0.000**
                                                (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.001)                          (0.000)              (0.000)               (0.000)
               Observations                      68359           137036            68692                            68359               137036                 68693
               Adjusted R2                        0.561            0.515            0.476                            0.016                0.013                 0.008
               Quarter Fixed-Effects               Yes              Yes              Yes                              Yes                  Yes                   Yes
               Bank Fixed-Effects                  Yes              Yes              Yes                              Yes                  Yes                   Yes
 Table OA.3: OTS Extinction and Strict Supervision: Heterogeneity across OTS Divisions



Table OA.3 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating whether the effect of the OTS extinction varies across the
different OTS regional divisions. We stratify the sample based on whether the headquarters of the bank is located in one of the
states covered by the West regional division of the OTS. The dependent variables are the Nonperforming Loan Ratio and Enf.
Act. Nonperforming Loan Ratio is defined as the sum of total loans that are 90 days past due and still accruing (RCFD1407)
and total nonaccrual loans (RCFD1407) divided by total assets (RCFD2170). Enf. Act. is an indicator variable if the bank
received a cease and desist or a consent order during the quarter. Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for
all quarters after 2011Q3 (inclusive). Ln(Assets) is the natural logarithm of total assets (RCFD2170). Share Residential is the
ratio of residential real estate loans (RCON1797+RCON5367+RCON5368) and total assets (RCFD2170). Share C&I is the
ratio of commercial and industrial loans (RCFD1766) and total assets (RCFD2170). Share CRE is the ratio of commercial and
real estate loans (RCON1415+RCON1460+RCON1480+RCFD2746) and total assets (RCFD2170). Tier1 Capital Ratio is the
Tier 1 capital ratio of the financial institution (RCFD7206). Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at
the level of the county, where banks are assigned into counties by the location of their headquarters. ***, **, and *, represent
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                           Nonperforming Loan Ratio                 Enf. Act.
                                          Central & NE & SE     West     Central & NE & SE                   West
            OTS × Post                            0.301***      0.421***         0.002***                    0.005***
                                                (0.028)       (0.022)          (0.001)                     (0.000)
            Ln(Assets)                           -0.008         0.003            0.003***                    0.006***
                                                (0.064)       (0.046)          (0.001)                     (0.001)
            Residential Share                     1.618***     0.944***         0.007*                      -0.000
                                                (0.355)       (0.222)          (0.004)                     (0.006)
            CRE Share                             0.079        0.059            -0.007*                     -0.004
                                                (0.204)       (0.253)          (0.004)                     (0.005)
            C&I Share                            -1.276***     -0.282           -0.008                      -0.018**
                                                (0.329)       (0.336)          (0.007)                     (0.007)
            Tier1 Capital Ratio                  -0.000        -0.000**         -0.000                      -0.000**
                                                (0.000)       (0.000)          (0.000)                     (0.000)
            Observations                        204938        136762           204938                      136763
            Adjusted R2                           0.529         0.472            0.016                       0.018
            Quarter Fixed-Effects                  Yes           Yes              Yes                         Yes
            Bank Fixed-Effects                     Yes           Yes              Yes                         Yes




                                                                63
                      Table OA.4: OTS Extinction and Strict Supervision: Interaction of Post with Composition Variables


     Table OA.4 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating whether the effect of the OTS extinction depends on the exposure of the bank to areas with significant
     house price decline in the 2007–2010 period. We stratify the sample based on a bank-specific measure of exposure to house price declines in the 2007-2010 period. The house
     price decline measure is computed as the weighted average on the house price declines in the counties where banks have a branch presence and the weighted are defined by
     the share of deposits of each bank in the county in 2007. The Hi. HPI decline sample is defined as banks whose weighted house price index fell by more than 17% between
     2007 and 2010. The Med. HPI decline sample is comprised of banks whose weighted house price index fell between two and seventeen percent between 2007 and 2010. The
     Low HPI decline sample are those banks whose weighted house price index either rose or fell less than two percent between 2007 and 2010. The dependent variables are the
     Nonperforming Loan Ratio and Enf. Act. Nonperforming Loan Ratio is defined as the sum of total loans that are 90 days past due and still accruing (RCFD1407) and total
     nonaccrual loans (RCFD1407) divided by total assets (RCFD2170). Enf. Act. is an indicator variable if the bank received a cease and desist or a consent order during the
     quarter. Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all quarters after 2011Q3 (inclusive). Ln(Assets) is the natural logarithm of total assets (RCFD2170). Share
     Residential is the ratio of residential real estate loans (RCON1797+RCON5367+RCON5368) and total assets (RCFD2170). Share C&I is the ratio of commercial and industrial
     loans (RCFD1766) and total assets (RCFD2170). Share CRE is the ratio of commercial and real estate loans (RCON1415+RCON1460+RCON1480+RCFD2746) and total
     assets (RCFD2170). Tier1 Capital Ratio is the Tier 1 capital ratio of the financial institution (RCFD7206). Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at
     the level of the county, where banks are assigned into counties by the location of their headquarters. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
     respectively.




64
                                                                        Nonperforming Loan Ratio                         Enf. Act.
                                OTS × Post                          0.196*** 0.360*** 0.434*** 0.231*** 0.002*** 0.003*** 0.002*** 0.001***
                                                                  (0.025) (0.019) (0.013) (0.025) (0.001) (0.000) (0.000) (0.001)
                                Residential Share                   1.079*** 1.290*** 1.106*** 0.892*** 0.005* 0.007** 0.008** 0.006*
                                                                  (0.212) (0.222) (0.202) (0.204) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003)
                                C&I Share                          -0.838*** -0.756*** -0.761*** -0.662*** -0.008    -0.009     -0.008    -0.011**
                                                                  (0.220) (0.235) (0.219) (0.224) (0.005) (0.006) (0.006) (0.006)
                                CRE Share                           0.108      0.133   -0.118    -0.140    -0.000    -0.000      0.001     0.001
                                                                  (0.143) (0.143) (0.148) (0.151) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003)
                                Residential Share × Post            0.747***                      0.777*** 0.005***                        0.005***
                                                                  (0.097)                       (0.083) (0.002)                          (0.002)
                                C&I Share × Post                              -0.194             -0.477**             0.003               0.010**
                                                                             (0.191)            (0.194)             (0.004)              (0.005)
                                CRE Share × Post                                       1.308*** 1.387***                        -0.007*** -0.008***
                                                                                      (0.113) (0.118)                          (0.002) (0.003)
                                Observations                      341700 341700 341700 341700 341701 341701 341701 341701
                                Adjusted R2                         0.511      0.510    0.513     0.514     0.017     0.017      0.017     0.017
                                Quarter Fixed-Effects                Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
                                Bank Fixed-Effects                   Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
   Table OA.5: OTS Extinction and Aggregate Small Business Lending by Census Tract

Table OA.5 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating the effect of the OTS extinction on small business lending
at the census tract level. The dependent variable Ln(Aggregate Total Loans by Tract) is the aggregate total amount of small
business loans (loans whose principal amount is below $1 million) originated by all depository institutions in a census tract over
a calendar year. Share OTS is the share of deposits held in former OTS institution in each census tract as of June 30th, 2010.
We map each branch in the Summary of Deposits (SOD) to its respective census tract using the Census Geocoder available in
the United Census Bureau website. We drop 1,773 branch addresses that account for 1.15% of the total number of branches
because their latitude and longitude data are missing or their address is improperly recorded. We use the census tract of each
branch location to compute measures of the exposure of each census tract to former OTS banks. Post is an indicator variable
that takes the value of one for all years after 2011 (inclusive). Ln(HPI) is the natural logarithm of a house price index (HPI) at
the census tract level The HPI is calculated using the all-transactions indexes at the census tract level provided by the Federal
Housing Finance Agency. Baseline controls include linear and quadratic terms for the total number of branches and total amount
of deposits held in each census-tract. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the county level. ***,
**, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                             (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)
                                                             Ln(Aggregate Total Loans by Tract)
                     Share OTS × Post                     0.054*** 0.051***     0.046*    0.038*
                                                           (0.021)   (0.019)    (0.024)   (0.022)
                     Ln(HPI)                                                   0.424*** 0.250***
                                                                                (0.025)   (0.031)
                     Observations                          241,922  236,254     193,608   188,845
                     Adjusted R-squared                     0.843     0.858      0.839     0.853
                     Baseline Controls                       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
                     Year Fixed Effects                      Yes       No         Yes       No
                     County-Year Fixed Effects               No        Yes        No        Yes
                     Census Tract Fixed Effects              Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes




                                                                65
Table OA.6: Robustness - OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending Interaction with Size
and Weighting Observations



Table OA.6 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating the effect of the OTS extinction after controlling for the
effects of bank size. Columns (1) and (2) report results after controlling for the total assets of banks and interactions of this
variable. Columns (3) and (4) report coefficients of a WLS regression where each bank-county pair is weighted by the total
amount of lending that a bank makes in the county during the sample period. The dependent variable Ln(Total Loans) is the
total amount of small business loans (loans whose principal amount is below $1 million) originated by a depository institution
in a county over a calendar year. OTS is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depository institution primary
regulator in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision. Post is an indicator variable that takes
the value of one for all years after 2011 (inclusive). Ln(Total Assets) is the natural logarithm of the total assets of the bank.
Baseline controls include linear and quadratic terms for the number of branches and total amount of deposits of each bank in
each county. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and *, represent
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                                (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)
                                                                       Ln(Total Loans)
                         OTS × Post                            0.228*** 0.135*** 0.243*** 0.162***
                                                              (0.041) (0.039) (0.050) (0.049)
                         Ln(Total Assets)                      0.002    0.198***
                                                              (0.017) (0.019)
                         Post × Ln(Total Assets)               0.009*** 0.008***
                                                              (0.003) (0.003)
                         Observations                         137953 129393 139277 130989
                         Adjusted R2                           0.756    0.865    0.894    0.935
                         Baseline Controls                      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
                         County-Year Fixed Effects              Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
                         Bank-County Fixed Effects              Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes




                                                                66
Table OA.7: Robustness - OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending controlling for Top 4
Banks and TARP Recipient Banks



Table OA.7 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating the effect of the OTS extinction on the supply of small
business lending by former OTS banks after conditioning on indicator variables representing whether the bank is among the
top 4 banks in the United States and whether the bank received TARP funds. The dependent variable Ln(Total Loans) is the
total amount of small business loans (loans whose principal amount is below $1 million) originated by a depository institution
in a county over a calendar year. OTS is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depository institution primary
regulator in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision. Post is an indicator variable that takes
the value of one for all years after 2011 (inclusive). Top 4 is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for the top 4 banks
in the United States (Chen, Hanson, Stein, 2018) TARP Recipient Bank is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if
the bank or its bank holding company received funds from the TARP program. Baseline controls include linear and quadratic
terms for the number of branches and total amount of deposits of each bank in each county. Standard errors are presented in
parentheses, and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.



                                                       (1)         (2)  (3)       (4)      (5)                     (6)
                                                                      Ln(Total Loans)
            OTS × Post                               0.233*** 0.122*** 0.152*** 0.200*** 0.079**                 0.072*
                                                    (0.041) (0.039) (0.041) (0.041) (0.039)                     (0.043)
            Top 4 × Post                             0.155*** 0.185*** 0.040
                                                    (0.017) (0.017) (0.082)
            TARP Recipient Bank × Post                                          -0.010   -0.016                  -0.157***
                                                                               (0.014) (0.015)                  (0.020)
            Observations                            139277 130989 116550 139277 130989                          116550
            Adjusted R2                              0.756    0.865    0.881    0.755    0.864                    0.882
            Baseline Controls                         Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes                      Yes
            Year Fixed Effects                        Yes      No       No       Yes       No                      No
            County Fixed Effects                      Yes      No       No       Yes       No                      No
            Bank Fixed Effects                        Yes      No       No       Yes       No                      No
            County-Year Fixed Effects                 No       Yes      Yes       No      Yes                      Yes
            Bank-County Fixed Effects                 No       Yes      Yes       No      Yes                      Yes
            Coarsened Exact Matching                  No       No       Yes       No       No                      Yes




                                                                67
Table OA.8: Robustness - OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending - Proforma Banks
after Mergers and Acquisitions



Table OA.8 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating the effect of the OTS extinction on the supply of small
business lending by former OTS banks using the proforma lending of banks that accounts for mergers and acquisitions throughout
the period. The dependent variable Ln(Total Loans) is the total amount of small business loans (loans whose principal amount is
below $1 million) originated by a depository institution in a county over a calendar year. OTS is an indicator variable that takes
the value of one if the depository institution primary regulator in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift
Supervision. Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all years after 2011 (inclusive). Baseline controls include
linear and quadratic terms for the number of branches and total amount of deposits of each bank in each county. Standard
errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                                       (1)       (2)       (3)
                                                                           Ln(Total Loans)
                                OTS × Post                             0.229*** 0.155*** 0.177***
                                                                      (0.043) (0.039) (0.042)
                                Observations                          135384 127890 117019
                                Adjusted R2                            0.746    0.855    0.866
                                Baseline Controls                       Yes      Yes      Yes
                                Year Fixed Effects                      Yes      No        No
                                County Fixed Effects                    Yes      No        No
                                Bank Fixed Effects                      Yes      No        No
                                County-Year Fixed Effects               No       Yes      Yes
                                Bank-County Fixed Effects               No       Yes      Yes
                                Coarsened Exact Matching                No       No       Yes




                                                                 68
              Table OA.9: Robustness - OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending - Impact of Other Dodd-Frank Provisions



     Table OA.9 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions investigating the effect of the OTS extinction on the supply of small business lending by former OTS banks after
     conditioning on indicator variables representing whether the bank holds total assets above $10 billion and as a result is subject to the regulation of the Consumer Protection
     Financial Bureau (CFPB) and whether the county is located in a state that allowed de novo branching. The dependent variable Ln(Total Loans) is the total amount of small
     business loans (loans whose principal amount is below $1 million) originated by a depository institution in a county over a calendar year. OTS is an indicator variable that takes
     the value of one if the depository institution primary regulator in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision. Post is an indicator variable that
     takes the value of one for all years after 2011 (inclusive). Post Dodd-Frank (2010) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all years after 2010 (inclusive). The
     CFPB and the interstate branching deregulation were enacted immediately after the passage of Dodd-Frank into law on July, 21st, 2010. Above 10bi is an indicator variable that
     takes the value of one if the bank is over $10 billion in assets and therefore subject to the supervision of the CFPB. DeNovo Branching State is an indicator variable that takes
     the value for all bank-county combinations that are part of a state that did not allow de novo interstate branching prior to the passage of Dodd-Frank. We obtain this list of
     states from Strahan and Rice (2010) and also exclude New York from this list because it deregulated de novo branching in 2008. Baseline controls include linear and quadratic
     terms for the number of branches and total amount of deposits of each bank in each county. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the county level.
     ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




69
                                                                                                    (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)
                                                                                                                      Ln(Total Loans)
                            OTS × Post                                                               0.202*** 0.084** 0.150*** 0.204*** 0.089** 0.153***
                                                                                                   (0.041) (0.039) (0.041) (0.041) (0.039) (0.041)
                            Above 10bi × Post Dodd-Frank (2010)                                     -0.040*** -0.027* -0.033*
                                                                                                   (0.015) (0.015) (0.019)
                            DeNovo Branching State × Post Dodd-Frank (2010)                                                     -0.061*** 0.555*** 0.702***
                                                                                                                               (0.014) (0.053) (0.064)
                            Observations                                                           137953 129393 116096 139277 130989 116550
                            Adjusted R2                                                             0.756      0.865   0.882     0.755    0.864    0.881
                            Baseline Controls                                                         Yes       Yes     Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
                            Year Fixed Effects                                                        Yes       No      No        Yes      No       No
                            County Fixed Effects                                                      Yes       No      No        Yes      No       No
                            Bank Fixed Effects                                                        Yes       No      No        Yes      No       No
                            County-Year Fixed Effects                                                 No        Yes     Yes       No       Yes      Yes
                            Bank-County Fixed Effects                                                 No        Yes     Yes       No       Yes      Yes
                            Coarsened Exact Matching                                                  No        No      Yes       No       No       Yes
                              Table OA.10: OTS Extinction and CRA Ratings

Panel A of Table OA.10 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2), Bad CRA
Rating takes the value of one if the bank was assigned less than a satisfactory CRA Rating (Rating of 3 or 4) in the aftermath
of the CRA examination The dependent variable in columns (3) and (4), CRA Rating Downgrade is an indicator variable that
takes the value of one if the bank’s CRA rating was downgraded in the last examinations. Panel B follows Agarwal, Benmelech,
Bergman, and Seru (2012) and examines if the relation between OTS Extinction and CRA examinations is more pronounced
during examination years. All other variables are defined as in previous tables. Standard errors are presented in parentheses,
and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Impact of OTS Extinction on CRA Ratings


                                                      (1)      (2)             (3)        (4)
                                                    Bad CRA Rating          CRA Rating Downgrade
                        OTS × Post                   0.007    0.006          0.065       0.062
                                                    (0.007) (0.007)         (0.063)    (0.062)
                        Ln(Assets)                            0.001                     -0.023
                                                            (0.004)                    (0.025)
                        Residential Share                    -0.037                     -0.115
                                                            (0.033)                    (0.182)
                        C&I Share                            -0.001                      0.012
                                                            (0.057)                    (0.209)
                        CRE Share                            -0.021                     -0.073
                                                            (0.027)                    (0.118)
                        Tier1 Capital Ratio                  -0.000                      0.000
                                                            (0.000)                    (0.002)
                        Observations                 7594     7563            2113       2105
                        Adjusted R2                  0.038    0.039          -0.009     -0.011
                        Baseline Controls             Yes      Yes            Yes         Yes
                        Bank Fixed Effects            Yes      Yes            Yes         Yes
                        Year Fixed Effects            Yes      Yes            Yes         Yes


Panel B: OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending - Controlling for CRA Exam Years


                                                                         (1)      (2)       (3)
                                                                            Ln(Total Loans)
                           OTS × Post                                   0.230*** 0.122*** 0.222***
                                                                      (0.044) (0.042) (0.045)
                           CRA Exam Year                               -0.001    0.003    -0.025***
                                                                      (0.005) (0.005) (0.008)
                           OTS × Post × CRA Exam Year                  -0.095* -0.130** -0.252***
                                                                      (0.055) (0.052) (0.054)
                           Observations                               139277 130989 116550
                           Adjusted R2                                  0.756    0.864     0.881
                           Baseline Controls                             Yes      Yes       Yes
                           Year Fixed Effects                            Yes      No        No
                           County Fixed Effects                          Yes      No        No
                           Bank Fixed Effects                            Yes      No        No
                           County-Year Fixed Effects                     No       Yes       Yes
                           Bank-County Fixed Effects                     No       Yes       Yes
                           Coarsened Exact Matching                      No       No        Yes

                                                               70
          Table OA.11: Robustness - Addressing Skewness in the Dependent Variable


Table OA.11 repeats the main analysis in the paper and investigates the relation between the OTS extinction and small business
lending for different sample horizons. The specifications of columns (1) and (2) uses the log growth rate of originations as
dependent variables, (3) and (4) defines total originations in a county and year scaled by total bank assets and (5) and (6) trims
the distribution of originations at the 95th percentile. OTS is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depository
institution primary regulator in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision. Post is an indicator
variable that takes the value of one for all years after 2011 (inclusive). Baseline controls include linear and quadratic terms for
the number of branches and total amount of deposits of each bank in each county. Standard errors are presented in parentheses,
and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                          (1)      (2)           (3)        (4)                      (5)       (6)
                                        ∆ SBL Amount           SBL Amount/Total Assets             Trimmed Ln(Amount)
    OTS × Post                           0.044* 0.055**         0.001***   0.001***                 0.197***  0.072*
                                        (0.025) (0.028)        (0.000)    (0.000)                  (0.041)   (0.040)
    Observations                        116605 108508          137962     129402                   132290    123881
    Adjusted R2                          0.032   -0.039         0.667      0.876                    0.711     0.835
    Baseline Controls                     Yes     Yes            Yes        Yes                      Yes       Yes
    Year Fixed Effects                    Yes      No            Yes        No                       Yes       No
    County Fixed Effects                  Yes      No            Yes        No                       Yes       No
    Bank Fixed Effects                    Yes      No            Yes        No                       Yes       No
    County-Year Fixed Effects             No      Yes            No         Yes                      No        Yes
    Bank-County Fixed Effects             No      Yes            No         Yes                      No        Yes




                                                               71
                          Table OA.12: OTS Extinction and Small Business Lending: Local Credit Supply by Competitor

     Table OA.12 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions. Columns (1) and (2) repeat the analysis of column (2) of Table 4 after stratifying the sample based on above- and
     below-median levels of the weighted average Tier1 Capital Ratio of local competitors, where the weights assigned to each local competitor are based on the share of deposits
     of that competitor in the county. Columns (3) and (4) repeat the analysis of column (2) of Table 4 after stratifying the sample based on above- and below-median level of the
     predicted negative lending shock in the county, which is measured using the same methodology as in Greenstone, Mas, and Nguyen (2015). The dependent variable Ln(Total
     Loans) is the total amount of small business loans (loans whose principal amount is below $1 million) originated by a depository institution in a county over a calendar year.
     OTS is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depository institution primary regulator in the first and second quarter of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision.
     Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all years after 2011 (inclusive). Baseline controls include linear and quadratic terms for the number of branches and
     total amount of deposits of each bank in each county. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and *, represent statistical
     significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




72
                                                                 (1)                          (2)                            (3)                             (4)
                                                                                                 Ln(Total Loans)
                                                       Hi Competitor Cap.         Low Competitor Cap. Low Neg Lending Shock                      Hi Neg Lending Shock
                  OTS × Post                                 0.043                       0.097*                  0.047                                   0.119**
                                                            (0.060)                     (0.056)                (0.055)                                  (0.054)
                  Observations                               65320                       55614                   65575                                   65414
                  Adjusted R2                                0.859                       0.866                   0.862                                   0.866
                  Baseline Controls                           Yes                         Yes                     Yes                                     Yes
                  County-Year Fixed Effects                   Yes                         Yes                     Yes                                     Yes
                  Bank-County Fixed Effects                   Yes                         Yes                     Yes                                     Yes
Table OA.13: OTS Extinction and Mortgage Lending (Likelihood of Application Rejection)

Table OA.13 reports the results of empirical analyses investigating the relation between the OTS extinction and the probability
of rejection of a mortgage loan application. The coefficients are obtained from the OLS estimation of the following specification
model: Rejectibct = δXi + βOT Sb × P ostt + F ixedEf f ects + t , where the subscripts index for the mortgage application
i in census tract c to bank b during year t. The vector δXi includes a number of characteristics of the application, namely
loan occupancy status, property type, lien status, loan-to-income ratio, applicant’s ethnicity, and applicant’s race. OTS is an
indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depository institution primary regulator in the first and second quarter
of 2011 was the Office of Thrift Supervision. Post is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for all years after 2011
(inclusive). Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and *, represent
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                        (1)         (2)         (3)
                                                                           Application Rejection
                      OTS × Post                                       0.009*** 0.010*** 0.002
                                                                      (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.004)
                      Loan to Income Ratio                             0.002*** 0.002*** 0.002***
                                                                      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                      Observations                                   38684393 38683683 38675108
                      Adjusted R2                                      0.110       0.123       0.136
                      Application Controls                              Yes         Yes         Yes
                      Year Fixed Effects                                Yes         Yes         No
                      Bank Fixed Effects                                Yes         Yes         No
                      Census-Tract Fixed Effects                        No          Yes         No
                      Bank × Census-Tract Fixed Effects                 No          No          Yes
                      Census-Tract × Year Fixed Effects                 No          No          Yes




                                                                73
   Table OA.14: OTS Extinction, Entry and Exit, and Dependence on External Finance

Table OA.14 reports the coefficients of WLS regressions in which each observation is weighted by the total employment in that
county. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2), Ln(Entry Rate), is the natural logarithm of the entry rate of new
establishments in a given county and year. Entry rate is the ratio between the number of new establishments and the number
of existing establishments at the beginning of the year. The dependent variable in columns (3) and (4), Ln(Exit Rate), is the
natural logarithm of the exit rate of establishment in a given county and year. Exit rate is defined as the ratio between the
number of establishment that exit the market and the total number of establishments at the beginning of the year. The models
of specifications (1) and (3) use entry and exit rates in the subset of 2-digit NAICS industries with high dependence of external
sources of finance and the models of specifications (2) and (4) use entry and exit rates in the subset of 2-digit NAICS industries
with low dependence of external sources of finance. Industries are classified as high/low dependence on external sources of
finance based on their above/below-median use of external financial capital according to the Census Bureau’s 2010 Survey of
Business Owners. We define external capital to include bank and government loans, loans from family and friends, credit cards,
venture capital investment or grants and only consider employer firms in the Survey of Business Owners dataset. Share OTS is
the share of county deposits held in former OTS institution as of June 30th, 2010. Post is an indicator variable that takes the
value of one for all years between 2006 and 2013 and zero for all years between 2006 and 2010. Baseline controls include linear
and quadratic terms for the total number of branches and total amount of deposits held in each county and controls for the
logarithm of the number of establishments in the county that employ 1–4, 5–9, 10–19, 20–49, 50–99, 100–249, 250–499 people,
and total number of establishments in the county. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the county
level. ***, **, and *, repr esent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                            Hi Ext. Fin. Low Ext. Fin.             Hi Ext. Fin. Low Ext. Fin.
                                                  Ln(Entry Rate)                          Ln(Exit Rate)
            Share OTS × Post                    0.096**             0.033               0.060**          0.056**
                                               (0.040)             (0.023)             (0.025)          (0.024)
            Observations                        8381                8388                8385             8392
            Adjusted R2                         0.786               0.856               0.744            0.842
            Baseline Controls                    Yes                 Yes                 Yes              Yes
            Employment Weighted                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes              Yes
            Year Fixed Effects                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes              Yes
            County Fixed Effects                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes              Yes




                                                                74
