                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         COMMITMENT AND THE MODERN UNION:
                            ASSESSING THE LINK BETWEEN
                            PREMARITAL COHABITATION AND
                           SUBSEQUENT MARITAL STABILITY




                                 Neil G. Bennett

                                Ann Klimas Blanc

                                 David E. Bloom




                             Working Paper No. 2416




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October 1987




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the annual meetings of the
Population Association of America, San Francisco, California, 3 April 1986. We
would like to thank William Form, Mark Montgomery, Michelle Alberti Gamborie, Amulya
Reddy, and two anonymous referees for their helpful comments and suggestions and
Statistics Sweden for graciously making their data available. Ann Blanc was funded
by Grant No. l-JD-06796 from the National Institutes of Health as a Postdoctoral
Fellow at Yale University. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #2416
                                                     October 1987



                         Commitment and the Modern Union:
                Assessing the Link Between Premarital Cohabitation
                         and Subsequent Marital Stability



                                     ABSTRACT


         In recent years, theincidence of premarital cohabitation has increased

    dramatically in many countries of Western Europe and in the United States. As

    cohabitation becomes a more common experience, it is increasingly important to

    understand the links between cohabitation and other steps in the process of

    family formation and dissolution. We focus on the relationship between pre-

   marital cohabitation and subsequent marital stability, and analyze data from

   the 1981 Women in Sweden survey using a hazards model approach.

        Our results indicate that women who premaritally cohabit have almost 80

   percent higher marital dissolution rates than those who do not cohabit. Women

   who cohabit for over three years prior to marriage have over 50 percent higher

   dissolution rates than women who cohabit for shorter durations. Last, cohabitors

   and non—cohabitors whose marriages have remained intact for eight years appear

   to have identical dissolution rates after that time. In addition, we provide

   evidence that strongly suggests a weaker commitment, on the part of those who

   cohabit premaritally, to the institution of marriage.




Neil G. Bennett             Ann Klimas Blanc               David E. Bloom
Department of Sociology     Institute for Resource         Department of Economics
Yale University               Development                  Columbia University
New Haven, CT 06520         Box 866                        New York, NY 10027
                            Columbia, MD 21044
                                    INTRODUCTION

         Nonmarital cohabitation is one element among many associated with the
increase in nontraditional family forms and household structure that has been
observed in many developed countries, especially in Western Europe and the United
States. The rising propensity to cohabit outside of marriage has been linked to
other demographic trends such as increasing proportions never married, increases in
the average age at marriage, rising divorce rates, and rising proportions of births
occurring outside of marriage. Many sociologists and demographerE e::pect that
the incidence of nonmarital cohabitation will continue to rise for many years to
come (Davis 1983; Glick 1984; Mackim 1978; Norton 1983; Spanier, 1986 Westc-ff
1978).    Glick asserts, for example, that the number of cohabiting unmarried couples
in the United States, which almost tripled in the 1970s, will have nearly doubled
during the 1980s.

         The increase in nonmarital cohabitation has been particularly marked in
Scandinavia. In Sweden, for example, unmarried cohabiting couples comprised but
one percent of all couples in 1960. In 1970, the proportion cohabiting but not
married was seven percent and in 1979, 15 percent (Trost 1980).         In Denmark,
between eight and nine percent of all unions were nonmarital in 1974; by 1978,
unmarried cohabiting couples made up 13 percent of all couples. A similar but
somewhat less marked trend has been observed in most of the remainder of
Western Europe (Audirac 1982; Brown and Kiernan 1981; Festy 1980).

         Clearly, understanding the links between nonmarital cohabitation and other
steps in the processes of family formation and dissolution becomes increasingly
important as the proportion of the population participating in this nontraditional
family form grows. This paper focuses on the relationship between premarital

                                          2
cohabitation and subsequent marital stability.

      Two hypotheses have been raised with respect to this relationship (see, e.g.,
Cherlin 1981; MackIm 1978; Mead 1966). One hypothesis states that a selection
process operates in which only the most stable of cohabiting couples marry. In
other words, cohabitation is viewed as a form of trial marriage in which unstable
unions are "weeded out" before marriage occurs. In a union that does lead to
formal marriage, the couple has presumably adjusted to expected marital roles and
can avoid possible pitfalls associated with marriage to a person with whose living
habits one is unfamiliar. Thus, one might expect marriages that are preceded by a
period of cohabitation to be more stable than those that occurred without prior
cohabitation.

       The matching process implied by this hypothesis may represent the latest
stage in the historical evolution of Western marriage markets. Marriage has never
been a random coupling process in Western societies. Information about potential
spouses has always played an important role in the making of matches. But the
nature of the information deemed important, and the process by which it is
gathered, has changed over time. Historically, the elder members of a family or
community played a dominant role in arranging marriages; the suitability of
potential matches was evaluated largely in terms of individuals' social and economic
backgrounds. Individuals were raised with the expectation that they would make
adjustments after marriage that were necessary to ensure longlasting and beneficial
unions.    However, over time, the bride and groom have come to play more
prominent roles in the matching process -- they collect and process much of the
information about potential spouses themselves (e.g., through dating), and they
tend to place greater weight on information relating to personal characteristics

                                          3
such as personality and physical appearance. As a practical matter, it appears that
careful screening before marriage has displaced in part the willingness to make
adjustments after marriage as the supposed key to promoting successful unions.

       Although its emergence lends itself to a variety of interpretations,
premarital cohabitation may be at least partially viewed as an extension of the
notion that information on a range of personal characteristics gathered directly by
the individuals involved improves the quality of marital unions. Researching the
validity of this perspective is indeed difficult. On the surface, one might judge
the secular increase in marital instability as evidence against this view. But this
is a difficult link to establish since so many other factors affecting both the
process of entry into marriage and marital stability have changed over time.

       The second hypothesis that has been offered regarding cohabitation and
marital stability states that those who cohabit are a select group of people for
whom relationships in general -- both nonmarital and marital -- are characterized
by a lack of commitment and stability. In addition, those who cohabit may attach
less importance to participation in traditional institutions, such as legal marriage,
and may be more willing to dissolve unsatisfying relationships (see Carison 1986).
Thus, premarital cohabitors might be expected to have higher marital dissolution
rates than would that segment of the married population who did not cohabit.
This hypothesis does not necessarily preclude the one outlined above, Even if
cohabitors are more likely to dissolve their marriages than non-cohabitors, they
may have lower dissolution rates than they would have had if they had not
cohabited.

      Although direct evidence to support this interpretation cannot be obtained
from currently a..'ailable data, the results of several studies of cohabitation and

                                         4
marriage in other countries are suggestive.      Carlson (1986) reports that in a
survey of 18 to 29 year-olds in France in 1977, compared to married couples who
had not cohabited, those who had cohabited or were cohabiting at the time of the
survey were twice as likely to view marriage as a response to social pressure and
were half as likely to see marriage as the result of the desire of the couple
themselves to add something to their union. In addition, when respondents were
asked about the future of marriage, the cohabitors were less likely to predict that
marriage would continue to be the dominant form of living together and more likely
to predict that marriage would eventually disappear.

      Furthermore, the results of a series of surveys conducted in Denmark'
during the 1970s (the Euro-barometer surveys) suggest that cohabiting individuals
are less likely than married individuals to subscribe to traditional sex roles. For
example, in comparison to married couples of the same age, respondents who were
living together tended to be more accepting of a husband moving for his wife's job
and more likely to think it reasonable for a man to perform household chores, such
as cleaning and ironing. Another difference between cohabiting and married persons
in Denmark is that cohabitors are less likely to report their religion as important
to them.

      We attempt to disentangle the relationship between cohabitation and marital
stability by investigating the empirical validity of each of these hypotheses.
Further analysis illuminates some of the complexities involved in that relationship.

      Because our analysis is based on individual-level data, we will be able to
control for several individual-specific variables that one might reasonably expect
to be related to both premarital cohabitation and marital stability. Although
interpretation of our results is limited insofar as we are unable to control for all

                                          5
important variables, much can be learned about the process of entry into marriage
and its implications for subsequent marital stability through the investigation we
describe below.


                                    THE DATA

       Few data sets exist that are appropriate for researching the hypotheses set
forth above. Indeed, few studies on the subject have used appropriate data and
methodology.2 However, a 1981 Swedish survey, entitled "Women in Sweden," has
an extensive cohabitational and marital history as well as a pregnancy history and
numerous background variables for each respondent. The survey, conducted by
the Swedish National Central Bureau of Statistics (now Statistics Sweden), was
based on a sample of 4966 women aged 20 to 44 and resident in the country as of
February 1981. Interviews were carried out with 4300 respondents and took place
primarily between March and May of 1981 (Statistics Sweden, 1981).

      In the section of the survey dealing with marriage and cohabitation,
respondents were asked to provide the dates (month and year) of all periods in
their lives during which they "lived together with a man, either as married or
without being formally married." For each period, the dates the couple "moved in
together", married (if applicable), and "split up" (if applicable) are recorded.
Marriages and periods of cohabitation lasting less than one month are not recorded.
Note that the date of dissolution refers to the date the couple ceased living
together rather than the date of divorce. Our analysis focuses on the dissolution,
as indicated by marital separation, of first marriages. It is important to note that
the population we examine here is composed only of ever-married women. Once we
establish that a woman entered a first marriage, we classify her as a cohabitor if

                                         6
she cohabited with her first husband immediately prior to marriage. Never-married
women who either were cohabiting at the time of the survey or had cohabited
before the survey date are not included in our study sample.


                             PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS

      The proportion of women in the sample experiencing a marital dissolution,
classified by whether they cohabited premaritally, is shown in Table 1. Almost
two-thirds of the women in the sample cohabited (for at least one month) with
their first husband) immediately prior to marrying. Overall, nearly 18 percent had
experienced the dissolution of their first marriage by the time of the survey.
Among cohabitors, 18.3 percent had separated from their husbands, and among non-
cohabitors, 17.4 percent. This simple crosstabulation, then, reveals only trivial
differences between the dissolution rates of cohabitors and non-cohabitors. Indeed,
a chi-square test is unable to reject the null hypothesis that premarital
cohabitation and marital dissolution are independent events.
      The comparison of gross dissolution rates between cohabitors and non-
cohabitors fails to control for a key variable related to dissolution probabilities:
length of exposure to the risk of divorce. This variable might well be important
because cohabitors tend to have later ages at first marriage than non-cohabitors
and because there has been a cross-cohort increase in the propensity to cohabit.
A briefer period of exposure, all else equal, would tend to depress the proportion
of cohabitors with dissolved marriages relative to the corresponding proportion of
non-cohabitors.

       We control for the differential exposure of cohabitors and non-cohabitors to
the risk of separation by constructing life tables for the two groups. These tables

                                          7
provide estimates of the probability that a woman will dissolve her first marriage
at each duration, taking into account her length of exposure to risk (i.e., how long
she has been married). Women who have dissolved a first marriage contribute
exposure at each duration until the point of dissolution. Women who are still
married at the time of the survey contribute exposure at each duration prior to
the survey date. Life tables, therefore, incorporate information both about women
who have separated and those who have not separated by the survey date.

       The cumulative proportion of marriages dissolved by a given duration of
marriage is shown in Figure 1 separately for cohabitors and non-cohabitors. Once
we account for differential exposure between cohabitors and non-cohabitors,
differences in marital dissolution occurring between the two groups become
evident. Within ten years of the date of their first marriage, 18 percent of the
cohabitors in the sample had separated compared to only 10 percent of the non-
cohabitors in the sample; within 20 years, the figures had risen to 34 and 24
percent, respectively.
     Given that the cohabitors and non-cohabitors differ with respect to marital
stability, it is natural to explore whether these two groups of women differ in
other ways as well. In particular, are there other factors that differentiate these
two groups that could account for the differences in rates of marital dissolution,
thus rendering the cohabitation factor       se   insignificant?

      Table 2 presents selected characteristics of women in our sample according
to whether they cohabited before their first marriage and the current status of
that marriage. A few characteristics that tend to differentiate ever-married women
who did and did not preinaritally cohabit are as follows: Those who did cohabit
are younger than those who did not, they are somewhat more likely to have had a

                                         8
premarital conception, and they are more than twice as likely to have had a
premarital birth though less likely to have had a marital birth.
     Of those women who lived with their first husband immediately prior to
marriage, there is great variability in the length of time spent cohabiting. Table 3
indicates that approximately two out of five such women spent one year or less
living with their future spouse. About the same proportion cohabited premaritally
for one to three years, and the remaining fifth or so lived with their partner for
over three years before they married.


                                       THE MODEL

       It is clear from Table 2 that there are several factors that may
simultaneously affect marital dissolution rates. Consequently, it is appropriate to
study the relationship between premarital cohabitation and subsequent marital
stability within a multivariate framework. A hazards model approach, which may
be thought of as a multivariate extension of the simple life table analysis
presented above, is suitable for the particular statistical problem we face (see, e.g.,
Cox and Oakes 1984).

       We assume that there is a hazard or risk of dissolution at each marital
duration, 4,   and    we allow this duration-specific risk to depend on individual
characteristics.4  In the proportional hazards model, a set of individual
characteristics represented by a vector of covariates is allowed to shift the
hazard by the same proportional amount at all durations. Thus, for an individual i
at duration 4, with an observed set of characteristics represented by a vector of
covariates, Z1, the hazard function, (d) is given by
                     = exp[X(d)]expEZ1fll

                                            9
 where     is a vector of parameters and X(d) is the underlying duration pattern of
 risk.  In this model, then, the underlying risk of dissolution for an individual i
 with characteristics Z1 is multiplied by a factor equal to exp[Z1fl].

         We also examine a set of more general models in order to test for
departures from some of the restrictive assumptions built into the proportional
hazards framework. More specifically, we allow for time-varying covariates (e.g.,
the occurrence of a first marital birth) as well as allow for the effects of
individual characteristics to vary with duration of first marriage. This type of
model enables us to examine, for example, the possibility that the relationship
between premarital cohabitation and marital dissolution diminishes in magnitude as
marriage duration increases. This model may be written as follows:

                     exp[X(d)]exp[Z(d)(d)}
where Md) is defined as in the proportional hazards model, Z1(d) is the vector of
covariates, some of which may be time-varying, and fl(d) represents a vector
parameters, some of which may give rise to nonproportional effects. The model
parameters are estimated using the method of maximum likelihood (see Tuma 1979).
The estimation procedure assumes that the hazard, i(d), is constant within
duration intervals. The intervals (in years) that we have chosen are: 0-1, 2-4,
5-7, 8-11, and 12 and greater. Experimentation with alternative intervals yielded no
substantive differences in our analysis.




                                           10
                            RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

      The object of this statistical analysis is, of course, to identify the direction
and magnitude of the relationship between premarital cohabitation and the risk of
marital dissolution controlling for other factors associated with marital disruption.
The first model that we report includes all covariates available in the Swedish
survey that could sensibly be hypothesized to relate to marital dissolution (see
Becker et al. 1977; Cherlin 1977; Menken et al. 1981; Morgan and Rindfuss 1985;
Murphy 1985; Teachman 1982; Waite et al. 19S5). Table 4 reports the antilogs of
the parameter estimates and the t-statistics associated with the parameter
estimates themselves, based on a simple proportional hazards model.5 Because the
estimates are maximum likelihood, they are asymptotically normally distributed,
thereby facilitating the drawing of statistical inferences.
      First, we categorize women into three groups according to their premarital
cohabitation experience: those who did not cohabit with their first husband (or
did so for less than one month), those who cohabited one to three months, and
those who cohabited more than three months. No premarital cohabitation is the
omitted category.    This categorization is intended to test the hypothesis that
women who cohabit for very short durations are more similar to those who do not
cohabit at all than they are to longer-term cohabitors. We might suppose that
those who cohabit for a short time are either formally or informally engaged and
are doing so merely for logistical reasons, having at the outset already committed
themselves to marrying. Instead, we find that, compared to non-cohabitors, those
who live together before marriage for either a brief or extended period of time are
 similarly likely to dissolve their marriages (the parameter estimates for the two
 groups of cohabitors are not significantly different); thus, in subsequent models we

                                           11
 combine all cohabitors into one group.

       The overall association between premarital cohabitation and subsequent
 marital stability is striking.   The dissolution rates of women who cohabit
premaritally with their future spouse are, on average, nearly 80 percent higher
than the rates of those who do not. (Recall from Table 3 that only one-eighth of
women cohabiting do so for only one to three months.) This finding is comparable
to that found by Blanc (1985) for Norway and by Balakrishnan and his colleagues
(1987) for Canada.6 The magnitude of the cohabitation parameter is slightly
smaller than that of age at marriage and greater than that of a premarital birth.
Note that the covarjate that indicates a woman cohabited more than once before
marriage is positive but not significant. We may conclude, then, that the higher
dissolution rates of cohabitors do not stem entirely from a small group of "repeat
cohabitors" who have especially low commitment to the institution of marriage and
to relationships in general.

       Age at marriage has been dichotomized into those who married at less than
21 years of age and those who married at age 21 or older. We also include a
covariate that indicates whether a woman had a birth prior to her first marriage.
The event of a first marital birth is entered as a time-varying covariate (i.e., its
value varies with duration) which assumes the value 0 at each duration until the
first birth within marriage occurs and 1 at each duration thereafter.          The
coefficient may be interpreted as the relative risk of marital dissolution for a
woman who has had a first birth, subsequent to that birth, compared to the
corresponding risk for women who had not yet had a marital birth.

      Additional results in Table 4 show that women who marry at a relatively
young age or have a premarital birth have substantially higher marital dissolution

                                          12
rates than those who defer marriage or restrict their childbearing to within marital
unions.     Women who marry early appear to have almost double the rate of
dissolution of their late-marrying counterparts; women with a premarital birth have
a rate that is one-half higher than women who did not give birth premaritally.
However, the first birth within marriage tends to have a stabilizing effect on the
marriage; dissolution rates of women who give birth within marriage are one-
quarter lower subsequent to the birth compared to those women at the same
marriage duration who have not given birth.

      These results are not surprising, as they are consistent with previous
research. For example, in his analysis of marital disruption in Great Britain,
Murphy (1985) found that for every year that age at marriage is reduced, the risk
of dissolution increases by 16 percent. Similarly, Menken et al. (1981) found that
for both white and black women in the United States, separation rates decline
regularly with increasing age at marriage. The occurrence of a premarital birth
has also been found to have a significant positive effect on the rate of marital
disruption (Menken et al. 1981; Morgan and Rindfuss 1985; Teachman 1982).
Although evidence regarding the relationship between marital fertility and marital
dissolution is somewhat unclear, our findings are consistent with recent studies
that suggest, at least for the first birth, that this relationship is negative (Becker
et al. 1977; Teachnian 1982; Thornton 1977; Waite et a!. 1985).

      Level of education has been found to be negatively correlated with the
likelihood of divorce (Menken et al. 1981; Morgan and Rindfuss 1985; Teachman
1982). In Sweden, other factors appear to vitiate any bivariate relationship that
may exist between education and marital instability.7

          Social background, which is measured here by the occupation of the "main

                                          13
 breadwinner" in the respondent's childhood home, may be an indicator of several
 factors including type of education, labor force participation, and parent's marital
 status (see Bernhardt and Hoem, 1985). We find that those women who grew up in
 a household in which the main breadwinner had been a salaried employee (i.e., a
white-collar worker), have substantially higher marital dissolution rates than other
women 8

       Although there is reason to believe that the relationship between marital
dissolution and each of our fixed covariates may change with marital duration (see
Morgan    and Rindfuss 1985), estimation of models in which these covariates are
allowed to vary with duration shows that only premarital cohabitation has
significant duration-dependent effects.

      Women who cohabit prior to marriage may well be a group that is
heterogeneous with respect to characteristics that were not measured in the
Swedish data (e.g., in their level of religiosity, personal maturity, or the stability
of their parents' marriage). Thus we may hypothesize in very simple terms, for
example, that this group is composed of two subgroups: those who believe more
and less in the institution of marriage as a lifetime commitment. Given this
hypothesis, the "less committed" group may be expected to dissolve their marriages
at a relatively high rate, leaving behind the "more committed" group (which has
dissolution rates indistinguishable from the group that did not cohabit). If this is
the case, then we would expect the relationship between cohabitation and
dissolution to decrease in magnitude across duration.

      Indeed, this more refined hypothesis is borne out by the results shown in
Table 5 (variables found insignificant in the previous model are omitted). The
relationship between marital stability and age at marriage, whether one had a
                                          14
premarital birth, and the timing of the first marital birth remains qualitatively
identical to that observed in the previous model. However, the nature of the
relationship between marital stability and whether a woman cohabited with her
future spouse changes substantially with marital duration. The monthly hazard of
marital dissolution in the first two years of marriage for those women who have
cohabited premaritally is over three times that of those who have not. The
hazard for cohabitors declines to approximately two times that of non-cohabitors
in the interval from two to eight years of marriage. After the first eight years of
marriage, marriage dissolution rates of cohabitors and non-cohabitors converge to
the extent that any differences are small in magnitude and statistically
insignificant.
      It is not possible to determine conclusively whether one should interpret this
pattern of changing effects across duration from a life course perspective assuming
a homogeneous cohort of women or rather from a perspective that incorporates the
notion of heterogeneity. From a life course perspective, one might say that all
couples who cohabit prior to marriage are equally likely to dissolve their
marriages at a relatively high rate during the first several years of marriage.
After this time, however, couples who remain in intact marriages "settle in" and
have dissolution rates essentially the same as those couples who did not cohabit
premaritally.

       As outlined earlier, an alternative interpretation views those who cohabit as
a group that is heterogeneous with respect to one or more                unobserved
characteristics that are associated with the probability of dissolution. Thus, after
the first eight years of marriage, those women with a greater propensity to
divorce -- due to the various characteristics that we have not observed -- are

                                         15
 selected out. The subgroup of women remaining, then, is indistinguishable from the
 segment of the population that never cohabited.

      One characteristic that varies among cohabitors is the length of the period
of cohabitation (see Table 3). Among the women in the Swedish sample, for
example, the duration of cohabitation ranges from one month to more than ten
years, with a mean cohabitational spell of approximately two years. The results
presented in Table 6 derive from a model in which we examine only the premarital
cohabitors in our sample. We include the duration of premarital cohabitation as a
covariate in order to evaluate two hypotheses. First, it is possible that couples
who cohabit for only a short period of time before marriage, in contrast to long-
term cohabitors, have less opportunity to develop an understanding of each other
and to recognize and resolve potential conflicts. Should this be the case, we would
expect the duration of cohabitation to be negatively related to the rate of
dissolution.

     Alternatively, couples who cohabit for a long period of time may be those in
which one or both partners are unsure about, or ideologically opposed to, the
institution of marriage itself, but who marry perhaps due to mounting external
pressure. Furthermore, it may be that individuals who live together for several
years before marrying become accustomed to a relatively individualistic mode of
behavior (see Rosenblatt and Budd 1975). Cohabitors are known, for example, to
value the independence that comes with cohabitation, which is sacrificed to some
extent in marriage. That is, cohabitors are often attracted to their nonmarital
arrangement precisely because they view that arrangement as one associated with
greater individual freedom than would be the case with marriage (see Blumstein and
Schwartz 1983). Consequently, those who cohabit premaritally for an extended

                                       16
period of time may miss the independence that existed in their previous
arrangement more than those who live together for a relatively short length of
time.    In addition, we might expect that long-term cohabitors have been more
stigmatized due to the non-conformity implicit in their unusually long spell of
cohabitation.         Thus it might be easier for them to withstand the social
repercussions of divorce than it is for short-term cohabitors. This hypothesis
would say, then, that long periods of cohabitation are associated with higher rates
of dissolution.

        The results shown in Table 6 are consistent with this latter hypothesis.
Women who cohabit premaritally for more than three years have 54 percent higher
marital dissolution rates than those who cohabit for shorter durations. Those who
cohabit for three years or less appear to have essentially identical rates of
dissolution. (The proportional factors for categories of duration 6-18 months and
19-36 months are not significantly different from one, and thus dissolution rates
are not distinguishable from those of women in the base category, 0-5 months.)9

        The last model that we discuss, the parameter estimates of which are
presented in Table 7, refers only to women who did not live with their prospective
husband before marriage, Comparing the results in Tables 6 and 7, we see that the
relationship between three factors --      age   at marriage, whether one had a premarital
birth, and whether the main breadwinner during one's childhood was a salaried
employee --     and   marital dissolution are similar for cohabitors and non-cohabitors.
        The impact of a first marital birth, however, on marital stability subsequent
to that birth is insignificant for women who did not cohabit premaritally. This
result stands in stark contrast to the pronounced stabilizing effect of the first
marital birth that is found among couples who did live together before marriage.

                                                 17
A plausible explanation of this difference is that for non-cohabiting couples the
solidifying event in the relationship is the marriage itself. In contrast, for the
cohabitors marriage merely preserves the status quo and it is not until the event
of a first birth that a significant change occurs. That is, for the non-cohabiting
couple a first birth does not affect dissolution rates because the major structural
change in the relationship occurs at the time of marriage when the couple begins
to live together. However, for the cohabiting couple the comparable change and
cementing of the relationship does not take place until the first child is born.

      Translation of the underlying hazard rates and proportionality factors into
cumulative dissolution probabilities yields statistics that allow one to see, in
straightforward fashion, the vast differences in marital dissolution across various
subgroups. We illustrate in Figure 2 the probability that a woman will have
separated by selected durations of marriage. The range of results is startling.
For example, a woman who is childless, has delayed marriage, and did not cohabit
premaritally has a .08 probability of separating within 12 years of marriage.      In

contrast, her counterpart who did cohabit is twice as likely to separate with a .16
probability. In addition, a woman who cohabited premaritally for more than three
years, had a premarital birth, and married before she turned 21 years of age had a
.54 probability of separating from her husband within her first 12 years of
marriage.




                                         18
                            SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

         The results presented in this paper indicate that Swedish women who
cohabited with their first husband immediately prior to their marriage dissolve
their first marriage at a significantly higher rate than married women who did not
cohabit. Although the evidence outlined above is too indirect and fragmentary to
pinpoint the precise cause of higher marital dissolution rates among cohabitors, our
findings are consistent with the hypothesis that those who cohabit may be a select
group of people who tend to lack what has been called "marital aptitude" (Bernard
1982).     That is, they "do not have the interests or the values demanded by
marriage" (Bernard 1982, p. 159).

         Our findings also indicate, however, that the difference in dissolution rates
between cohabitors and non-cohabitors decreases in magnitude as marital duration
increases. We test the hypothesis that diversity among cohabitors in the length
of premarital cohabitation is partly responsible for the observed pattern of
duration dependence. We find that among those who cohabited, women who lived
with their future spouse for more than three years are significantly more likely to
separate than those who cohabited for three years or less.           This difference
between cohabitors of long and of short duration may reflect differences in the
motivation behind cohabiting or in the extent to which patterns of individualistic
behavior developed during the cohabitation period continue after marriage.

         Strictly speaking, inferences from the results reported above can be drawn
only for the Swedish population. However, the Canadian analysis by Balakrishnan
et al. (1987) gives some indication that the nature, if not necessarily the
magnitude, of the relationship between premarital cohabitation and marital stability
is likely to be similar in other Western societies.

                                           19
        Blumstein and Schwartz's (1983) study of couples in the United States s1ios
that    cohabiting couples are more committed to personal independence than are
married couples. This commitment is reflected in a lower likelihood of pooling
income, owning joint property, and sharing leisure activities. Cohabitors do not
expect the man to assume the role of provider and do expect each partner to be
responsible for his or her own economic welfare. Furthermore, cohabiting couples
are less likely than married couples to think monogamy is important and are more
likely to approve of sex without love. Tanfer (1987), in the National Survey of
Unmarried Women (a 1983 nationwide sample of never-married, 20 to 29 year-old
women), found differences between those who had ever cohabited and those who
had not. For example, those who had cohabited prior to the time of the survey
attended church much less frequently and also were less likely at age 15 to be in
households in which the parents were in intact marriages. These differences
suggest that the direction of effects found in Sweden in all likelihood hold true in
the United States as well.
       In conclusion, simple descriptive statistics suggest no relationship between
premarital cohabitation and subsequent marital stability. However, by applying a
more refined model of marital dissolution, we have found the two events to be
strongly negatively associated. This relationship is quite robust to varied model
specifications. Due to limitations of the data, we cannot conclusively determine
the mechanisms underlying this relationship.     Nevertheless, the weight of the
evidence does suggest that the higher marital dissolution rates of cohabitors
reflects their weaker commitment to the institution of marriage. Further insight
into the nature and strength of the underlying structural relationships between
premarital cohabitation and marital stability must await the development of richer
data sets, especially those with more information on attitudes toward marriage.
                                         20
                                  REFERENCES



Audirac, Pierre-Alain. 1982. "Cohabitation et Manage: Qui Vit avec Qui?"
    Economie et Statistigu, 145: 41-59.
Balakrishnan, T. R., K. V. Rao, Evelyne Lapierre-Adamcyk, and Karol J. Krotki.
     1987. "A Hazards Model Analysis of the Covariates of Marriage
     Dissolution in Canada." Demography, forthcoming.
Becker, Gary S., Elisabeth M. Landes, and Robert T. Michael. 1977. "An Economic
    Analysis of Marital Instability." Journal of Political Economy 85: 1141-1187.
Bernard, Jessie. 1982. The Future of Marriage. New Haven: Yale University
     Press.
Bernhardt, Eva and Britta Hoem. 1985. "Cohabitation and Social Background:
     Trends Observed for Swedish Women Born between 1936 and 1960."
     European Journal of Population 1: 375-395.
Blanc, Ann Klimas. 1985. The Effect of Nonmarital Cohabitation on Family
     Formation and Dissolution: A Comparative Analysis of Sweden and Norway.
     Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University.
Blumstein, Phillip and Pepper Schwartz. 1983. American Couples: Money, Work,
    Sex. New York: William Morrow.
Brown, A. and K. Kiernan. 1981. "Cohabitation in Great Britain: Evidence from
    the General Household Survey." Population Trends 25: 1-8.
Carison, Elwood. 1986. "Couples without Children: Premarital Cohabitation in
     France." In Contemporary Marriage: Comparative Perspectives of a
     Changing lnstitution, edited by Kingsley Davis with A. Grossbard-
     Schechtman. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Cherlin, Andrew. 1977. "The Effect of Children on Marital Dissolution."
     Demography 14: 265-272.
               . 1981. Marriage, Divorce, Remarriage. Cambridge: Harvard
     University Press.
Cox, D. R. and D. Oakes. 1984. Analysis of Survival Data. London: Chapman and
     Hall.
Davis, Kingsley. 1983. "The Future of Marriage." Bulletin -- The Academy of
    Arts and Sciences 36: 15-43.
DeMaris, Alfred and Gerald R. Leslie. 1984. "Cohabitation with the Future
   Spouse: Its Influence upon Marital Satisfaction and Communication."
     Journal of jfl!g. and the Family 46: 77-84.
                                        21
Festy, P. 1980. "Aspects Demographiques de la Formation de la Famille en Europe
     Occidentale." In Marriage and Cohabitation in Contemporary Societies,
     edited by J. Eekelaar and S. Katz. Toronto: Butterworth and Co.
Glick, Paul C. 1984. "Marriage, Divorce, and Living Arrangements: Prospective
     Changes." Journal of Family Issues 5: 7-26.
Floem, Jan M. 1986. "The Impact of Education on Modern Family-Union Initiation."
     European Journal of Population 2: 113-133.
Mackim, Eleanor D. 1978. "Noninaritai Heterosexual Cohabitation." Marriage and
    Family Review 1: 1-12.
Mead, Margaret. 1966. "Marriage in Two Steps." Redbook (July): 48-49, 84-85.
Menken, Jane, James Trusseil, Debra Stempel, and Ozer Babakol. 1981.
    "Proportional Hazards Life Table Models: An Illustrative Analysis of Socio-
    demographic Influences on Marriage Dissolution in the United States."
    Demography 18: 181-200.
Morgan, S. Philip and Ronald R. Rindfuss. 1985. "Marital Disruption: Structural
     and Temporal Dimensions." American Journal of Sociology 90: 1055-1077.
Murphy, M. J. 1985. "Demographic and Socio-economic Influences on Recent
    British Marital Breakdown Patterns." Population Studies 39: 441-460.
Norton, Arthur J. 1983. "Keeping Up with Households." American Demographics
     (February): 17-21.
Rosenblatt, Paul C. and Linda G. Budd. 1975. "Territoriality and Privacy in
    Married and Unmarried Cohabiting Couples." The Journal of Social
    Psychology 97: 67-75.
Spanier, Graham B. 1986. "Cohabitation in the 1980s: Recent Changes in the
     United States." In c ntem orary Marriage: Comparative Perspectives of a
     Changing Institution, edited by Kingsley Davis with A. Grossbard-
     Schechtman. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Statistics Sweden. 1981. "Women in Sweden." Stockholm. Inquiries about this
      data set should be addressed to Statistics Sweden, S-uS 81, Stockholm,
     Sweden.

Tanfer, Koray. 1987. "Patterns of Premarital Cohabitation among Never-Married
     Women in the United States." Journal of Marriage and the Family 49:
     483-497.

Teachman, Jay D. 1982. "Methodological Issues in the Analysis of Family
     Formation and Dissolution." Journal of Marriage and the Family 44:
     1037-1053.

Thornton, Arland. 1977. "Children and Marital Stability." Journal of Marriage
     and the Family 39: 531-540.
Trost, J. 1980. "Cohabitation without Marriage in Sweden." In Marriage and
      Cohabitation in Contemporary Societj edited by J. Eekelaar and S. Katz.
      Toronto: Butterworth and Co.
Tuma, Nancy B. 1979. Invoking RATE (2nd edition). Menlo Park, CA: SRI
    International.
Waite, Linda J., Gus W. Haggstrom, and David E. Kanouse. 1985. "The
     Consequences of Parenthood for the Marital Stability of Young Adults."
     American Sociological Review 50: 850-857.
Westoff, Charles F. 1978. "Some Speculations on the Future of Marriage and
    Fertility." Family Planning Perspectives 10: 79-83.




                                       23
                                    FOOTNOTES


      'The Euro-barometer surveys are conducted by the Commission of the
European Communities and made available through the ICPSR. Although nine
countries participate in the surveys, the sample sizes are small and only in
Denmark are there sufficient numbers of persons in the sample cohabiting to allow
the construction of meaningful crosstabulations. The results reported here are
drawn from Euro-barometer 3 and Euro-barometer 8.

        2To our knowledge, virtually all of the studies that have been conducted
on this subject are based on samples of currently married couples rather than
samples of ever-married women (see, e.g., DeMaris and Leslie, 1984). As a result,
the least successful or stable marriages (i.e., those that have been dissolved) are
not observed.     Consequently, the results are biased by inclusion of a
disproportionately large number of the most stable marriages. For a review, see
Mackim (1978).

        3The fact that we are studying women only should not, of course, indicate
that we wish to saddle women with sole responsibility for stability within marriage.
Either partner could be "at fault" for the dissolution of the marriage, although we
only observe the characteristics and behavior of women.

        4We have explored the possibility that the salient measure of duration is
"duration since the initiation of the union," not "duration since the initiation of
the marriage." For married women who did not cohabit premaritally, obviously the
measures are identical. However, for those who did cohabit, this new duration
measure reflects the total amount of time that a couple has been in a union, formal
or otherwise. In this regard, it is interesting to test the hypothesis that there are
no differences in marital dissolution probabilities between cohabitors and non-
cohabitors using this measure of duration. This hypothesis might be true if
people "get tired of their partners" within some length of time, regardless of their
marital status. For example, women who have been married ten months with no
prior cohabitation would have dissolution rates similar to those who have been
married only six months but with four months of premarital cohabitation.
      We test this hypothesis by counting duration as that since union, however
we censor our data before the time of marriage. In our example, then, we would
pretend to observe those women who cohabited before marriage only in their fifth
month of union and beyond.   In this way, the fact that these women cannot
possibly divorce before they are married does not bias our results. It is
important, though, to bear in mind that our results are conditioned upon entering
into marriage. In this model, we also include a covariate denoting whether one
cohabited. Under this hypothesis, the cohabitation covariate should be irrelevant
to the likelihood of marital dissolution. However, when we estimate a model
specified in this way, the relationship between cohabitation and subsequent marital
stability is in the same direction and virtually as strong in magnitude.


                                         24
     Further analysis may address whether a given length of premarital
cohabitation could be translated into an "equivalent" length of marriage. Suppose,
for example, that cohabitation were, for argument's sake, only half as "intense" a
relationship as marriage with respect to the amount of deterioration (or
improvement, for that matter) that a relationship may experience over time.
Referring again to our example above, in this scheme we pretend to observe the
cohabiting couples in what we call the third "pseudo-month." That is, their
marriage occurs in their third marriage-duration-equivalent month, since the four
months of cohabitation translate into two months of marriage duration. We
specified a range of such translations and in no case was the cohabitation
parameter estimate anything but similar to that obtained in models measuring
duration as that since marriage.

         5The cross-sectional nature of the data will generate a bias by selecting
women with short duration of cohabitation. In addition, we will tend not to
observe women who marry late, either due to long premarital cohabitation or other
factors.
         One approach to this issue is to note that the selection problem is less
important for older women because people reach their "final state" eventually.
This suggests a test for the selection hypothesis. One would fit the model to
separate cohorts and examine whether the relationship between divorce and
cohabitation differs among the various cohorts. The test is not entirely
satisfactory because looking at differences across cohorts could be interpreted
either as evidence of selection bias or of genuine behavioral changes. Nonetheless,
performing such an analysis yielded results that are not consistent with the
hypothesis suggesting cross-cohort differences.

        6Balakrishnan et al. (1987) find 50 percent higher dissolution rates for
cohabitors using a proportional hazards model in which several other variables are
incorporated. Using life tables, Blanc (1985) finds that in Norway the cumulative
proportion of first marriages ending in separation after five years is .12 for
cohabitors and .06 for non-cohabitors who married before age 21. For women who
married at age 21 or later, the corresponding proportions are .06 and .02.

       7We should note that this variable measures the respondent's level of
education at the time of the survey, not at marriage. See Hoem (1986) for a
detailed discussion of the problems in the information on completed education in
the Swedish survey.

        8ThiS finding regarding main breadwinners' occupations is somewhat
puzzling. It is possible that the mothers in these households were more likely to
have worked outside the home and were themselves subject to higher dissolution
rates. This behavior may to some extent be transmitted across generations.
Unfortunately, given the available data, we are unable to test this or related
hypotheses.




                                        25
        9We explored the possibility that the interpretations of results in Tables 4
and 6 are confounded by the fact that (a) long-term cohabitors are more likely to
have premarital births and that (b) long-term cohabitors marry relatively late in
life. We did so by estimating models that included the relevant interaction terms.
Inclusion of these terms did not contribute significantly to the explanatory power
of the models.




                                        26
Figure 1: Proportion of First Marriages Dissolved by Duration x.
     ESTIMATED PROPORTION OF MARRIAGES DISSOLVED
                    BY DURATION X
      0.6


                                                                GROUP 4
a
w
      0.5                                                   V
                                                       /,
0
(I)
                                                 / /
0
                                               / /
If)
w
I)
                                         / /
      0.3

                                   / /
0z
                             / /
F-
c0
 0
      02

                        //                                      GROUP 2


 0
                   //                                           GROUP 3
a-    0.1•

              /   /                                             GROUP 1


      0.0
             0123456789101112
              DURATION OF MARRIAGE IN YEARS
Figure 2: Estimated Proportion of Marriages Dissolved by Duration x.




                                  Legend for Figure 2




      Group 1         Did not cohabit, age at marriage 21 or greater, no premarital
birth, no marital birth, main breadwinner's occupation during respondent's childhood
not salaried employee.
     Group 2         Did not cohabit, age at marriage less than 21, premarital birth, no
marital birth, main breadwinner's occupation during respondent's childhood not
salaried employee.
     Group 3 =         Did   cohabit for three years or less, age at marriage 21 or
greater, no premarital birth, no marital birth, main breadwinner's occupation during
respondent's childhood not salaried employee.
     Group 4       Did cohabit for greater than three years, age at marriage 21 or
greater, premarital birth, no marital birth, main breadwinner's occupation during
respondent's childhood not salaried employee.
  ESTIMATED PROPORTION OF MARRIAGES DISSOLVED
                 BY DURATION X
      0.6


                                             GROUP 4

D  05
LU

0
(/)
Ct)
D     0.4
Ct)
LU
CD

      0.3


z0
F- 02                                        GROUP 2
0
0                                            GROUP 3
0
0     0.1
                                             GROUP 1


      0.0
            0123456789101112
             DURATION OF MARRIAGE IN YEARS
Table 1: Percentage of women experiencing marital dissolution
          by premarital cohabitation experience.*




                    Status of First Marriage at Time of Survey
                       Intact     Dissolved      All Women


Did cohabit             81.7         18.3             65.0
  premaritally         (1472)        (329)           (1801)

Did not cohabit         82.6         17.4             35.0
  pretnaritally         (800)        (168)            (968)


All Women               82.1         17.9            100.0
                       (2272)        (497)           (2769)




    *Numbers of cases are reported in parentheses.
     Table 2: Sample means of selected characteristics of
               ever—married women by premarital cohabitation
               experience and status of first marriage at time
                of survey.



                                   Women who            Women who
                                  did cohabit        did not cohabit
                                 premaritally         premaritally
                               First marriage       First marriage
                             Dissolved   Intact   Dissolved   Intact


Age at survey                    35.1      33.1      38.3         37.3
Age at first marriage           22.0       24.0      21.1         22.3
Age at cohabitation             20.4       21.9

Premarital conception            .64       .53        .57         .37

Premarital birth                 .38       .31        .19         .10

One or more marital              .67       .82        .86         .93
  births

Cohabited premaritally           .06       .09                   .003*
  more than once
Occupation of main
  breadwi nner during
  childhood:
 Salaried employee              .26        .25       .28          .24
 Skilled or unskilled           .48        .49       .43          .40
   worker
 Farmer or self—employed        .26        .26       .29         .36

Educa t ion:
 Less than secondary            .78        .65       .72         .75
 Completed secondary            .09        .17       .11         .10
 More than secondary            .13        .18       .17         .15


 *Two women cohabited premaritally more than once, though they did
    not cohabit immediately prior to their first marriage.
Table 3: Percentage distribution of duration of premarital
          cohabitation with first husband.




                  Duration (months)            Percent


                         1—3                    12.9
                         4—6                    10.8
                         7—9                     8.5
                        10—12                    8.4

                               1—12                    40.6


                        13—18                   13.9
                        19—24                   10.2
                        2 5—30                   7.9
                        3 1—36                   5.1

                           13—36                       37. 1



                        37—48                    9.1
                        4 9—60                   5.1
                         >60                     8.1

                               >36                     22.3
    Table 4: The monthly hazard of marital dissolution and
              covariate effects —— preliminary m'del.


                                            Parameter Antilog
Covar iate                                    (t-stat st ic)



Pren.r i tal cohabitation                        1.643
     1—3 months                                 (3.16)
Premarital cohabitat ion                         1.790
  >3 months                                     (5.56)
Premarital cohabitation                              •355*
  >1 time                                       (1


Age at marriage <21 years                        1.913
                                                (6.80)
Premarital birth                                 1.518
                                                (3.97)
First marital birth                              .749
                                               (2.37)
Educat ion:**
 Comp 1 e ted secondary                         1.077*
                                               (0.47)
More than secondary                             1.175*
                                               (1.16)
Occupation of main breadwinner
  during childhood:***
 Skilled or unskilled worker                    1.003*
                                               (0.02)

Salaried employee                                1 .460
                                               (3.02)
Table 4 (continued):



     Duration                            Monthly hazard
    (in years)                            (t—statistic)


         0—1                                   .000517
                                                (44.3)

         2—4                                   .000811
                                                (41 .9)

         5—7                                   .000713
                                                (38.3)

         8—11                                  .000785
                                                (37.8)

          12                                  .000940
                                                (37.9)



    Number of observations = 2769
    log likelihood = —3676.701



    *Estimate not significantly different from zero at the .05
        1 eve I


    **Omitted category is "less than secondary school
       graduate."
    ***itted category is "farmer or self—employed."

Note: t—statistics in this and subsequent tables refer to the
       actual parameters and not their antilogs.
     Table 5: The monthly hazard of marital dissolution and
               covariate effects——premarital cohabitation as
               a duration—dependent parameter.


                                          Parameter antilog
Cova r i ate                                (t—s tat i st i c)




Age at marriage <21 years                         1.879
                                                 (6.74)

Premarital birth                                  1.494
                                                 (3.94)

First marital birth                                .744
                                                 (2.42)

Occupation of main breadwinner                    1.493
  during childhood= salaried                     (3.87)
  employee


                                       Premarital cohabitation
 Duration         Monthly hazard (X)      parameter antilog
(in years)          (t—statistic)           (t—statistic)

   0—1                .000339                   3.226
                       (25.8)                  (3.57)

   2—4                .000818                   1.899
                       (35.2)                  (3.21)
   5—7                .000623                   2.294
                       (30.5)                  (3.40)
   8—11               .000934                   1.412*
                       (34.4)                  (1.64)

   12                .001107                   1.341*
                       (36.6)                  (1.49)

    Number of observations = 2769
    log likelihood = —3674.085


    *Estimate not significantly different from zero at the .05
          level
    Table 6: The monthly hazard of marital dissolution and
              covariate effects——only women who cohabited
                premaritally.
                                       Parameter antilog
Covariate                                (t—statistic)

Age at marriage <21 years                       2.079
                                               (6.08)

Premarital birth                                1.384
                                               (2.64)

First marital birth                              .714
                                               (2.38)

Occupation of main breadwinner                  1.534
  during childhoodsalaried                     (3.32)
  emp 1 oyee

Duration of Cohabitation
   6—18 months                                  1.148*
                                               (0.95)

   19—36 months                                 1.026*
                                               (0.15)

   >36 months                                   1.541
                                               (2.24)

     Duration                   Monthly hazard ()
    (inyears)                     (t—statistic)

        0—1                          .000929
                                      (36.7)

        2—4                          .001358
                                      (33.7)

        5—7                          .001282
                                      (30.6)

        8—11                         .001206
                                      (29.5)

        12                          .001357
                                      (28.3)

    Number of observations   1800
    log likelihood = —2634.804

 *Estimate not significantly different from zero at the .05 level.
Table 7: The monthly hazard of marital dissolution and covariate
          effects——only women who did not cohabit premaritally.

                                           Parameter antilog
Cova r i ate                                 (t—s tat i st i c)



Age at marriage <21 years                         1.742
                                                 (3.44)
Premarital birth                                  1.578
                                                 (2.25)
First marital birth                                .970*
                                                 (0.12)

Occupation of main breadwinner                    1.436
  during childhoodsalarjed                       (2.08)
  emp I oyee




Duration                 Monthly hazard (X)
(in years)                 (t—statistic)

     0—1                         .000326
                                  (24.3)

     2—4                         .000702
                                  (26.0)
     5—7                         .000513
                                  (23.2)

    8—11                         .000761
                                  (23.5)

    12                       .000901
                               (23.4)



    Number of observations = 969
    log likelihood = —1305.476



*Estimate not significantly different from zero at the .05 level.
