NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CRUDE OIL PRICE DIFFERENTIALS AND PIPELINE INFRASTRUCTURE
Shaun McRae
Working Paper 24170
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24170

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017

I thank participants in the NBER Hydrocarbon Infrastructure and Transportation workshop,
especially the organizers Jim Bushnell, Ryan Kellogg, and Erin Mansur, for many helpful
comments and suggestions. I also thank the Sloan Foundation for their generous financial
support. Jordán Mosqueda provided valuable research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Shaun McRae. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Crude Oil Price Differentials and Pipeline Infrastructure
Shaun McRae
NBER Working Paper No. 24170
December 2017
JEL No. L71,L95,Q35,Q41
ABSTRACT
Crude oil production in the United States increased by nearly 80 percent between 2008 and 2016,
mostly in areas that were far from existing refining and pipeline infrastructure. The production
increase led to substantial discounts for oil producers to reflect the high cost of alternative
transportation methods. I show how the expansion of the crude oil pipeline network reduced oil
price differentials, which fell from a mean state-level difference of $10 per barrel in 2011 to
about $1 per barrel in 2016. Using data for the Permian Basin, I estimate that the elimination of
pipeline constraints increased local prices by between $6 and $11 per barrel. Slightly less than 90
percent of this gain for oil producers was a transfer from existing oil refiners and shippers.
Refiners did not pass on these higher costs to consumers in the form of higher gasoline prices.

Shaun McRae
ITAM, Centro de Investigación Económica
Camino a Santa Teresa No. 930
Col. Héroes de Padierna
Ciudad de México
Mexico
shaun.mcrae@itam.mx

1

Introduction

Technological advances in oil production have reshaped the geography of oil markets in the
United States. Areas where production had been low or declining, such as the Bakken
shale region in North Dakota and the Permian Basin in western Texas, experienced rapid
and unanticipated growth. However, the boom in oil production overwhelmed the capacity
of existing infrastructure for transporting that oil. Oil producers received prices heavily
discounted to the price at market hubs, reflecting the higher cost of transporting oil by
pipeline alternatives such as rail or truck.
Price diﬀerentials created opportunities for investment in oil pipelines. Between 2010
and 2015, the total length of crude oil pipelines in the United States grew from 54,600 to
73,200 miles. Pipeline owners also reconfigured and expanded their existing networks to
match the new market conditions. The new pipelines improved transportation access not
only out of the Bakken and Permian regions but also from the Rocky Mountains, Great
Plains and Midwest to the crude oil hub in Cushing, Oklahoma. A small fraction of these
oil pipeline projects have been controversial, most notably the Keystone XL and the Dakota
Access pipelines.1
Most discussion of pipeline costs and benefits misses the primary economic motivation
for investment in transportation infrastructure: the reduction in trade costs. For pipeline
supporters, the raw materials and labor used in construction are the primary benefits of
the projects.2 For opponents, the main cost of building a pipeline is the environmental risk
associated with possible future oil spills. Both viewpoints ignore the economic eﬀects. New
oil pipelines reduce the cost of transporting oil out of expanding production regions to the
world market. The cost reduction means that oil producers face a smaller discount to the
world oil price for their output.
At an aggregate level, there appear to have been substantial benefits from the expansion
of the oil pipeline network. The production-weighted discount of the oil price received by
1

The proposed Keystone XL pipeline runs from Alberta, Canada to the United States Gulf Coast. In
2015, President Obama denied approval for the section from Alberta to Nebraska, although President Trump
reversed this decision in 2017. Environmental groups campaigned against the pipeline due to concerns about
greenhouse gas emissions from oil sands production in Canada. The Dakota Access project is a 1,172-mile
crude oil pipeline from North Dakota to Illinois. The pipeline route passes close to the Standing River Sioux
reservation. The tribe opposed its construction because of concerns about water contamination in the event
of an oil spill (Crooks, 2017).
2
For example, in signing a memorandum that advanced the Keystone and Dakota Access projects, President Trump discussed the 28,000 “great construction jobs” and a potential new requirement to build the
pipelines out of United States steel (Lynch et al., 2017).

2

producers in the United States, relative to a world price benchmark, has fallen from $28 per
barrel in September 2011 to $5 per barrel in December 2016. Volumes of oil transported by
rail have fallen from a peak of 35 million barrels during October 2014 to 13 million barrels
in December 2016. Although these aggregate changes appear correlated with the pipeline
network expansion, there may be other contributing factors. In particular, world oil prices
have halved since 2014, and oil production in the United States has fallen by 9 percent from
its peak.
This paper decomposes the economic benefits from the expansion of the pipeline network.
Additional pipeline capacity narrows the discount for oil producers from the world oil price.
Higher prices for producers mean higher costs for refiners, so part of the benefit for producers
is a transfer from oil refiners. There is also a transfer from oil shippers to oil producers, as
shippers with access to the constrained pipeline capacity had earned profits from the price
arbitrage. Two other components of the reduced discount represent overall welfare gains
for society. First, there is a reduction in transportation costs for the oil carried by the new
pipeline instead of a higher priced alternative. Second, there is an addition to oil production
as the result of the increase in producer prices.
I quantify these economic eﬀects at the level of an oil-producing region. The primary
analysis focuses on the Permian Basin in western Texas and southeastern New Mexico. I
also provide summary results for the Bakken region and Colorado. For each area, I assemble
a dataset of monthly pipeline capacity, incorporating publicly available information on the
construction and expansion of the pipeline network. I combine this data with information on
oil production, refinery capacity, flow volumes, and producer prices. There are two sources
for producer prices: monthly average wellhead prices at a state level (used for the Bakken and
Colorado analyses) and daily crude oil prices at major trading hubs (used for the Permian
Basin).
I use this data to construct a measure of excess production for each exporting region: the
monthly oil output, less the crude oil input capacity of the local refineries, less the pipeline
export capacity. I estimate the price discount as a function of this variable, then use these
estimates to simulate the eﬀect on producer prices of expansion in pipeline capacity. For
the Permian Basin, a hypothetical pipeline that eliminates excess production would increase
the producer price by between $6 and $11 per barrel. The results are used to calculate the
increase in profits for oil producers and the reduction in profits for oil refiners and oil shippers.
Most of the overall welfare gain is due to the elimination of higher shipping costs. However,
these benefits are smaller in magnitude than the transfer of the surplus from refiners and

3

shippers to oil producers. For the Permian Basin, slightly less than 90 percent of the gains
for producers is a transfer from refiners and shippers.
Previous papers study the causes of price diﬀerentials in crude oil markets. Between
2011 and 2014, the benchmark price for the United States interior, known as WTI Cushing,
traded at a substantial discount to international oil prices. Most closely related to this paper,
Agerton and Upton (2017) test alternative explanations for the price diﬀerential between
inland and coastal crude prices: pipeline constraints, refining constraints, and the crude oil
export ban. They use the proportion of shipments by rail and barge to quantify the pipeline
constraints and find that these explain most of the diﬀerential. McRae (2015) studies the
strategic incentives for an integrated refinery and pipeline owner to delay the alleviation of
pipeline constraints and profit from lower refinery input costs due to the discounted prices.
Buyuksahin et al. (2013) test alternative explanations for the WTI discount, highlighting
storage capacity constraints at Cushing as a contributing factor. Other papers have focused
on the eﬀect of a transportation constraint that was due to regulation, not infrastructure:
the ban on exports of crude oil from the United States that Congress lifted in December
2015 (Brown et al., 2014; Melek and Ojeda, 2017).
This paper makes several contributions to this existing literature on price diﬀerentials in
crude oil markets. Rather than focusing on the WTI Cushing discount and the infrastructure
constraints at Cushing, I analyze the general phenomena of oil price diﬀerentials and their
relationship to local and regional pipeline capacity. I use data on expansions to the oil
pipeline network to infer the periods in which capacity constraints are binding. The pipeline
data reveals changes in the marginal transportation method. As predicted by the theoretical
model, the results show that switching the marginal barrel from rail to pipeline will narrow
the price discount. This empirical approach also allows for a decomposition of the welfare
eﬀects of incremental changes to the pipeline network.
This paper complements the literature on the distributional eﬀects of changes in energy
prices. Hausman and Kellogg (2015) study the gains and losses by sector of the drop in
natural gas prices in the United States due to the availability of shale gas. They find that
the shale revolution made natural gas producers are worse oﬀ overall, due to lower revenue
for inframarginal production more than oﬀsetting the profit for higher output. Borenstein
and Kellogg (2014) study the passthrough of the WTI benchmark to gasoline. They find
no evidence of lower retail prices, suggesting that oil refiners captured the full benefit of the
wholesale price discount.
Finally, this paper contributes to the growing literature on the economic value of infras-

4

tructure investments.3 Improved transportation and communication connections have been
shown to increase economic growth through a reduction in trade costs. Donaldson (2012)
finds that the expansion of the railroad network in India reduced trade costs, reduced price
diﬀerentials between regions, and increased trade. Expansion of the railroad network in
the United States increased agricultural land values due to improvements in market access
(Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2016). Interstate highways in a city increased specialization in
sectors with high weight-to-value ratios (Duranton et al., 2014) and increased employment
(Duranton and Turner, 2012).
The next section provides descriptive evidence on the relationship between price diﬀerentials and pipeline investment. Section 3 describes a stylized model of price diﬀerentials
and provides details of the empirical methodology. Section 4 provides the main analysis of
the paper, focusing on the changes in price diﬀerentials for the Permian Basin caused by
increases in oil supply and the subsequent expansion of pipeline infrastructure. Section 5
summarizes the results for other regions. Section 6 concludes.

2

Descriptive evidence on price diﬀerentials and pipeline
infrastructure

After a long period of decline since the early 1970s, crude oil production in the United States
rebounded in the ten years after 2007. Production rose from 5.0 million barrels per day in
2008 to 8.9 million barrels per day in 2016 (Table 1). The halving of oil prices at the end
of 2014 caused only a small drop in production, which was higher in 2016 than in 2014 even
though producer prices had dropped by 56 percent.
This production boom was due to the development of horizontal drilling, microseismic
imaging, and hydraulic fracturing technologies. These innovations allowed for the profitable
exploitation of oil and natural gas resources in shale formations (Kilian, 2016). Because
of the new technology, much of the increase in oil production occurred in locations that
are distant from existing major oil fields. These areas lacked both the refining capacity to
process the crude oil locally as well as suﬃcient pipeline infrastructure to transport the oil
3
Many papers focus on the value of infrastructure projects in developing countries. For electrification,
Lipscomb et al. (2013) find large eﬀects of electrification on development indicators in Brazil, while Burlig
and Preonas (2016) find no medium-run development eﬀects from a rural electrification program in India.
Electrification reduced indoor air pollution (Barron and Torero, 2017) and increased female labor force
participation (Dinkelman, 2011; Grogan and Sadanand, 2013). Nevertheless, household willingness to pay
for electrification has been found to be below the cost of infrastructure provision (Lee et al., 2016).

5

to distant refineries.
The opportunity to transport oil from the new production regions led to the construction
of many new oil pipelines. Total crude oil pipeline length within the United States increased
from about 51,000 miles in 2008 to over 75,000 miles in 2016. The length of interstate oil
pipelines increased by 37 percent between 2010 and 2016. Not all of this increase in pipeline
length was the result of new construction. Some owners of natural gas, propane, or refined
petroleum product systems converted these to carry crude oil. Also, there were several
projects to expand the capacity of existing oil pipelines or to reverse the direction of flow.
The increase in pipeline capacity led to more oil being transported by pipeline. Deliveries
to refineries by pipeline increased from 7.3 to 10.2 million barrels per day between 2008 and
2016 (Figure 1).
When pipeline capacity is insuﬃcient, oil shippers use more expensive alternatives such
as rail and truck. Trainloads of oil pulling into refineries increased from 10,000 barrels per
day in 2010 to 430,000 barrels per day in 2014. Truckloads more than doubled over the same
period. These refinery statistics understate the growth of rail shipments, because shippers
may transfer crude oil from trains to pipelines for final delivery. Overall rail shipments
within the United States rose from 60,000 barrels per day in 2010 to 870,000 barrels per day
in 2014.
In absolute terms, the growth in pipeline deliveries overshadowed the increase in rail
shipments (Figure 1). After 2014, the use of rail declined. Refinery deliveries fell by about
25 percent between 2014 and 2016, and total rail shipments more than halved. Given that
oil production and pipeline deliveries were still growing over this period, the rail decline
is almost certainly due to the increased availability of cheaper pipeline infrastructure. In
the two years after 2014, at the same time that rail deliveries were falling, pipeline length
increased by 13 percent and pipeline deliveries by 8 percent.
The switch between pipeline and rail for oil transportation has a material eﬀect on oil
prices. There are many diﬀerent oil price measures. Buyers and sellers of oil use benchmark
prices for pricing oil shipments sold under long-term contracts. These contracts specify the
price diﬀerential to the benchmark (Fattouh, 2011). The two most widely used oil price
benchmarks are WTI Cushing and Brent.4 Other widely-used price benchmarks within the
United States are Light Louisiana Sweet (“LLS”) and WTI Midland. The wellhead price
4
The WTI Cushing price is an assessed price based on small transaction volumes at the pipeline hub
in Cushing, Oklahoma. There is a liquid, globally-traded futures market linked to WTI. However, because
the underlying commodity is delivered oil at Cushing, small changes in the supply and demand balance at
Cushing can have substantial eﬀects on WTI futures prices.

6

is the price per barrel received by oil producers and will be lower than international price
benchmarks, with the diﬀerence reflecting marketing and transportation costs.
Price dispersion for wellhead oil prices in the United States peaked in 2011 and has been
declining since then (Figure 2). The absolute price deviation is the non-negative diﬀerence
between the mean wellhead price in a state and the mean for the entire country. I calculate
the monthly average of these state-level price deviations, weighted by the oil production in
each state. The mean absolute price deviation increased from $2.16 per barrel in 2010 to
$6.02 per barrel in 2012, then declined to $1.21 per barrel in 2016.
An alternative measure of producer price diﬀerentials is the diﬀerence between a benchmark price such as LLS and the wellhead price. The mean wellhead discount to LLS, weighted
by state-level production, increased to over $25 per barrel in 2011 and then declined to an
average of $6.33 per barrel in 2016. Both measures of price diﬀerentials follow a similar
pattern.
Part of the explanation for the price diﬀerentials in 2011 and 2012 was the dislocation
in oil markets due to the pipeline capacity constraints out of Cushing. The glut of oil
accumulating at Cushing pushed down the WTI Cushing price relative to the LLS price on
the Gulf Coast and the Brent benchmark price. In response, pipeline companies constructed
a new pipeline and reversed and expanded an existing pipeline between Cushing and the Gulf
Coast. These pipeline projects alleviated the constraints at Cushing. The price diﬀerential
between WTI Cushing and LLS fell from $17.41 per barrel in 2012 to $3.67 per barrel in
2014.
The pipeline projects between Cushing and the Gulf Coast nearly eliminated the diﬀerential between the WTI Cushing and LLS price benchmarks. However, as described above,
many other oil pipelines have been constructed, expanded, or reconfigured. These projects
also aﬀected the prices received by oil producers. Both measures of oil price diﬀerentials continued to decline, even after 2014 (Figure 2). This decline was coincident with the increase
in pipeline shipments and decline in crude-by-rail.

3

Stylized model of pipeline expansion

In this section, I describe a simple model of price diﬀerentials in oil markets and how these are
aﬀected by the expansion of oil pipeline networks. This model can explain the observations
about price diﬀerentials, pipeline availability, and oil shipments in Section 2.

7

3.1

Theoretical framework

Suppose there is a small isolated market with local oil production S (Figure 3). This market
has a local refinery with demand for crude oil DR . With no exports, the oil price in autarky
will be p0 , with oil production equal to refinery consumption q0 .
The world price of oil pW is higher than p0 . Suppose there are two methods available for
transporting oil to the world market, pipeline and rail, with marginal costs cpipe < crail . Both
transportation methods have a limited capacity: K pipe and K rail . When there are exports,
the oil producers in this market will receive pW , less the marginal cost of the highest cost
transportation method.
The local refinery demand, combined with the two capacity-constrained transportation
methods, give an oil demand curve DRX . The intersection of DRX with S determines the oil
price p1 . The pipeline will be used to capacity. Some rail will be used to export oil, but there
will still be spare capacity. Oil production will be higher than under autarky, q1 instead of
q0 .
′
Now suppose there is an expansion of the pipeline to K pipe . This shifts out DRX to
′
DRX . With the expanded capacity, the demand curve crosses S at p2 , meaning that the
pipeline can carry all exports with no need for rail. Local oil producers receive a higher price
p2 and their production increases to q2 .
Who are the winners and losers of this expansion of pipeline capacity? Local oil producers
benefit from the higher price and are better oﬀ by the area A+B +C +D. However, the local
oil refinery is worse oﬀ by the area A. It now pays the price p2 for its input oil purchases,
not p1 . Oil shippers who had access to the original pipeline capacity are also worse oﬀ by
the area B. Before the pipeline expansion, they could buy oil at a price p1 and sell it at a
price pW , less the pipeline charge cpipe . They lose their profit of crail − cpipe for each barrel
shipped.
The areas A and B represent transfers from the refinery and shippers to the local oil
producers. In contrast, C and D represent overall welfare gains from the pipeline expansion.
Eliminating the use of rail for transportation reduces shipping costs by C. Higher prices
move oil producers along their supply curves, increasing production from q1 to q2 and profits
by the area D.
Most of the benefits from greater pipeline capacity require the expansion to be large
′
enough to eliminate the use of rail. For a smaller pipeline project, DRX would still interest S at p1 . Such an expansion would produce welfare benefits from switching some oil
transportation from rail to pipeline. Oil shippers with access to the pipeline capacity would
8

capture the benefits of the lower costs. There would be no change to the welfare of the local
oil refinery or oil producers.
The empirical methodology described in the next section will estimate the relationship
between pipeline capacity and local prices, then use this to perform the decomposition illustrated in Figure 3 for a hypothetical pipeline.

3.2

Empirical details

Let pt be the observed equilibrium price and qt be the observed production quantity, for an
oil-producing region in period t. There is a world market for oil with a price pW
t in period t.
D
I model the price diﬀerential, pt :
W
pD
t = pt − pt

This price diﬀerential depends on the relationship between oil production in the region
and the available infrastructure to refine or export the oil. Let Ktref be the oil refining
capacity in the region and Ktpipe be the capacity of oil pipelines out of the region. Excess
production, qtX , is defined as:
qtX = qt − Ktref − Ktpipe

(1)

X
The price diﬀerential pD
t is a nonlinear function of the excess production qt (Figure 4).
This function is modeled as in Equation 2:

X
X
X
X
pD
t = β0 + β1 qt + β2 I(qt > 0) + β3 I(qt > 0)qt + εt

(2)

For qtX < 0, the marginal barrel of oil production is exported by pipeline. Higher oil
production may lead to higher shipping costs and so increased price diﬀerentials (β1 > 0).
In part, this may reflect the use of successively higher-cost pipelines. Furthermore, oil
shippers sign long-term forward contracts with pipeline owners. Spot shipments that exceed
the contracted quantity will pay significantly higher tariﬀs.
Once the refinery and pipeline capacity is exhausted (qtX > 0), additional oil production
will have to be exported by higher cost transportation methods such as rail. These methods
may require a fixed cost (β2 > 0) representing the additional loading and unloading expenses.
The marginal cost of shipment may also be higher than for pipelines (β3 ).
One complication for the estimation of Equation 2 is that there may be multiple pipelines
9

out of the region, potentially with diﬀerent end locations and prices. Suppose some pipelines
V
end at the world market with price pW
t and other pipelines end at location V with price pt .
If V is the destination for the marginal barrel of oil, then the local oil price will be equal
to pVt less the pipeline shipping costs. Equation (2) would then overstate the pipeline cost
W
V
component of pD
t , as the price diﬀerential pt − pt would be attributed to the pipeline cost.
The eﬀect of multiple pipeline destinations on price diﬀerentials can be accounted for by
V
including a correction for pW
t − pt , as in Equation (3):
V
X
X
X
X
W
X
pD
t = β0 + β1 qt + β2 I(qt > 0) + β3 I(qt > 0)qt + β4 I(qt < 0 & Vmarg )(pt − pt ) + εt
(3)

This correction is only required when the marginal barrel of additional oil production is
being exported by pipeline (qtX < 0) and when the final destination for that oil is region V
instead of the world market W (Vmarg = 1). The coeﬃcient β4 represents the share of the
V
W
price diﬀerential pW
t − pt that is passed through to the price diﬀerential pt − pt , for only
those periods with V as the marginal pipeline destination.

4

Oil pipelines and the Permian Basin

4.1

Background information

The Permian Basin is a geologic region in western Texas and southeastern New Mexico that
encompasses several subbasins, including the Midland and Delaware Basins.5 The gush of
oil from Santa Rita No. 1 in 1923 initiated its growth into one of the major oil-producing
regions in the United States. Midland and Odessa became boom towns servicing the oil
industry, with the population of Midland growing from 1,400 to 23,000 in three years after
the Spraberry discovery in 1949 (Owen, 1951). Despite an occasional resurgence in drilling
in response to higher oil prices, Permian oil production entered a long decline, with the basin
described in 1978 as being “in the late afternoon of life and the sunset is almost in view”
(Stevens, 1978).
The sun rose again in the Permian with the twin innovations of horizontal drilling and
hydraulic fracturing. Producers were relatively slow to exploit these technologies in the
Permian, with their first use for oil production occurring in the Bakken and Eagle Ford
5

The Wolfcamp shale formation appears in both of these subbasins. In the Midland Basin, it lies beneath
the Spraberry Trend (Gaswirth et al., 2016). The complex, multilayered geology of the Spraberry-Wolfcamp
formation comprises one of the largest oil fields in the world.

10

shale formations (Warren, 2014). Production of oil in the Permian Basin grew from 920,000
barrels per day in 2010 to over 2 million barrels per day in 2016 (Figure 6 and Table 3).
Unlike in the Bakken and Eagle Ford, output continued to grow even after the large drop in
world oil prices at the end of 2014.
The increase in oil production quickly exceeded the capacity of the existing infrastructure
to refine the oil locally or export it by pipeline. There are three oil refineries located in or
nearby the Permian Basin: Big Spring and El Paso in Texas, and Navajo in New Mexico
(Figure 5).6 Apart from local refineries, four major crude oil pipelines were configured to
export oil out of the Permian Basin (Table 2). The Basin and Centurion pipelines had
their delivery point at the Cushing oil hub. The Phillips pipeline ran north to the Borger
refinery.7 Only the West Texas Gulf pipeline traveled east and southeast to delivery points
in Longview, Texas and Goodrich, Texas.
By the middle of 2012, the volume of Permian crude exceeded the capacity of the local
refineries and the available pipelines (Figure 6).8 The excess production required the use of
rail and truck to deliver the crude oil production to market. The volume of oil transported
by rail within PADD 3 increased throughout 2012 and peaked in early 2013 (bottom graph
of Figure 7). Most rail loading terminals in the PADD 3 region are in or near the Permian
Basin (Figure 5), with the majority of the rail unloading terminals located at refineries on
the Gulf Coast.9 This increase in rail volumes during 2012 is consistent with the model
presented in Section 3.1. As the supply curve for oil production shifted out, the quantity
exceeded the refinery and pipeline capacity, leading to the use of more expensive forms of
transportation.
As described by the model in Section 3.1, the spot price of oil for producers in the
Permian Basin equals the world price of oil, less the transportation cost for the marginal
barrel exported. The price diﬀerential between LLS and WTI Midland reached its maximum
at the end of 2012, with an average price diﬀerence exceeding $30 per barrel for the month
(middle graph of Figure 7). In part, this diﬀerence reflected the diﬀerential between the
LLS and WTI Cushing prices, due to constraints on the infrastructure between those two
6

Their total capacity is 297,000 barrels per day, an increase from 273,000 barrels per day in 2008 as the
result of capacity upgrades at Navajo in 2008–09 and Big Spring in 2014–15.
7
There are two refineries in northern Texas: Borger and Valero McKee. Separate Phillips pipelines
connect both Cushing and Odessa to the Borger refinery.
8
As discussed in the next section, I modify the nameplate capacity to reflect real-world operating constraints. All graphs and analysis use the adjusted numbers.
9
As shown on the map, there are also three rail loading terminals located in the Eagle Ford oil production
region of southern Texas. The public data does not allow me to distinguish between crude oil shipped out
of the Eagle Ford and Permian basins.

11

locations. However, this does not explain the full diﬀerential, because the price diﬀerence
between WTI Midland and WTI Cushing also increased to over $10 per barrel.
The low price of oil in the Permian Basin relative to the nearby market hubs encouraged
investment in new pipeline infrastructure. By the end of 2016, six new pipelines were in
service, resulting in the pipeline capacity out of the region more than doubling. Four carried
Permian crude directly to the Gulf Coast refinery complex. The Cactus pipeline connected
to new infrastructure constructed in the Eagle Ford region. The PELA pipeline delivered
oil to Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Three of the projects (Bridgetex, Cactus, Permian Express
II) were greenfield developments. Sunoco reversed the flow of its Amdel pipeline to carry
oil from west-to-east instead of east-to-west. Magellan also changed the flow direction of
its Longhorn pipeline and converted it back from refined products to crude oil. The PELA
project comprised some new segments and some reconfiguration of existing pipelines.
The Amdel and Longhorn pipeline projects led to the refinery and pipeline capacity
exceeding Permian production in the second part of 2013 (top graph in Figure 7). This
period coincided with low price diﬀerentials and low rail volumes.
Nevertheless, the continuing growth in Permian crude volumes, coupled with the extra
time required to complete greenfield pipeline projects, led to the second period of excess production during 2014. Rail volumes within PADD 3 were higher, although these did not reach
their level of early 2013. The price diﬀerential between LLS and WTI Midland increased to a
mean of $10.53 during 2014 (Table 3). Unlike in 2012, by 2014 the infrastructure constraints
between Cushing and the Gulf Coast had been resolved. Because the diﬀerential between
LLS and WTI Cushing was only a few dollars per barrel, the Cushing–Midland diﬀerential
closely tracked the LLS–Midland diﬀerential.
The completion of new pipeline projects during 2014 and 2015 once again relaxed the
pipeline infrastructure constraints. By the middle of 2015, excess production had fallen
below -0.2 million barrels per day. The diﬀerentials between LLS, WTI Midland, and WTI
Cushing were around $2 per barrel. Rail volumes in PADD 3 had fallen close to zero.
One notable feature of the data is the spike in rail volumes within PADD 3 during 2011,
even though there was suﬃcient pipeline capacity to export all production (Figure 7). At
this time, the marginal barrel out of the Permian Basin would be sent by pipeline to Cushing,
meaning that the WTI Midland price was equal to the WTI Cushing price less the pipeline
shipping cost. The unprecedented price diﬀerential between WTI Midland and LLS during
2011 was entirely due to the price diﬀerential between WTI Cushing and LLS, as during that
year there were not yet infrastructure constraints out of Midland. This diﬀerential created

12

an opportunity to send crude oil by train directly to the Gulf Coast and receive the LLS
price less the rail cost.

4.2

Data

The essential explanatory variable for the analysis is excess production qtX , defined in Equation (1). I obtain monthly crude oil production qt for the Permian Basin from EIA (2017).
Section 4.1 provides the identity of the refineries and pipelines that are used to calculate
the aggregate Ktref and Ktpipe . Refinery capacity, in barrels per calendar day, is from annual
EIA reports on refinery capacity. Pipeline capacity (including the in-service dates for new
or reconfigured pipelines) is compiled from industry reports and news sources, particularly
RBN Energy (2017) and Genscape (2015).
The maximum amount of oil that can be processed by an oil refinery may diﬀer from
its nominal capacity due to unplanned maintenance or outages, unanticipated changes in
oil input quality, and so on. I approximate the typical input volumes of the three refineries
using the average capacity utilization rate in the Inland Texas refining district, multiplied
by the nominal capacity in barrels per calendar day.10 Over the period 2008 to 2016, this
average capacity utilization was 92 percent.
Similarly, the maximum amount of oil that can be transported by a pipeline may diﬀer
from its nominal capacity due to downtime for maintenance or repairs, or diﬀerences in
characteristics of the oil. For example, reducing the API of crude oil from 40 to 35 (that is,
making the oil more viscous) reduces pipeline throughput by over three percent (Genscape,
2015). I use proprietary data on pipeline volumes from Genscape to calculate the maximum
flow observed, in all available months of data, for four pipelines: Basin, Centurion, Longhorn,
and Bridgetex (Genscape, 2016a,b). In aggregate, the highest observed volumes are equal
to 94 percent of their theoretical maximum. I apply this adjustment factor to the nominal
capacity of all pipelines in the data.
Estimation of Equation (3) requires information on the periods in which the pipeline
destination for the marginal barrel of oil is Cushing rather than the Gulf Coast. Using
the Genscape data on volumes, I observe a steady increase in flows through the Basin and
Centurion pipelines (with a delivery point at Cushing) until February 2013. Flows are
10

There are two measures of oil refinery capacity: barrels per stream day and barrels per calendar
day (https://www.eia.gov/tools/glossary/index.php?id=B). Barrels per stream day is the maximum
amount that refiners can process under optimal conditions over a 24-hour period. Barrels per calendar day
is a measure based on typical operating conditions.

13

always lower than the pipeline capacity. This evidence suggests a regime shift at that time,
coincident with the completion of pipelines to the Gulf Coast (Table 2).11

4.3

Empirical results

Table 4 shows results of the estimation of Equations (2) and (3) using data for the Permian
Basin. The dependent variable in all regressions is the monthly mean diﬀerence between
the LLS and WTI Midland prices. Adding the term based on the price diﬀerential between
WTI Cushing and LLS (β4 ) increases the explanatory power of the regression (Column 2 of
Table 4). This variable controls for the large price diﬀerentials during 2011 at a time when
the pipeline capacity constraints out of the Permian Basin were not binding.
Adding year fixed eﬀects to Equation (3) reverses the sign of β3 and slightly reduces
the magnitude of the other coeﬃcients (Column 3 of Table 4). The year controls allow for
changes in market structure over the ten years so that the eﬀect of capacity constraints is
estimated using only within-year variation in qtX .
The remaining columns provide additional robustness checks. Column 4 fixes the value of
β4 at −1, implying that there is full passthrough of the WTI Cushing to LLS price diﬀerential
to the WTI Midland to LLS price diﬀerential during those periods when pipelines to Cushing
receive the marginal oil output. Column 5 uses an alternative calculation for qtX in which
there is no adjustment of refinery capacity based on average capacity utilization in the region.
In all specifications, there is a positive and statistically significant coeﬃcient on qtX ,
meaning that higher oil production in the Permian Basin reduces the price received by oil
producers relative to the world price. In all but the first specification, there is a positive and
statistically significant coeﬃcient on I(qtX > 0), meaning that there is a further reduction
in the price received by Permian oil producers when their production exceeds the available
refinery and pipeline capacity. An increase in qtX from -150,000 to -50,000 barrels per day
would reduce the price received by Permian producers by $1.61 per barrel.12 A further
increase in qtX to 50,000 barrels per day, meaning the production exceeds the refinery and
pipeline capacity, would reduce the price received by $11.15 per barrel.13 As illustrated
in Figure 3, once production in a region exceeds the refining and pipeline capacity, there
11

I formalize this analysis using weekly data for the Basin, Centurion, Longhorn, and Bridgetex pipelines.
I regress the weekly change in deliveries to the Gulf Coast on the weekly change in total pipeline flows. For
2015, the results show that Gulf Coast deliveries absorb 85 percent of the weekly change in volumes.
12
Using the estimates from Column 3, the eﬀect of a production increment of 0.1 million barrels is β1 (0.1) =
1.61.
13
Again using the estimates from Column 3, the price eﬀect of this production increase is β1 (0.1) + β2 +
β3 (0.05) = 11.15.

14

is a discrete jump in price diﬀerentials (equivalently, a drop in the price received by local
producers) that reflects the higher marginal cost of alternative methods of transportation.
There are few observations in the data for which qtX is positive. Price diﬀerentials are
relatively noisy during these months. This data limitation makes it diﬃcult to estimate β3 ,
the diﬀerential slope term for positive values of qtX . Therefore, estimates of this coeﬃcient
are imprecise and sensitive to small changes in the specification (Table 4).
Figure 8 plots the data used in the estimation, with the dependent variable shown on the
vertical axis. Triangles indicate those months in which the marginal barrel of oil production
is sent by pipeline to Cushing, meaning that the WTI Cushing–LLS diﬀerential aﬀects the
price diﬀerential. The line of best fit uses the estimates of Column 3 in Table 4, setting
that the WTI Cushing–LLS price diﬀerential to zero. It illustrates the discrete jump in price
diﬀerentials once production exceeds refining and pipeline capacity.
I use the estimates from Table 4 to simulate the eﬀects of a hypothetical pipeline project
completed during September 2014.14 This pipeline is assumed to have a capacity to transport
100,000 barrels per day of oil out the Permian Basin, suﬃcient to reduce qtX to zero. Similar to
the calculation above, this hypothetical pipeline would increase oil prices for local producers
by between $5.72 and $10.86 per barrel (first row of Table 5). The columns of Table 5 are
based on the results for alternative specifications provided in Columns 2 to 5 of Table 4.
Based on the stylized model in Figure 3, I decompose the eﬀects of this price increase
on oil producers, refiners, and shippers. The higher oil price reduces the profits of the oil
refiners in the Permian Basin region by $2.7 million per day, due to the higher cost for their
crude oil inputs (Column 3 of Table 5). Oil shippers who had access to the existing pipelines
are notably worse oﬀ from the new pipeline construction. Their profits fall by $13 million
per day, reflecting the diminished opportunity for buying cheap Permian oil and selling it
at a higher price at Cushing or in the Gulf Coast. The losses for refiners and shippers are
gains for oil producers, in the form of higher oil revenues.
There are overall welfare gains as the result of the hypothetical pipeline. These comprise
the reduction in transportation costs for the oil that is shipped by pipeline instead of rail or
truck, valued at $0.95 million per day.15 Based on an assumed price elasticity of oil supply
of 1.0, the additional profit from higher oil production due to the higher oil price is about
$1 million per day.16
14

The choice of month and year determines the baseline oil production and oil prices.
This calculation assumes that there is no market power in the market for crude-by-rail transportation.
If there are markups in the cost of rail, then part of the reduction in transportation costs will be a transfer
from rail operators to oil producers, not an overall welfare gain for society.
16
Using Texas data from 1990 to 2007, Anderson et al. (forthcoming) find that output from existing wells
15

15

Across the four model specifications, oil producers are better oﬀ by between $9.8 and
$19.2 million per day as the result of the hypothetical pipeline project. Slightly less than
90 percent of this benefit is a transfer from oil refiners and shippers (final row of Table 5).
There is limited variation in the composition of producer gains across the four specifications.

4.4

Additional robustness checks

In the welfare results for oil refiners in Table 5, higher costs for crude oil reduce refinery profits
one-for-one. This relationship will be more complicated if refineries vary their production
quantities in response to changes in oil prices, or if they pass higher costs on to end consumers.
In this section I show that neither eﬀect will change the qualitative results in Section 4.3.
Manufacturing firms increase input purchases, and potentially total output, in response to
lower input prices. Therefore it is plausible that the refineries in the Permian Basin increased
their crude oil purchases and their refined product output during the periods of low WTI
Midland prices. One reason this may not happen is if refineries are already operating at or
near the capacity of their facilities. At a national level, this appears to have been the case.
Overall refinery capacity utilization in the United States has been above 80 percent in every
year since 1985 and is relatively unaﬀected by oil prices. It was 90.4 percent in 2014 and
89.7 percent in 2016, despite refinery acquisition costs being 56 percent lower in the latter
period.17 .
The aggregate trends match the local or refinery-level data for refineries in the Permian
Basin (Figure 9). There is no significant relationship between the price discount in the
Permian Basin and the refinery capacity utilization in the inland Texas region, based on
monthly data from 2007 to 2016 (left graph of Figure 9). The lack of relationship is in spite
of an oil price discount exceeding $20 per barrel in eleven of the months. The same result
holds for the two Texas refineries in the Permian Basin, based on monthly refinery-level data
for 2014 to 2016 (right graph of Figure 9). There is a slight negative relationship between
the price diﬀerential and the refinery utilization: lower relative input prices imply lower, not
higher, input volumes. There is no evidence that the refineries adjusted their purchases or
output in response to the drop in input prices.
does not respond to oil prices, but drilling of new wells has a price elasticity of about 0.7. Newell and
Prest (2017) use more recent data that includes shale oil wells. They estimate larger drilling elasticities:
approximately 1.2 for conventional and 1.6 for unconventional wells.
17
Refinery utilization is from the EIA Refinery Utilization and Capacity data, available at https://
www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/pet_pnp_unc_dcu_nus_a.htm. Refinery input costs are from the EIA Refinery
Acquisition Cost of Crude Oil data, available at https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/pet_pri_rac2_dcu_nus_
m.htm

16

The second possibility is that changes in regional oil prices did not aﬀect refinery profits
because they were passed on to consumers through lower or higher gasoline prices. In that
case, part of the benefit of the pipeline expansion for oil producers would be a transfer from
gasoline consumers.
The oil price diﬀerential between LLS and WTI Midland does not influence the gasoline
price diﬀerential between Midland and Houston (left graph of Figure 10). Over the period
2013 to 2016, the diﬀerence in oil prices fell from 75 cents per gallon to almost zero. At
the same time, the diﬀerence in gasoline prices showed no apparent trend, and the Houston
gasoline price was mostly lower than the Midland price. For El Paso, gasoline prices were 25
cents per gallon lower than Houston at the start of 2013 when the oil price diﬀerential was
highest (right graph of Figure 10). Nevertheless, the subsequent relationship is less clear. In
some periods, such as the end of 2014, the oil price declines at the same time as the gasoline
price increases.
I estimate Equation (4) using weekly gasoline price data for three cities in Texas: Houston,
El Paso, and Midland, with the latter two being in the Permian Basin. The results provide
a decomposition of the weekly change in the gasoline prices in the Permian Basin.
∆Ptretail

=

3
∑

LLS
W T IM idland
∆Pt−τ
+ ∆Pt−τ
+ εt

(4)

τ =0

In this equation, ∆Ptretail is the weekly change in the mean of the daily average gasoline
prices in the corresponding city, using information from Gas Buddy. ∆PtLLS is the weekly
change in the daily average LLS price. The estimation equation includes three lags of this
variable. ∆PtW T IM idland and its lags are defined similarly for the WTI Midland price. An
additional specification adds the weekly change in the WTI Cushing price and its lags.
Changes in the LLS price are the primary determinant of changes in gasoline prices in
all three cities (Table 6). For the three cities, the coeﬃcients on the weekly change in LLS
and its first two lags are statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero. The magnitude of
the estimates is similar across the three cities. There is a statistically significant negative
coeﬃcient on the change in the WTI Midland price for the Houston and El Paso regressions,
though the magnitude is less than that of the LLS terms. For the regressions that also
include the WTI Cushing price, the only statistically significant coeﬃcients are those for the
change in the LLS price and its lags. The WTI Midland and WTI Cushing coeﬃcients are
statistically insignificant and either small in magnitude or negative.
The results demonstrate that retail gasoline prices in Texas did not respond to the ge17

ographical variation observed for crude oil prices. Borenstein and Kellogg (2014) reported
a similar finding for gasoline prices in the Midwest at a time when WTI Cushing traded
at a substantial discount to LLS. They argued that the lack of constraints in refined product pipelines meant that Gulf Coast refineries were setting the marginal price for gasoline.
Based on the results in Table 6, the same argument applied for gasoline prices within Texas
between 2013 and 2016. This conclusion implies that gasoline consumers were unaﬀected by
oil price changes caused by additions to pipeline capacity.

5

Analysis for other oil-producing regions

Many regions contributed to the 3.9 million barrels per day increase in the United States oil
production between 2008 and 2016. Production in the Bakken region increased by nearly 1
million barrels per day over the period (Table 1). The state of Colorado, which shares the
Niobrara Region with Kansas, Nebraska, and Wyoming, increased its production by 240,000
barrels per day. The largest increase occurred in the Eagle Ford region of southern Texas,
where production rose from 50,000 barrels per day in 2008 to a peak of 1.7 million barrels
per day in March 2015.18 In this section I repeat the analysis in Section 4 using information
on prices and pipelines in the Bakken region and Colorado.
Since 2008, midstream companies have constructed three oil pipelines out of the DenverJulesburg Basin in Colorado. The White Cliﬀs pipeline connects Platteville, Colorado to
Cushing. It was commissioned in 2009 and expanded in 2014 and 2016 to a capacity of
215,000 barrels per day.19 In 2015, the Northeast Colorado Lateral pipeline connected to
the Pony Express pipeline from Guernsey, Wyoming to Cushing, allowing the export of an
additional 90,000 barrels per day out of Colorado. In late 2016, the new Saddlehorn pipeline
from Platteville to Cushing was commissioned, increasing capacity by a further 190,000
barrels per day.20 .
By the end of 2015, the capacity of the new pipelines exceeded oil production in Colorado
(top graph of Figure 12).21 Between 2013 and 2015, oil production exceeded refinery and
18

Production data from the EIA Drilling Report. Eagle Ford is not separately analyzed in this paper
because there is no public data available about producer prices in the region.
19
https://www.semgroupcorp.com/Operations/RoseRock/Transportation/Pipelines/WhiteCliffs.
aspx
20
http://okenergytoday.com/2016/09/saddlehorn-pipeline-platteville-cushing-operational/
21
The figure shows monthly output for Colorado. Most oil production in the state is in the DenverJulesburg Basin, in the southern part of the Niobrara Region. Total Niobrara production in December 2016
was 418,000 barrels per day, compared to 294,000 barrels per day for Colorado.

18

pipeline capacity. The diﬀerential between the WTI Cushing benchmark and the Colorado
wellhead price was high during this period (bottom graph of Figure 12), creating a $2.80 per
barrel discount for producers. The new pipeline projects increased prices for Colorado oil
producers, just as shown for Permian producers.
For the Bakken region, production first exceeded the available refining and pipeline capacity in 2010 (top graph of Figure 11). This condition continued through the end of 2016,
in spite of the construction of new pipelines and a refinery and the expansion of existing
facilities. In 2016, there were three pipeline routes out of the Bakken Region: south to
Wyoming, north to Canada, and east to Minnesota.22 Capacity along all of these routes
increased. With the completion of the Butte Loop in 2014 and other projects, maximum
volumes on the Butte pipeline system to Wyoming rose from 92,000 barrels per day in 2007
to 260,000 barrels per day in 2016. Double H is a smaller pipeline to Wyoming, commissioned in 2015.23 . The pipeline company Enbridge increased the capacity on its Line 81 to
Minnesota to 214,000 barrels per day. Its new Line 26 to Manitoba, Canada, provided a
further 145,000 barrels per day of pipeline capacity. The Dakota Prairie Refinery, with a
processing capacity of 20,000 barrels per day, was the first new oil refinery to be built in the
United States since the 1970s. All of these projects increased the total Bakken refining and
pipeline capacity from 232,000 barrels per day in 2007 to 833,600 barrels per day in 2016.24
Unlike the Permian and Colorado results, the price diﬀerential for North Dakota oil
producers is uncorrelated with excess production (bottom graph of Figure 11). One reason
is that excess production has been positive since 2011. There is almost no variation in the
data between positive and negative excess production. Transportation options out of the
Bakken are relatively more complex. Pipeline and rail alternatives connect to other pipeline
systems that may also be congested, and rail can potentially deliver oil to refineries across
North America.25 Compared to the Permian Basin, this makes it diﬃcult to determine the
output price and transportation cost for the marginal barrel.
22

The Dakota Access Pipeline, from North Dakota to Illinois, began operating in 2017.
https://www.kindermorgan.com/pages/business/products_pipelines/doubleH.aspx
24
Information on infrastructure projects in North Dakota is primarily from the North Dakota Pipeline
Authority: https://northdakotapipelines.com/about-us/.
25
Covert and Kellogg (2017) develop a model in which oil shippers choose between pipeline and rail to
arbitrage price diﬀerences between regions. Rail has the advantages of not requiring a long-term commitment
and providing the flexibility to serve multiple locations. They calibrate their model using data for the Bakken
region to show that lower rail transportation costs reduce investment in pipeline capacity.
23

19

6

Conclusion

Large investments in transportation infrastructure have reshaped the North American crude
oil pipeline network over the past decade. The reconfigured system provides access to world
markets for the near-doubling in oil production since 2008. As quantified in this paper,
these new pipelines nearly eliminated the discount to world oil prices that many United
States producers faced between 2011 and 2014, leading to substantial improvements in oil
producer surplus. Most of the gain came at the expense of oil shippers and oil refiners who
benefited from the price diﬀerentials due to infrastructure constraints.
This analysis focuses purely on the price eﬀects of pipeline investment. However, there
may be changes in negative externalities that aﬀect the overall welfare outcome. Clay et
al. (2017) show that the external costs from air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions are
almost twice as large for rail as they are for pipeline transportation of crude oil. They also
report costs associated with spills and accidents that are six times greater for rail than for
pipelines. A complete accounting of the welfare change from pipeline investments would also
incorporate this reduction in the externalities from rail transportation.

20

References
Agerton, Mark and Gregory Upton, “Decomposing Crude Price Diﬀerentials: Domestic
Shipping Constraints or the Crude Oil Export Ban?,” Technical Report 2017.
Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and Stephen W. Salant, “Hotelling Under Pressure,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Barron, Manuel and Maximo Torero, “Household electrification and indoor air pollution,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2017.
Borenstein, Severin and Ryan Kellogg, “The Incidence of an Oil Glut: Who Benefits
from Cheap Crude Oil in the Midwest?,” Energy Journal, 2014, 35 (1), 15–34.
Brown, Stephen PA, Charles Mason, Alan Krupnick, and Jan Mares, “Crude
Behavior: How Lifting the Export Ban Reduces Gasoline Prices in the United States,”
2014.
Burlig, Fiona and Louis Preonas, “Out of the Darkness and Into the Light? Development
Eﬀects of Rural Electrification,” Technical Report 2016.
Buyuksahin, Bahattin, Thomas K Lee, James T Moser, and Michel A Robe,
“Physical markets, paper markets and the WTI-Brent spread,” Energy Journal, 2013, 34
(3).
Clay, Karen, Akshaya Jha, Nicholas Muller, and Randall Walsh, “The External Costs of Transporting Petroleum Products by Pipelines and Rail: Evidence From
Shipments of Crude Oil from North Dakota,” Working Paper 23852, National Bureau of
Economic Research September 2017.
Covert, Thomas R. and Ryan Kellogg, “Crude by Rail, Option Value, and Pipeline
Investment,” Working Paper 23855, National Bureau of Economic Research September
2017.
Crooks, Ed, “Work restarts on Dakota Access oil pipeline,” Financial Times, February 9
2017.
Dinkelman, Taryn, “The eﬀects of rural electrification on employment: New evidence from
South Africa,” The American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 3078–3108.

21

Donaldson, Dave, “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure,” 2012.
and Richard Hornbeck, “Railroads and American economic growth: A “market access”
approach,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (2), 799–858.
Duranton, Gilles and Matthew A Turner, “Urban growth and transportation,” Review
of Economic Studies, 2012, 79 (4), 1407–1440.
, Peter M Morrow, and Matthew A Turner, “Roads and Trade: Evidence from the
US,” Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (2), 681–724.
EIA, “Drilling Productivity Report May 2017,” Technical Report 2017.
Fattouh, Bassam, An anatomy of the crude oil pricing system 2011.
Gaswirth, Stephanie B., Kristen R. Marra, Paul G. Lillis, Tracey J. Mercier,
Heidi M. Leathers-Miller, Christopher J. Schenk, Timothy R. Klett,
Phuong A. Le, Marilyn E. Tennyson, Sarah J. Hawkins, Michael E. Brownfield,
Janet K. Pitman, and Thomas M. Finn, “Assessment of undiscovered continuous oil
resources in the Wolfcamp shale of the Midland Basin,” Technical Report, U.S. Geological
Survey Fact Sheet 2016-3092 2016.
Genscape, “Mid-Continent Pipelines Report: Frequently Asked Questions,” Technical Report 2015.
, “Gulf Coast Pipeline Report,” 2016. Data from 2009 to 2016.
, “Mid-Continent Pipelines Report,” 2016. Data from 2009 to 2016.
Grogan, Louise and Asha Sadanand, “Rural Electrification and Employment in Poor
Countries: Evidence from Nicaragua,” World Development, 2013, 43 (Supplement C), 252
– 265.
Hausman, Catherine and Ryan Kellogg, “Welfare and Distributional Implications of
Shale Gas,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2015.
Kilian, Lutz, “The impact of the shale oil revolution on US oil and gasoline prices,” Review
of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2016, 10 (2), 185–205.

22

Lee, Kenneth, Edward Miguel, and Catherine Wolfram, “Experimental Evidence on
the Demand for and Costs of Rural electrification,” Technical Report, National Bureau of
Economic Research 2016.
Leroux, Bailey, “Pipe Dreams,” PB Oil and Gas, November 2012.
pboilandgasmagazine.com/pipe-dreams/.

https://

Lipscomb, Molly, Ahmed Mobarak, and Tania Barham, “Development Eﬀects
of Electrification: Evidence from the Topographic Placement of Hydropower Plants in
Brazil,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5 (2), 200–231.
Lynch, David J., Barney Jopson, and Ed Crooks, “Trump ends Obama block on
Keystone XL and Dakota Access pipelines,” Financial Times, January 24 2017.
McRae, Shaun, “Vertical Integration and Price Diﬀerentials in the U.S. Crude Oil Market,”
Working paper, 2015.
Melek, Nida Çakır and Elena Ojeda, “Lifting the US Crude Oil Export Ban: Prospects
for Increasing Oil Market Eﬃciency,” Economic Review, 2017.
Newell, Richard G. and Brian C. Prest, “The Unconventional Oil Supply Boom: Aggregate Price Response from Microdata,” Working Paper 23973, National Bureau of Economic
Research October 2017.
Owen, Russell, “New Boom Town,” New York Times, April 23 1951, p. 184.
RBN Energy, “With a Permian Well, They Cried More, More, More,” Technical Report,
A RBN Energy Drill Down Report 2017.
Stevens, William K., “Texas Oilfield Is Revived By the Increase in Prices,” New York
Times, April 15 1978, p. 461.
Warren, Jennifer, The Chronicles of an Oil Boom: Unlocking the Permian Basin, Concept
Elemental, 2014.

23

Figure 1: U.S. refinery deliveries of crude oil by method of transportation, 2007–16
12.5

Pipeline

Rail

Million barrels/day

10.0

7.5

5.0

2.5

0.0
2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

Notes: Data from the EIA “Refinery Receipts of Crude Oil by Method of Transportation” report, available
at https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/pet_pnp_caprec_dcu_nus_a.htm

24

Figure 2: U.S. wellhead crude oil price diﬀerentials, 2004–16

Weighted mean price differential ($/barrel)

30

20

Discount to LLS

10

0

Absolute differential
Jan 2008

Jan 2010

Jan 2012

Jan 2014

Jan 2016

Notes: State-level wellhead oil price data is from the EIA “Domestic Crude Oil First Purchase Prices by
Area” report, available at https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/pet_pri_dfp1_k_m.htm. LLS price data is
from Bloomberg. Absolute wellhead price diﬀerential is the mean of the absolute diﬀerence between the
state-level wellhead price and the national average wellhead price. Discount to LLS is the mean diﬀerence
between LLS and the state-level wellhead price. Both means are weighted by the oil production in each
state.

25

Figure 3: Stylized model of the welfare eﬀects of oil pipeline expansions

A

C

B

26

D

Figure 4: Empirical model of price diﬀerentials and infrastructure

World price

Price differential

Local price

Local refinery
capacity

Pipeline capacity
out of region
Excess production

27

Figure 5: Crude oil refining and transportation infrastructure out of the Permian Basin

Original pipeline
New pipeline after 2012
Oil refinery
Main Permian fields
Rail loading terminal
Rail unloading terminal

Notes: Oil field locations are from the EIA “Tight Oil and Shale Gas Plays” shape file. Refinery locations are from the EIA “Petroleum Refineries” shape file. Most pipeline paths are
from the EIA “Crude Oil Pipelines” shape file. Crude oil rail loading and unloading terminals, as at November 2014, are from the EIA “Crude Oil Rail Terminals” shape file. These
map files are available at https://www.eia.gov/maps/layer_info-m.php. The routes for the
Permian Express II and PELA pipelines are not included in the EIA data. Approximate routes
were created using OpenStreetMap (http://www.openstreetmap.org), based on information from
http://www.sunocologistics.com/Customers/Business-Lines/Asset-Map/241/.

28

Figure 6: Crude oil production and combined refinery and pipeline capacity in the
Permian Basin
2.5

Million barrels/day

2.0

1.5

Refinery + pipeline capacity
1.0

Production
0.5

0.0
2008

2010

2012

29

2014

2016

Figure 7: Excess supply, price diﬀerentials, and rail volumes for the Permian Basin

Million barrels/day

0.1
0.0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3

Excess supply
−0.4

$/barrel

30

20

10

LLS − WTI Midland
0

Million barrels/day

WTI Cushing − WTI Midland

0.10

0.05

0.00

Rail volumes
2008

2010

2012

30

2014

2016

Figure 8: Excess supply and price diﬀerentials for the Permian Basin

Price difference ($/barrel)

30

20

10

0
−0.4

−0.3

−0.2

−0.1

0.0

0.1

Excess supply (million barrels/day)

Notes: The scatter graph shows the 120 observations of qtX and pD
t used for the regressions in Table
4. Observations with a triangle are those for which the marginal barrel of oil production is sent by
pipeline to Cushing (and so the LLS–WTI Midland price diﬀerentials need to be adjusted by the
WTI Cushing–LLS diﬀerential). The fitted line is based on Column 3 of 4, assuming the year is
2016 and the WTI Cushing–LLS diﬀerential is zero.

31

Figure 9: Refinery capacity utilization and price diﬀerentials

Inland Texas Refineries

1.2

Individual Refineries

Refinery capacity utilization

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

Refinery
Big Spring

0.2

El Paso
0.0
0

10

20

0

30

LLS − WTI Midland differential

5

10

15

LLS − WTI Midland differential

Notes: The left graph shows the monthly mean capacity utilization of the refineries in the Inland Texas refining district, plotted against the LLS to WTI Midland price diﬀerential. Refinery
data is from the monthly EIA Refinery Utilization and Capacity report (https://www.eia.gov/
dnav/pet/pet_pnp_unc_dcu_nus_m.htm). The right graph shows the monthly capacity utilization for the two Texas refineries in the Permian Basin (Big Spring and El Paso), for the period 2014 to 2016. Individual refinery data is from the refinery Monthly Report and Operations
Statements, made available by the Railroad Commission of Texas (http://www.rrc.texas.gov/
oil-gas/research-and-statistics/refinery-statements/).

32

Figure 10: Price diﬀerentials for crude oil and retail gasoline in Midland and El Paso

0.50

0.75

Price difference ($/gallon)

Price difference ($/gallon)

0.75

Crude oil (LLS − WTI Midland)

0.25

0.00

0.50

Crude oil (LLS − WTI Midland)

0.25

0.00

Gasoline (Houston − Midland)

Gasoline (Houston − El Paso)

−0.25

−0.25

Jan 2013 Jan 2014 Jan 2015 Jan 2016 Jan 2017

Jan 2013 Jan 2014 Jan 2015 Jan 2016 Jan 2017

Notes: Both graphs show the weekly mean diﬀerence between the WTI Midland and LLS oil prices,
in dollars per gallon. The left graph shows the weekly mean diﬀerence between the daily mean
gasoline price in Midland and the daily mean gasoline price in Houston. The right graph shows
this comparison for El Paso and Houston. Retail gasoline prices are from Gas Buddy.

33

Figure 11: Production, infrastructure, and price diﬀerentials for the Bakken region
1.25

Million barrels/day

1.00

0.75

0.50

Refinery + pipeline capacity
0.25

Production
0.00
2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

Price difference ($/barrel)

20

15

10

5

0
0.0

0.2

Excess supply (million barrels/day)

34

0.4

0.6

Million barrels/day

Figure 12: Production, infrastructure, and price diﬀerentials for Colorado

0.4

0.2

Refinery + pipeline capacity

Production
0.0
2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

Price difference ($/barrel)

15

10

5

0
−0.2

−0.1

0.0

Excess supply (million barrels/day)

35

0.1

Table 1: Summary statistics about U.S. crude oil production, infrastructure, and prices,
2007–16
Variable

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

Mean

U.S. crude oil production (mbd)
Permian basin (mbd)
Bakken (mbd)
Colorado (mbd)
Eagle Ford region (mbd)

5.00
0.87
0.18
0.08
0.06

5.48
0.92
0.32
0.09
0.08

6.49
1.19
0.69
0.14
0.63

8.76
1.63
1.12
0.26
1.45

8.88
2.02
1.06
0.32
1.25

6.76
1.26
0.63
0.17
0.65

Total pipeline length (000 miles)
Interstate pipeline length (000 miles)
Intrastate pipeline length (000 miles)

50.96

54.63
37.94
16.69

57.46
39.48
17.98

66.81
47.00
19.81

75.74
51.93
23.80

59.82
43.92
19.66

Refinery deliveries by pipeline (mbd)
Refinery deliveries by rail (mbd)
Refinery deliveries by truck (mbd)

7.34
0.01
0.19

7.71
0.01
0.20

8.44
0.09
0.36

9.43
0.43
0.42

10.17
0.33
0.45

8.46
0.15
0.31

0.06

0.38

0.87

0.39

0.47

94.22
100.33
103.09

74.64
79.35
82.62

94.63
94.21
111.62

87.71
93.67
97.34

38.37
43.01
44.70

74.84
78.52
85.02

3.53
8.87

2.16
7.97

6.02
16.99

2.50
9.63

1.21
6.33

3.13
10.18

Rail shipments within U.S. (mbd)
U.S. wellhead price ($/barrel)
WTI Cushing price ($/barrel)
LLS price ($/barrel)
Mean abs. price deviation ($/barrel)
Mean discount from LLS ($/barrel)

Notes: The table shows annual means for every second year between 2008 and 2016, as well as
the overall mean for the 10-year period from 2007 to 2016.
Crude oil production is from the
EIA “Crude Oil Production” and Drilling Productivity reports.
Crude oil pipeline length data
is from the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration annual report data from hazardous liquids operators (available at https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/pipeline/library/data-stats/
distribution-transmission-and-gathering-lng-and-liquid-annual-data). Refinery delivery data is
from the EIA “Refinery Receipts of Crude Oil by Method of Transportation” report. Domestic rail shipments
of crude oil are from the EIA “Movements of Crude Oil and Selected Products by Rail” report. U.S. wellhead
prices are from the EIA “Domestic Crude Oil First Purchase Prices by Area” report. WTI Cushing and LLS
prices are from Bloomberg.
mbd = millions of barrels per day.

36

Table 2: Crude oil pipelines out of the Permian Basin

Pipeline name

Start date

Destination

Original pipelines
Basin
Centurion2
Phillips3
West Texas Gulf4
New pipelines since 2012
Amdel5
Longhorn6
Bridgetex
Cactus
Permian Express II
PELA7
1
2

3

4

5
6

7

Sep 2012
Apr 2013
Sep 2014
Feb 2015
Aug 2015
Aug 2016

Length
Capacity
(miles) (barrels/day)1

Cushing, OK
Cushing, OK
Borger, TX
Goodrich, TX

530
2,700
289
580

450,000
140,000
132,000
340,000

Nederland, TX
Houston, TX
Houston, TX
Gardendale, TX
Nederland, TX
Baton Rouge, LA

503
450
400
310
334

40,000
275,000
300,000
330,000
200,000
100,000

Unless otherwise stated, length and capacity data are from RBN Energy (2017).
Centurion pipeline length includes oil gathering pipelines in both the Texas and New Mexico parts of the
Permian Basin
Information from http://www.phillips66partners.com/EN/Pages/borger-crude-assets.aspx. Capacity is for the combined Line 80 and Line WA pipelines.
The capacity of the West Texas Gulf pipeline was increased from 250,000 to 340,000 barrels per day in
2013.
Amdel was an existing pipeline that was reversed in 2012.
The Longhorn pipeline was built in the 1950s to transport oil from the Permian Basin to the Gulf Coast.
It was reversed to 2005 and converted to carry refined products from Houston to El Paso. In 2013 it
was reversed again and converted back to its original purpose. Its capacity was expanded to 275,000
barrels/day in mid-2014 (Leroux, 2012).
The PELA pipeline project included a combination of new pipeline segments and the reversal of existing
pipelines.

37

Table 3: Summary statistics about Permian Basin crude oil production, infrastructure,
and prices, 2007–16
Variable

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

Mean

Oil production (mbd)

0.87

0.92

1.19

1.63

2.02

1.26

Local refining capacity (mbd)
Adjusted
Pipeline export capacity (mbd)
Adjusted

0.27
0.25
0.97
0.91

0.29
0.27
0.97
0.91

0.29
0.27
1.01
0.95

0.29
0.27
1.68
1.58

0.30
0.27
2.31
2.17

0.29
0.26
1.33
1.25

0.00

0.05

0.04

0.00

0.03

103.09
100.33
100.19

82.62
79.35
79.06

111.62
94.21
90.33

97.34
93.67
86.81

44.70
43.01
42.93

85.02
78.52
77.11

2.90

3.56

21.29

10.53

1.77

7.91

-0.29
0.00
1.00

-0.26
0.00
1.00

-0.00
0.50
0.50

0.02
0.58
0.00

-0.36
0.00
0.00

-0.19
0.13
0.55

Intra-PADD 3 rail shipments (mbd)
LLS ($/barrel)
WTI Cushing ($/barrel)
WTI Midland ($/barrel)
LLS - WTI Midland ($/barrel)
qtX (mbd)
I(qtX > 0)
Vmarg

Notes: Values for refining and pipeline capacities are as at December. All other variables are the means over
the corresponding year, with the final column showing the means over the 10-year period from 2007 to 2016.
mbd = millions of barrels per day.

38

Table 4: Estimation of price diﬀerentials for Permian Basin (WTI Midland)

qtX
I(qtX > 0)
I(qtX > 0) qtX

No β4

Base

Year FE

β4 = −1

Unadj Ktref

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

39.49∗∗∗
(12.95)

23.34∗∗∗
(4.00)

16.12∗∗∗
(5.42)

13.43∗∗∗
(4.83)

15.21∗∗
(6.02)

4.59
(6.18)

11.56∗∗
(5.69)

9.04∗∗
(3.91)

12.61∗∗∗
(4.42)

13.09∗∗
(6.06)

−68.19∗∗
(30.92)

V
I(qtX < 0 & Vmarg )(pW
t − pt )

Constant

Year fixed eﬀects
Observations
Adj. R2

15.44∗∗∗
(4.31)
N
120
0.543

−52.04∗
(27.06)

9.99
(25.38)

−0.76∗∗∗
(0.04)

−0.68∗∗∗
(0.15)

8.47∗∗∗
(1.02)

5.96∗∗∗
(2.04)

N
120
0.841

Y
120
0.883

−17.43
(22.88)

−73.73
(56.04)
−0.65∗∗∗
(0.20)

4.13∗∗∗
(1.52)
Y
120
0.829

6.10∗∗
(2.50)
Y
120
0.889

Notes: Each observation is one month, with data covering the period January 2007 to December
2016. The dependent variable in all equations is the diﬀerence between the LLS and WTI Midland
prices, in $ per barrel. The variable qtX is the diﬀerence between oil production and refinery and
pipeline capacities, in millions of barrels per day. Vmarg is equal to 1 when marginal pipeline flows
are delivered to Cushing, assumed to be before March 2013. In equation 4, the coeﬃcient on
the fourth line is set equal to -1 (implying a complete passthrough of the WTI Cushing to LLS
diﬀerential when Cushing pipelines are marginal). In equation 5, refinery capacities are unadjusted
barrels per calendar day. Standard errors are Newey-West with 12 lags.
∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01

39

Table 5: Welfare decomposition for hypothetical new oil pipeline out of the Permian
Basin, as of September 2014
$ million/day
Local oil price increase ($/barrel)
Increase in oil producer revenue (A+B+C+D)
Reduction in oil refiner profits (A)
Reduction in oil shipper profits (B)
Reduction in oil transportation costs (C)
Profit from higher oil production (D)
Transfer % of higher producer profit

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

6.36

10.04

10.87

5.71

10.95

17.65

19.19

9.81

1.71
7.94
0.90
0.40

2.70
13.01
0.95
0.99

2.92
13.94
1.17
1.15

1.54
7.01
0.94
0.32

88.21

89.01

87.87

87.16

Notes: The results in the table show a welfare decomposition for the eﬀect of a hypothetical
new pipeline out of the Permian Basin, with a capacity of 100,000 barrels per day, placed in
service in September 2014. Each column shows the decomposition based on the estimates for the
corresponding columns in Table 4. The first row shows the predicted increase in the WTI Midland
price due to the pipeline. The next rows show the eﬀects on producer, refiner, and shipper profits,
with the letters corresponding to the areas in Figure 3. Profits from higher oil production are based
on an assumed supply elasticity of 1.0. The final row shows the share of the higher oil producer
profits that correspond to transfers from oil refiners and shipper.

40

Table 6: Estimation of retail gasoline price changes on benchmark oil prices
∆Houston

∆El Paso

∆Midland

∆Houston

∆El Paso

∆Midland

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.26∗∗∗

0.31∗∗∗

0.24∗∗∗

0.34∗∗∗

0.43∗∗∗

(0.07)

(0.07)

(0.07)

(0.13)

(0.14)

0.32∗∗∗
(0.10)

∆LLSt−1

0.31∗∗∗
(0.06)

0.37∗∗∗
(0.06)

0.34∗∗∗
(0.06)

0.31∗∗
(0.12)

0.46∗∗∗
(0.13)

0.32∗∗
(0.13)

∆LLSt−2

0.22∗∗∗
(0.07)

0.26∗∗∗
(0.06)

0.20∗∗
(0.08)

0.26
(0.19)

0.34∗∗
(0.14)

0.21
(0.18)

∆LLSt−3

0.05
(0.11)

0.07
(0.10)

0.07
(0.11)

0.04
(0.09)

0.15
(0.11)

0.09
(0.09)

−0.12∗
(0.06)

−0.18∗∗∗
(0.06)

−0.06
(0.06)

−0.05
(0.08)

−0.07
(0.09)

−0.01
(0.08)

∆LLSt

∆WTI Midlandt

∆WTI Midlandt−1

0.03
(0.06)

−0.03
(0.04)

0.04
(0.06)

0.0004
(0.10)

0.03
(0.08)

0.01
(0.11)

∆WTI Midlandt−2

0.06
(0.06)

0.04
(0.06)

0.03
(0.08)

0.09
(0.10)

0.09
(0.10)

0.05
(0.15)

∆WTI Midlandt−3

0.13
(0.11)

0.09
(0.12)

0.11
(0.12)

0.10
(0.13)

0.13
(0.18)

0.12
(0.15)

−0.17
(0.17)

−0.25
(0.18)

−0.14
(0.13)

∆WTI Cushingt−1

0.05
(0.18)

−0.15
(0.19)

0.07
(0.21)

∆WTI Cushingt−2

−0.07
(0.25)

−0.13
(0.22)

−0.02
(0.28)

∆WTI Cushingt−3

0.04
(0.14)

−0.12
(0.24)

−0.03
(0.18)

209

209

∆WTI Cushingt

Observations

209

209

209

209

Notes: Each observation is one week, with data covering the period January 2013 to December
2016. The dependent variable in each equation is the change in the weekly mean gasoline price in
each city. Covariates are the change in the weekly mean benchmark crude oil price (in $/gallon)
and up to three lags. Standard errors are Newey-West
with 12 lags.
41
∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01

