                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             TRADE IN NOMINAL ASSETS:
                            MONETARY POLICY, AND PRICE
                           LEVEL AND EXCHANGE RATE RISK




                                Lars E.O. Svensson




                              Working Paper No. 2417




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 1987




Support from the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
I thank Jeremy Greenwood, Peter Howitt, Sweder van Wijnbergen, participants in
the NBER Summer Institute, and in particular, Torsten Persson for helpful dis-
cussions and comments. Errors and obscurities are my own responsibility. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper #2417
                                                      October 1987


                              Trade in Nominal Assets:
              Monetary Policy, and Price Level and Exchange Rate Risk




                                     ABSTRACT




        In a previous paper, "Trade in Risky Assets," I have analyzed the pattern

of iiiternational trade in risky real assets between barter economies, relyillg

on the Law of Comparative Advantage and using autarky asset price differences

to predict the pattern of asset trade.    Iii this paper the analysis is extended

to international trade in nominal assets (assets with returns paid in

currencies) between monetary economies. The risk characteristics of real

returns on nominal assets depend on price level and exchange rate risk, and

therefore on monetary policy. It is examined how different combinations of

monetary policies and exchange rate regimes affect nominal assets' return risk

characteristics, their autarky prices, and hence their trade pattern, when

countries differ with respect to their outputs or their attitudes towards

risk. When when world asset markets are incomplete, different monetary

policies and exchange rate regimes have dramatic effects on risk

characteristics   of home and foreign currency bonds and on the trade pattern in
these   assets, as well as on aggregate capital and   current accounts.



                                                      Lars E.O. Svensson
                                                      Institute for International
                                                        Economic Studies
                                                      University of Stockholm
                                                      S-106 91 Stockholm
                                                      SWEDEN
                                                 1



                                       I. Introduct ion
            In   practice all internationally traded assets are risky. That is, their
    real returns are risky and depend, among other things, on risk characteristics
    of   price levels, exchange rates and terms of trade. With increased

    liberalization and integration of international capital markets, the

    importance     of international trade in risky assets can hardly      be disputed.

        has beell considerable work on the determinants of aggregate capital
    There

    movements, for instance in the literature that regards capital movements as
    intertemporal trade.' however, there seems to be relatively little research
    done on the determinants of the disaggregate pattern of trade in distinct
    risky assets, definitely much less thaii on the determinants of the pattern of
    trade in goods.
          A previous paper of mine, Svensson (1987), discusses the trade pattern in

    risky assets between barter economies, by combining the general Law of

            Advantage from the literature on international trade in goods with
    Comparative

the literature on lilternational asset pricillg.2 As developed by Deardorff
    (1980) and Dixit and Norman (1980)     for   trade in goods, the Law of Comparative

Advantage states that there is a correlation between autarky price differences

and the trade pattern such that a country tends to import goods for which the

country's autarky price is high relative to the world market price, or

relative to autarky prices in        the rest    of the world. When adapted to asset

trade, the law states that there is a tendency for a country to import assets

for which the autarky price is relatively high. Differences in countries'




1
         See Persson and Stockman (1987)    for      a presentation of this approach.
2
     See Svensson (1987) for references to the relevant literature on
international asset pricing, and for references to the existing (but
relatively small) literature oil the trade pattern in risky assets in barter
economies.
                                           2



autarky prices depend on underlying differences between countries. Svensson
(1987) explains how international differences with respect to the stochastic
properties   of outputs, rates of time preference, attitudes towards risk, and

subjective beliefs determine autarky price differences, and how autarky price

differences   then determine the pattern of trade in arbitrarily specified
assets, as well as in specific assets like indexed bonds, claims to countries'
output   (stocks, equity), and Arrow- Debreu securities.

       analysis in Svensson (1987) applies oniy to real assets in barter
     The

economies. Most international assets are iioininal assets, in the sense that
their return is paid in some international currency. Then, the real returns
depend on risk characteristics of price levels and exchange rates, which in
turn depend on, among other things, the risk characteristics of countries'
money supplies.3

     This paper extends the aiialysis to include trade in risky nominal assets

between monetary economies. The new element is to study the effect of

monetary policies and price level and exchange rate risk on the real returns

on specified nominal assets in a general-equilibrium setting. The focus is on

how different combinations of monetary policies and exchange rate regimes

determine    the pattern of trade in   nominal assets by affecting   the risk


3    See   Fama and   Farber   (1979), Grauer, Litzenberger and Stehie (1976), and
Kouri (1977). These papers take, as is coninion in the finance literature, the
stochastic processes for price levels as exogenous, and tile dependence on
money supply in general equilibrium is not integrated into the analysis. Such
an integration is undertaken in tile general- equilibrium international asset
pricing models of Lucas (1982), Stulz (1984) and Svensson (1985). Tile focus
in these papers is on prices and exchange rates and not 011 the trade pattern;
since a perfectly pooled equilibrium is assumed, the trade pattern is trivial.
That is, relative to autarky each country (in a two-country world) exports
half of its assets and imports half of tile  other    country's assets. Still,
capital  movements  and correlations between key macro variables like
investment, the current account, output, etc., can be studied, as in Stockman
and Svensson (1987), but any current and capital account movements are due
exclusively to revaluation of domestically based assets relative to foreign
based assets, not to changes in tile ownership of assets.
                                         3



 characteristics of these assets.

      The outliiie of the paper is as follows. Sectioll II lays out a two-period

 model   of a two- country world, where home and foreign currencies are introduced
 via cash- in- advance constraints. The international asset market is
 characterized by the assets' real return risk characteristics, summarized as a
 real return matrix. Sections II and III exploit that, for a given real return
matrix, the monetary world equilibriuni is equivalent to an equilibrium in a

world barter economy without money and liquidity constraints. The Law of

Comparative Advantage, relating trade in assets to autarky asset price

differences, can then be applied as in Svenssoii (1987). Section IV discusses

how different monetary polices determine risk characteristics of real returns

of nominal assets, the real return matrix. These building blocks are combined

in Section V, which examines the determinants of autarky asset prices for the

case when countries differ oniy with respect to the stochastic properties of

their outputs. It presents a simple condition, in terms of the covariances

between output and real asset returns, for the direction of trade in a given

asset with given real return characteristics. Four distinct monetary policies

are specified: the passive (nominal CDP) and tile price-level (inflation rate)

stabilizing policies, and the fixed exchange rate regimes with either a

one-sided or a two-sided peg. In section VI these elements are combined to

examine how different combinations of monetary policies and exchange rate

regimes determine the trade patterii in home and foreign currency bonds, when

countries differ with respect to the risk characteristics of their outputs.

Section VII examines the case when the countries differ with respect to their

attitudes towards risk. Section VIII includes a summary, some conclusions,

and a discussion of limitations and possible extensions of the analysis. An

appendix includes a detailed description of tile cash- in-advance transactions

structure.
                                            4



                                 II. Markets and   Assets
        We consider a world with two countries, home and foreign. Each country

consists of a representative consumer and a government. There are two

periods, 1 and 2, and there is one good and two currencies, home and foreign,

in each period. Period 1 outputs in        the home and     foreign country, y1 and y*,

are exogenous and certain. Period 2 outputs in the two countries, y2 and y2,

are also exogenous but uncertain. We call tile vector s =                (y2,y*2)   the state

of the world in period 2. The state of the world is distributed accordingly

to the distribution function F(s). Goods are perishable and there is no

storage    or otiier investment technology.
        Stochastic outputs is the only source of uncertainty in the model. The
monetary      policies to be   specified in section V   will be conditional upon the

stochastic outputs. Tile model caii easily be expanded to consider monetary

policy as an independent source of uncertainty.

        The home and foreign countries have access to a world asset market in the

beginning of period 1. On this asset market home and foreign currencies and

assets can be traded. Let us now describe this asset market.

        There is a given set J of J cliff erent assets (in addition to home and

foreign currency), which can be traded on          the world   asset market in period 1,

before the uncertainty about tile state of         tile world in period 2 has been
resolved.       (We let J denote both the set and the number of elements of the

set.)     The assets pay a state-dependent return in tile beginning of period 2.
All   assets    are nominal assets. More precisely, they are either home currency
or   foreign    currency assets, in the sense   that they      returns are    paid   in either
home or foreign currency.4 If a particular asset j             EJ   is   a home currency


4       The   demand for  money will be introduced via liquidity (cash-in-advance)
constraints.        Assets who pay returns physically in goods can then not be
allowed,      since they would provide a way to avoid the liquidity constraints,
and   remove any demand for money.
                                                 5




asset,    it is   characterized by a (gross) home currency return function Ri(s)

giving    the amount of home currency it pays in the beginning of period 2 as a
function      of the state. If      instea,d a particular asset j    e J is   a foreign
currency      asset, it   has   a (gross) foreign currency return function R(s) giving

the    amount of foreign currency it pays in the beginning of period 2 as a
function of the state. The most important characteristic of an asset will be
its real return measured in the one good, however. Let the home and foreign
currency price of goods in state            s in period 2   be denoted by P2(s) and P*2(s),
respectively. Then, the (gross) (real) return function ri(s) for a given
asset j E J is a function given by
(2.1)          rd(s) =
                      R(s)/P2(s)       r(s) = R(s)/P*2(s),
                                       or                           for all s,

depending      upon whether the asset is a home or foreign         currency asset. We see

that    the real return on a home currency asset in general depends on the home
price level, and that the real return on a foreign currency asset in geiieral
depends on the foreign price level. hence, iii general the real returns will
be   endogenously determined in        equilibrium.
        Let us consider some special assets. A home           currency   bond (more

precisely a home currency discount           bond) pays one unit of home currency in all
states in period 2. It will be denoted by j = in and             has the home currency

return function R(s) = 1 for all s. hence, its real              return function r111(s) is

given    by

(2.2a)        r(s) =     1/P2(s),   for all s.
That is, its real return is the reciprocal of the home price level. This
implies that the risk characteristics of home currency bonds depends directly
on the risk characteristics of the home price level, which in turn depend on
the suppiy and demand of home currency.5

5      Let      be the home currency price on the asset market in period 1 of a
home currency bond. Theii the nominal interest rate i111 on a home currency bond
                                                       6


        Similarly,   a foreign currency bond, denoted j =               n,   has the foreign

currency return function R(s) =                 1   for all s, and the real return function

r11(s) given by

(2.2b)       r11(s) =     1/P*2(s),   for all s.

The risk characteristics of the foreign currency bond depend directly on the

risk characteristics of the foreign price level and hence on the demand and

supply for foreign currency.6

        Let us also consider some real assets, assets that although they pay in

home    or foreign currency have real returns that are independent of the
countries' price levels. That is, their currency returns are, directly or
indirectly, indexed. The indexed bond (denoted j                    =   0) has the home currency
return function R0(s) =           P2(s)   or tile foreign currency        return function R(s)

p*2(s).     That is, its real return is unity in each state,
(2.2c)       r0(s) = 1, for all s.
Home stocks (j       =   h)   are claims to (the home currency value of) home (period 2)
output. They are a home currency asset with the home currency return function
Rh(s)      P2(s)y2. Hence the real return function rh(s) is given by
(2.2d)       rh(s) = y2,        for all

Similarly,    foreign stocks (j =          f)       are a foreign currency asset with the

foreign currency return function R(s) =                    P*2(s)y*2.   Hence the real return

function is given by

(2.2e)      rf(s) =      y*2,   for all s.

       Let us finally note that au Arrow-Debreu security for a particular state



is given by Q = 1/(1+i111).
6      The real return on a foreign currency bond can also be expressed in terms
of   the period 2 exchange rate in      s, e2(s), and the home price level as
                                                state
r11(s) = e2(s)/P2(s), hence depending on exchange rate and home price- level
risk. However, in equilibriuiii in our model the Law of One Price will hold, so
this   is the same expression as (2.2b).
                                              7


s is   an asset that pays either      P2(s) units of home      currency or P*2(s) units of

foreign currency in the particular state s, and that pays nothing in other

states. Hence, the    real   return function is given by

(2.2f)      r5(o) = 1 for o- =   s,   r5()   = 0   for   o   s, for all states o.

An Arrow-Debreu security pays a real return equal to unity in one particular

state only.

       The set J of assets available for trade on the world asset market is

completely characterized by the assetst real return vectors. Let us consider

the (real) return (generalized) lilatrix r consisting of the J real return

functions r(s) jeJ. When tile number of states of the world, S, is finite,

this is an ordinary (SxJ)-matrix, with S rows and J columns. When the number

of states S is infinite, we can still think of a r as a generalized matrix

with   infinitely many rows. The components of the return matrix are exogenous
to consumers trading on tile world asset market, but some or all of the
components are endogenously determined in an equilibrium. Therefore, it will
be   practical to express individual behavior as conditional upon an arbitrarily

given return matrix. In equilibrium the given return matrix must of course

coincide with the actual equilibrium return matrix as it is determined by

price levels and monetary policies, for instance.

       In principle the trade pattern in any given set of assets, complete or

incomplete, can be examined with our methods. In sections VI and VII we shall

however restrict the analysis to the special case when the set of assets

include only home and foreign currency bonds (J =            {iu,n}).   Since we will

assume that there are more the two states of the world, the set of assets then
                                          8



considered is incomplete.7

        Having described the asset market and some possible assets, we shall now

look    more closely at the home consumer and the constraints he faces. The home
consumer has rational expectations and knows the probability distribution F(s)
over the states of the world. He has preferences over period 1 consumption,
c,   and state-dependent period 2 consumption,       c2(s). The preferences can be
represented     by the additively separable expected utility function

(2.3)         U(c1) +flE[U(c2)],

where U(.) is a standard increasing concave sufficiently differentiable von

Neumann-Morgenstern utility function,         >   0 is is the subjective discount

factor, and E[a] denotes the expected value Ja(s)dF(s).8

        The   consumer is entitled to cash revenues from the sale of home output.
The sequence of transactions and payments is such that he does not receive
these revenues until at the end of each period, whereas he must provide cash
in advance to purchase goods in      the beginning of each period.9 The precise




7     We recall that the set o-f assets is said to be complete if the rank of
the return matrix r is S, that is, if there are as many independent assets
 (that is, with linearly independent return vectors) as there are states of the
world. Then consumers can reach the same consumption allocation across states
of the world with trade on the asset market as they can if they have access to
the S Arrow-Debreu securities. If the rank of the return matrix is less
than S, the set of assets is said to be incomplete.
8    As is well known, representing preferences by an additively separable
expected utility function does not allow a separation between risk aversion
and interteinporal substitution in consumption (see Sandmo (1974) and
Selden (1978)).
     The model is similar to the ones of Helpman (1981) (except it has
uncertainty and oniy two periods), 1!elpman and Razin (1982) (except it has no
uncertainty in period 1), Lucas (1982) (except it has possibly incomplete
markets and only two periods), Persson (1982, 1984) (except it has uncertainty
and only two periods), and Stockinan (1983) (except it has cash in advance
instead of money in the utility function).
                                                9




sequence of markets and transactions is described in the appendix. There it

is    also shown that        tile resulting equilibrium with money is identical to the

equilibriuni        in the   analog barter economy.'°      Therefore we can here   proceed to

define the equilibriuni without aiiy reference to money. Money and monetary

policy       will   be introduced in   Section V.
        Let x denote the home        country's (net) import of goods in period 1. Then

consumption in period 1 fulfills

(2.4)           c1 = y1 +

      the J-vector z =
Let
                               (z) denote the home country's (net) import of asset on
the asset market in period 1.11 Then consumption in period 2 fulfills
(2.5)          c2(s) y + r(s)z, for all s,
where r(s)z denotes the inner          product Ejr(s)z. Substitution of (2.4) and
(2.5) into (2.3) allows us to define the trade utility function U(x,z;r),

conditional on a given          return matrix r, by
(2.6)          U(x,z;r) =         E[U(y2+rz)].
                              U(y1+x) +
        The period 1 budget constraints for the home consumer can now be written
as
(2.7)          x+qz=O,
where    q =          is the J-vector of asset prices measured in period 1         goods   and
                (q)
qz denotes the inner product                        This   equation can be interpreted as a

balance-of-payments constraint, stating that the              the   current account deficit,

x, and the capital account deficit, qz, suni to zero.




10   This equivalence result for a cash-in-advance economy with given output
is demonstrated in tile perfect-foresight case by Helpman (1981).
11      It
         is practical to let z denote only the net international trade of the
consumer, and to let his initial holdings of domestic assets (claims to period
1 and period 2 output) be implicitly given in tile right-hand sides of his
constraints (2.4) arid (2.5).
                                       10


      The behavior of the home coiisuiner can now be described as the result of
maximizing the trade utility fuiiction (2.6) subject to the budget constraint
(2.7), for given asset prices q, and for a given return matrix r. This
results in goods import arid asset import functions x(q;r) and z(q;r) •12




12    We   assume that these functions are single-va1ued. This does not matter
for our results, but simplifies the notation.
     Also, we disregard bankruptcy issues, by not restricting consumption to
be non-negative.
                                                       11



                   III. Equilibrium and          the   Law of Comparative Advantage

         A home country autarky equilibrium for a given return matrix                 r, is an

equilibrium without access to the                  world asset market. That is, asset import
 is zero,

 (3.1)          z(q;r) = 0.

 (Import of period 1 goods is then also zero, x(q;r) = 0, but by Wairas's Law

that equation is redundant.) Equation (3.1) can be solved for the home

autarky asset prices q, for a given                  return matrix r.13
         The foreign country has a trade utility function over period 1 goods

(net) import x and asset (net) import z, U*(x*,z*;r), defined by the analog

to (2.6). Its period 1 budget constraint is the analog to (2.7).

Maximization of the foreign country's trade utility function subject to its

period 1 budget constraint gives foreign country's goods and asset import

functions x*(q;r) and z*(q;r). An autarkv equilibrium for the foreign

country, for a given return matrix r, is an autarky asset price vector q* that

fulfills the analog of (3.1).

        In a world equilibrium, fiiially, home and foreign asset import sum to

zero, that is

(3.2)          z(q;r) +     z*(q;r)        0.

Equation (3.2) can be solved for tile                  world   equilibrium asset prices, for a

given return matrix r. (By Walras's Law the world market for period 1 goods

is in equilibrium whenever the asset market is in equilibrium.)

        The equilibria defined are conditional upon a given return matrix r.                     It

remains to restrict the return matrix to be consistent with the monetary




13   There is no contradiction in considering the home autarky price of a
foreign currency asset. The foreign currency asset is defined by a real
return vector that is here taken as exogenous. The autarky price of any asset
with a given real return vector is the equilibrium asset price for which zero
trade is an equilibrium.
                                           12



policies pursued. Before that is (lone, we shall contiiiue to take the set of

assets and the return matrix as given and proceed, exactly as in Svensson

(1987), to apply the Law of Comparative Advantage.

        For a given return matrix r, the barter economies described by the trade

utility function (2.3) and its foreign analog, and the budget constraint (2.7)

and its foreign analog, are formally equivalent to static barter economies

trading J+1 commodities. Therefore, the standard international trade theorems

apply, for instance the Gains-from--Trade Theorem and the Law of Comparative

Advantage. Let us therefore directly apply the Law of Comparative Advantage,

in   the general form advanced by Deardorff      (1980) and Dixit and Norman (1980),

to   the present circumstances.?
        Let z be the home country's import of period 1 goods and assets in a
world    equilibrium, and let q and q* be home and foreign autarky asset prices

relative to period 1 goods. Then the Law of Comparative Advantage can be

written on the form

(3.3)           (q_q*)z 0.
It states that      on the   average, the home country   will import assets whose

autarky       prices are higher in the home country than in the foreign country. If
oniy    one   asset is traded we have an exact   relation between autarky asset

prices and the trade pattern: Tile asset will be imported (and period 1 goods

will be exported) if and oniy if the autarky price of the asset is higher in

the home country than in the foreign country. If more than one asset are

traded, the Law of Comparative Advantage provides a "tendency" for a

particular asset to be imported if its autarky price is relatively high,
                                        13


rather    than an exact relation for import in any   individual   asset.'4




'"   As Deardorff (1980) emphasizes, a positive inner product ab =                 0
does not exactly provide a positive correlation between the
                                                                          Eab
                                                                   J-vectors a =
                                                                                   (a)
                                                   0.
and b =
           (b)   unless either Ea = 0 or       =        This is so, since the
sample correlation coefficient cor(a,b) is proportional to the sample
covariance cov(a,b) and the latter fulfills cov(a,b) = ab -
Deardorff
                                                                  aEb/J.
            shows how one can construct correlations in two ways. One way is to
exploit the balance-of-payments constraint. Let qt be the asset prices in
terms of goods in the world equilibrium. Then (3.3) is equivalent to the
statement   that the (J+1)-vectors (0,((q-q/q)) and (x,(qz)) are

positively correlated, since x + qtz = 0. The other way is to restrict the
vector of goods and asset prices to be in the unit simplex. Let (p,q) and
(p*,q*) be the home and foreign autarky prices of period 1 goods and assets.
The standard derivation of the Law of Comparative Advantage gives
(p_p*,q.q*)(x,z)   0. Restricting (p,c) and (p*,q*) to be in the unit simplex
then implies that the (J+1)-vectors ((1,q)/(1÷q) -                     and
(x,z) are positively correlated.
     For our purpose it is sufficient to interpret (3.3) as stating that there
is tendency for asset j to be imported into the home country (z > 0) when its
home autarky price (measured in goods) is higher than its foreign autarky
price (measured in goods) (q >
                                  q).
                                                 14



                      IV.   Autarky   Asset Prices and Output Differences

        In this section we shall look at tile determinants of autarky asset

prices. For the case of countries differing only in their period 2 outputs,

we shall make simplifying assumptions so as to be able to derive a simple and

operational condition, in terms of covariances of outputs and asset returns,

for the autarky asset price of a particular asset to be lower in one country.

        The home autarky asset price             of a particular asset j         with   return
                                            q
function ri(s) is simply given by the marginal rate of substitution between

asset j and period 1 goods of the trade utility function (2.6) at zero import

of goods and assets, Ui(OO;r)/U(OO;r) where U and U denote the partial

with respect to             and x. It follows from (2.6) that the autarky asset price
                      z
fulfills

(4.1)             =
                      /3E[Uc(y )r]/U(y ),
the familiar expression of the discounted expected utility of period 2 returns

over the marginal utility of period 1 consumption.

        It is practical to relate the price of a asset to the real interest rate

on an indexed bond, and to the risk measure for the asset. First, consider

the indexed bond, with returns r0(s) =                1   for all s. Its autarky price, q0,

and the corresponding autarky real interest rate, p, fulfill, by (4.1),

(4.2)          q0 =   l/(l+p)   =
                                    E[U(y2)]/U(y1).
Second, define the autarky risk measure for asset j,                        as
                                                                     llj,
(4.3)          ll =   -Cov[U(y2)r]/E[U(y2).
Third, use the rule E[xy] =           E[x]E[y]   + Cov[x,y] to rewrite (4.1), and apply

the definitions (4.2) and (4.3). This gives

                                -
(4.4)          q =    {E[r]         Il}/(l+).
We see that the asset price can be written as the present value of the

difference     between its expected return and its             risk measure.

        The   risk measure (4.3) is proportional to            the negative of the covariance
                                         15


between    the marginal utilities of consumption U(y2) and the returns
                                                                          ri(s).
Hence it is positive or negative depending upon whether period 2 marginal

utilities and returns are negatively or positively correlated. The risk

measure for an asset can be interpreted as a measure of how risky that asset

is relative to the indexed bond. If the risk measure is positive, the asset

is riskier than the indexed bond. If it is negative, the asset is less risky

than the indexed bond.'5 16

        It is clear from (4.4) that autarky prices for a   given asset may differ
across countries because autarky real interest rates,      autarky risk measures,
or both differ across countries. More precisely, the home autarky real

interest rate and the risk measure for asset j should be      relatively low for
the asset to have a higher home autarky price and for      the home country to have
a tendency to import the asset.

       Let us first consider the effect of different autarky real interest

rates.    Let thehome autarky real interest rate be lower than the foreign

autarky   real interest rate. Then, for all assets which do not have higher

autarky   risk measure at home than abroad, home autarky asset prices will be




15
     The risk premium can be defined as the difference between the expected
gross rate of return, E[r]/q., and the gross real rate of interest, l+p.
Then the risk premium is equa to ll/q and fulfills ll/q =

                             /qJ and is hence the negative of the covariance
     -flCov[U(Y2)/U(Y1)r
between the marginal rates of substitution and the ex post rates of

return r(s)/q.
16     Note   that the indexed bond has a sure real return, but that the utility
value of the return is risky, siiice marginal utility itself is risky. Hence
there is nothing paradoxical with assets that are less risky than the indexed
bond. A sure-utility bond (in autarky) (j = u) would have returns rn(s)

fulfilling U(y2)r(s) = 1, hence rn(s)         1/Uc(y2) for all s.
                                     16



higher, and there is hence a tendency for the home country to import all such

assets. For assets with a higher autarky risk measure at home, a lower home

autarky real interest rate implies a higher autarky price but not necessarily

higher than the foreign autarky price. Nevertheless, we may state that a

lower home autarky real interest rate implies a tendency to import (almost)

all assets into the home country, to run a capital account deficit and hence

be a net lender. If the only asset traded is the indexed bond, we have an

exact result and know for sure that the the home country will import the

indexed bond and be a net lender.

     Let us next turn to differences in autarky risk measures. From (4.4) we

see that, for autarky real interest rates not higher at home than abroad, a

lower risk measure at home for asset j implies a higher home autarky asset

price and hence a tendency for asset j to be imported by the home country.

For autarky real interest rates higher at home than abroad, a lower home

autarky risk measure implies a higher autarky asset price, but not necessarily

higher than in the foreign country. Risk terms are specific to individual

assets and depend on the individual risk characteristics of the asset. Hence

a difference between risk measures for a given asset gives information about

trade in that specific asset; a difference in autarky real interest rates

affect autarky asset prices for all assets, and hence gives information about

aggregate asset trade, the capital account.

     If the countries are identical in all respects, the autarky asset prices

will be identical, there is no basis for trade, and zero trade will be a trade

equilibrium. Hence, trade here arises because of differences between the

countries. The countries can differ either with regard to their outputs,

their preferences (including their subjective probability distributions), and

with regard to their monetary policies. In Svensson (1987) differences in all

these respects, except monetary policies, are considered. Here we shall, in
                                          17



addition to differences in monetary policies, only discuss differences between

countries with regard to output/technology (section VI) and with regard to

attitudes towards risk (section VII).

        In Svensson (1987) differences in both autarky real interest rates and

risk measures are extensively discussed. In the present setup, as

demonstrated in the appendix, monetary policy and price level risk does not

affect autarky real interest rates. Therefore, in order to isolate and

highlight the effect of monetary policies we shall make assumptions that

ensure that autarky real interest rates are the same, and hence that then only

reason for autarky asset price differences is differences in autarky risk

measures.

        We therefore make the following assumptions:

(Al)        The home and foreign countries are identical in all respects except

            with regard to period 2 outputs.

(A2)        Home and foreign period 2 outputs have the same marginal probability

             distribution but are imperfectly correlated.

        It follows directly from and assumptions (Al) and (A2) and equations

(4.3) and (4.4) that the two countries will have the same autarky real

interest rate,

(4.5)       p =   p.
Then autarky price differences for a particular asset j depends only on

autarky risk measure differences.

        Under the following assumptions we get a very simple expression for the

risk measures:

(A3)         The vOll Neumann-Morgenstern utility function has constant absolute

             risk aversion, that is,

             U(c) =

             where '   = Ucc/Uc   the Arrow-Pratt measure of absolute risk
                                              18



             aversion, is a positive constant.

(A4)         For all assets j      e J, (Y2r(s)) and (y2r.(s)) are jointly
             normally distributed.17

        Under assumption (A3) and (A4) it is easy to show that the home autarky

risk measure fulf ills'8

(4.6)        ll =   7Cov[y2,r].
The autarky risk measure is simply the product of the absolute risk aversion

parameter      and the covariance between its return and home period 2 output.
        Therefore, under assumptions (A1)-(A4) we can summarize our results as

(4.7)
                             ll    ll      Cov[Y2r]     Cov[y*Z,r] I'"    zj     0,
where "" denotes       "implies a tendency to."

        Hence, if an assets return is less positively correlated, or more

negatively correlated, with home period 2 output than with foreign period 2

output, there is a tendency for the asset to be imported by the home country.

If the asset is the only asset traded we have an exact          result and know for

sure that it will be imported by the home country. We           note the simplicity of

(4.7) in   that it    depends     only on the return vector for the asset in   question

and not on the return vectors of other assets. This is of course because the
asset price and      risk   measure are computed in autarky, when there is zero trade

in all assets. The simplicity of (4.7) illustrates the convenience in using

the Law of Comparative Advantage.




17   As usual, the assumption of a normal distribution is problematic, since
it implies that period 2 outputs can take negative values with positive
probability. With small variances relative to means, it is a minor problem,
though.
18     Under   assumption (A4) a theorem by Rubinstein (1976) implies that ll =

= -Cov[U(y2),r]/E[U(y2)]            =                                    Under

assumption (A3) we have U(y2) =           -7U(y2), hence   (4.6).
                                                       19


                                             V. Monetary        Policy

        Demand for currencies is introduced via cash-in-advance constraints. The

rule is that home goods must be purchased with home currency, and foreign

goods with foreign currency (this is the S-system in Helpman and Razin

(1984)). The details are spelled out in the appendix. Here we need oniy

concern ourselves with the resulting period 2 price level equations. Under

the assumption that nominal interest rates are positive, the price level

equations are the familiar quantity-theory (-of-money) equations

             P2(s)   =   t2(s)/y2
(5.1)                                   and P*2(s) =         N2(s)/y*2,      for all s,

where    M2(s) and N2(s) are the home and foreign molletary supplies in state S in
period 2.
        We also note that in equilibrium the Law of One Price must hold. If it

would not, home and foreign consumers would in this setup shift all their

demand towards goods from one country. Hence,

(5.2)        P2(s) =     e2(s)P*2(s),          for   all   s.

It follows from (5.1)-(5.2) that the period 2 exchange rate equation is

(5.3)        e2(s) =     (M2(S)/N2(S))(y*2/y2),                 for all s.

        We have already noted that for nominal assets real returns depend on

period 2 price levels. Thus front the expression for the real returns on home

and foreign currency bonds (2.2a,b) and the quantity equation (5.1) we see

that

(5.4)        rm(s) =     1/P2(s)    =       y2/12(s)   and

             rn(s) =     1/P*2(s)       =
                                             y*2/N2(s), for       all

Hence the stochastic properties of the return on a bond nominated in a

country's currency is completely determined by the stochastic properties of

the country's period 2 money supply and output.

        In order to know the relevant real returns on nominal assets we therefore

need to specify the monetary policies we want to consider. Obviously a large
                                             20   Printed October 13, 1987



number of different monetary policies can be examined. We shall only specify

a small set of four simple bench-mark monetary policies, the consequences of

which for the trade pattern in nominal assets we shall examine in sections VI

and VII.

        It is practical to distinguish between independent and coordinated

monetary policies, independent meaning that policy in one country is

independent of variables in the other country, and coordinated meaning that

policy in one country depends on variables from both countries. Among

possible independent policies, let us only consider output-dependent monetary

policy with a constant elasticity k of home money supply with respect to home

output, that is,19

(5.5)        2() = (2)k         for all s.

We can refer to the case k > 0 as a pro-cyclical monetary policy, and k < 0 as

a counter-cyclical monetary policy. The case k = 0 can be called a passive

monetary policy, with money supply constant and state-independent,

(5.6a)       I2(s) =   1,   for all s.

Equivalently, in view of (5.1) we caii say that this policy stabilizes nominal

GDP. This is the first monetary policy shall examine below.

        We can also conceive of price-level related monetary policies, policies

that are designed to have particular effects on the price level. The second

monetary policy we shall coiisider is the special case of a price-stabilizing

monetary policy, the output-dependent policy for which the elasticity k equals

unity and the price level is constant,

(5.6b)      M2(s) = y2 and P2(s) = 1, for all s.

Equivalently, we can call this an inflation-stabilizing policy.




19   Since only the risk characteristics of period 2 price levels and returns
matter, that is, their dependence on the state of the world, any
multiplicative constant for the money supply is irrelevant. For simplicity we
set the constant equal to unity in (5.5).
                                                21      Printed October 13, 1987



        Among coordinated monetary policies we have the exchange-rate related

monetary policies, policies that are designed to affect the exchange rate.

From the exchange rate equation iii (5.3) we have that for a particular

exchange rate target 2(s) for all s, home and foreign monetary policy must

fulfill

(5.7)        M2(s) =   é2(s)N2(s)y2/y*2,       for all s.

A special case is the fixed exchaiige rate regime when the target exchange rate

is constant (state- independent), e2(s)               e for all s, for which case the

monetary policies must fulfill

(5.8)        M2(s) =   N2(s)y2/y*2,        for all s.

The third monetary policy we shall consider is the one-sided ,                  the   fixed

exchange rate regime in which the foreign country pursues an output-dependent

monetary policy, and the home country sets money supply according to (5.8) so

as to hold the exchange rate constant, that is,
              2              2 k*       -2      - 2  *2 k*_1
(5.9)        N (s) =   (y*    )     and M (s) = ey (y )      ,   for   all s.

The fourth policy is the two-sided peg, the fixed exchange rate regime in

which the two countries cooperate so as to hold the world money stock, M,

constant ,20

(5.10)       M2(s) + N2(s) =        I,   for all s.

From (5.8) and (5.10) it follows that the monetary policies must then fulfill

(5.11)       12(s) =   1y2/(y2 +     y*2) and N2(s) =     (M/)y2/(y2   + y*2), for all s.

Each country's money supply is adjusted so as to be in proportion to the

country's share in world period 2 output.

        In the appendix the governments' policy instruments are restricted to be

money supply and (net) transfers. Neither open market operations nor foreign




20   Holding the world money stock I constant is of course a special case.
Output dependent world money stocks can be considered, for instance.
                                       22     Printed October 13, 1987



exchange interventions are considered. however, open market operations and

foreign exchange interventions (assuming that foreign reserves are interest

bearing foreign currency bonds rather than non- interest bearing foreign

currency) are neutral as long as they result in the same money supply.21 This

is so, since the home and foreign countries as modeled are characterized by

Ricardian Equivalence (there are no distortioiiary taxes, money is not

distortionary, there are rational expectations, and the consumers' horizon is

as   long as the horizon of the economies)   and since with the given transactions

structure, each country's consumer chooses not to hold any of the other

country's   currency between the periods (see appendix). Put differently, the
only   things that matter for price levels and exchange rates, and hence real

returns, are the home and foreign currency supplies, (M1,M2(s)) and (N1,N2(s))

(this is obvious from the quantity equations (5.1) and the exchange rate

equation    (5.3)). hence, whether we allow   such interventions or not in the

present framework is for our purpose irrelevant.22

       Monetary policy can here be regarded as "pure" monetary policy, without

any implicitly associated fiscal policy. This is so even though the money




21   In the transactions structure laid out in the appendix the home consumer
chooses not to hold any foreign currency between period 1 and period 2. lIe
effectively holds all home currency between the periods, since it is held by
home firms to be distributed to home consumers in the beginning of period 2.
Therefore, an expansion of the home money stock does not imply any inflation
tax on the foreign consumer. That is also the reason why any private currency
flows   do not appear in the balance of payments (2.7).
22     See Helpman (1981) and Persson (1982, 1984) for a detailed discussion on
different exchange rate regimes and different kinds of central bank
intervention in similar perfect-foresight models. Stockman (1983)
demonstrates in a similar uncertainty model, although with real balances in
the utility function, that a sterilized intervention has no effect on exchange
rates and price levels when Ricardian Equivalence obtains.
     Since it is the period 2 exchange rates and price levels that are
relevant for the risk characteristics of asset returns in our two-period
model, and there are no assets except home and foreign currency traded in
period 2, the set of possible interveutions in period 2 would in any case be
limited.
                                         23      Printed October 13, 1987



supply   is   changed by net transfers to consumers, which usually implies that

monetary      and fiscal policy cannot he separated. The reason is that the
monetary structure laid out iii the appendix assumes that all monetary
transfers received during period 1 and     2   are taxed at 1OO7 at the end of
period 2.
                                        24



               VI. Trade in Nominal Assets: Output Differences

     In section IV we derived tile simple covariance criterion (4.7) for

whether there will be a tendency for the home country to import or export a

particular asset with given risk characteristics, that is with a given real

return vector, when countries differ only with respect to period 2 outputs.

In section V we noted that the risk characteristics of the real returns of

home and foreign currency are completely determined by the risk

characteristics of period 2 outputs and money supply, and we specified four

bench-mark monetary policies to be considered: the independent passive and

price-level stabilizing monetary polices, and the coordinated one-sided peg

and two-sided peg. At last we are ready to use these building blocks to

discuss how combinations of monetary polices determine the trade pattern in

home and foreign currency bonds.

     Hence, we assume that the set of assets consist only of home and foreign

currency bonds, that is J =   {m,n},   and consider combinations of the monetary

polices mentioned. A summary or the results is given in Table 1.

     First, let us take the foreign country to pursue a passive monetary

policy (the elasticity k* of foreign period 2 money supply with respect to

foreign period 2 output equals zero), and let us vary the monetary policy of

the home country. This corresponds to column (a) in Table 1. From (5.4) and

(5.6a) we see that with a foreign passive monetary policy, the foreign

currency bonds is a perfect substitute for foreign stocks, since its return is

proportional to foreign period 2 output, r11(s) =   y2   =
                                                             rf(s),   for all s.   It

is as if there were trade in   claims to foreign period 2 output instead of
                                                 25



foreign currency bonds. This circumstance we denote by n =                 f23   Furthermore,

since the marginal distributions of home and foreign period 2 outputs are

equal and the two outputs are not perfectly correlated, we have

(6.1)        ll =   ll   =   Cov[y2,y*2]   <   (yar[y2]yar[y*2])l/2   = Var[y*2] =

                = Cov[y*2,y*2]         ll =    ll.
Thus,    the home autarky risk measure for tile foreign currency bond is lower

than the foreign autarky measure, and there is a tendency for the home country

to import the the foreign currency bond. The foreign currency bond is a

perfect substitute for foreign stocks, which are a less risky in the home

country than in the foreign country. This result is denoted by "n=f: Import

in the first three rows in column (a) in Table 1.

        Suppose the home country also pursues a passive monetary policy (the

elasticity k of home monetary supply with respect to home period 2 output

equals zero). This corresponds to row (1) in Table 1.                 It follows directly

from   the reasoning above that with a passive home monetary policy the home
currency bond will be a perfect substitute for a claim to home period 2
output, r(s) =      y2 =     rh(s), for all s. Since home stocks are riskier in the
home country (the autarky risk measure is lower), there will be a tendency for

the   home country to export tile home currency bond (denoted by "m=h: Export" in
the first two columns in row (1) in Table 1).
       Suppose instead that the home country stabilizes the home period 2 price
level (the elasticity k equals unity). This corresponds to row (2). This
implies that the return on the home currency bond is sure, rm(s) = 1, for all



23   We say that two assets i and j with returns ri(s) and ri(s) are perfect
substitutes if and only if r1(s) =
that is, if and only if their returns
                                               r(s)
                                          for all s, for some constant   > 0,
                                                 are proportional. Then the asset prices
                               aq. Two assets who are perfect substitutes are said
     and q. fulfill q =
to   be effectively only one asset.
                                           26


s, and the      home currency bond is a perfect substitute for the indexed bond,

which we denote by m = 0.        By assumption   autarky interest rates and hence the
autarky    asset prices on the indexed    bond are equal. If the home currency bond
were the only asset traded, we would know        that it will be neither imported nor
exported in a trade in equilibrium. however, when the foreign currency bond
is    also traded, it does not necessarily follow that there will be no trade in

equilibrium      in the home currency bond. We already know that there is a
tendency for the home country to import the foreign currency bond when the
foreign country pursues a passive monetary policy. hence in equilibrium there
should be (a tendency to) export of either goods or home currency bonds, or
both,    to balance the import of foreign currency bonds. We conclude that the
home currency bond can be either exported or imported (denoted by by tlm=O: ?"
in row (2) column (a)).
        Next,   let us consider the situation when the home country pursues a

one-sided peg and fixes the period 2 exchange rate, when the foreign country

still pursues a passive monetary policy. With a fixed exchange rate, home and

foreigil currency bonds become perfect substitutes, since by the Law of One

Price rh(s) =      1/P2(s)1/(P*2(s)) = rf(s)[e, for all s. Furthermore, we
                             =

already   know that the foreign currency bond is a perfect substitute to a claim
to foreign stocks, and that there is a tendency for the home country to import
the foreign currency bond. Since there is now effectively only one asset
traded,   we even have an exact result rather than a tendency: The home country

will import the asset, have a capital account deficit and a current account

surplus. This is denoted in=n=f: Import' in row (3) column (a).

       Second, let us briefly consider the possibilities when the foreign

country   pursups a   price-level stabilizing policy (row (b) in Table1). Then
the   foreign currency bond is a perfect substitute for the indexed bond. The
case when the home country pursues a passive monetary policy (row (1) column
                                          27



(b)) is of course identical to the case in row (2) and column (a), except that

the properties of home and foreign currency bonds are interchanged. Hence,

the home currency bond is a perfect substitute for home stocks, and there is a

tendency    for the home country to export home currency bonds. The foreign
currency bond may or may not be imported into the home country.
        When the home country also pursues a price-level stabilizing monetary
policy    (row (2) column (b)), both home and foreign currency bonds are perfect
substitutes for the indexed bond. Since the relevant autarky asset prices are
equal, and there is effectively only one asset traded, we have the exact
result that there will be no trade and that the capital and current accounts
will each be balanced. Also, since the exchange rate is constant, this policy

is equivalent to the home country pursuing a one- sided peg (row (3)

column (b)).

        Third and last, let us consider the case when both countries engage in a

two-sided peg (row (4) column (c)). Since the period 2 exchange rate is

fixed, home and foreign currency bonds will be perfect substitutes (m=n). From

(5.1) and (5.8) it follows that the return        on home currency bonds is given by
(6.2)        rh(s) = y2/M2(s) = (y2 +   v*2)/L,   for all s.

That is, home and foreign currency bonds are perfect substitutes for a claim

to world output (j=w) with returns r,(s) given by

(6.3)        r(s) = y2 +   y2,   for all s.

        Furthermore, since the marginal distributions of home and foreign

period 2 output by assumption are identical, it follows that

(6.4)       11m =    = Cov[y2,r] = Cov[y*2,rw] =

Then by (4.7) the home and foreign autarky risk measures and hence autarky

asset prices are equal. Since there is effectively only one asset traded, we

have an exact result. There will be rio trade in equilibrium, and the current

and capital accounts will each be balanced.
                                       28


     We note   the contrast to the case when both countries pursue a passive
monetary   policy. That equilibrium effectively involves trade in both

countries stocks. Indeed, we realize that under assumptions (Al) and (A2),

the resulting equilibrium is the Pareto efficient perfectly pooled

equilibrium, where each country exports half of its stocks. Then, the capital

and current account will also be balanced, although there is nonzero gross

trade. In the case with the cooperative peg there is effectively oniy one

assets, claims to world output. Both net and gross trade are zero, and both

countries are effectively iii their autarky equilibrium.
                                        29



              VII. Trade in Nominal Assets: Risk Aversion Differences

        Next, we consider tile situation when the home country is more risk averse

than the foreign country. To isolate the effect of differences in attitudes

towards risk, we want to assume that the countries are identical in all other

aspects. We also want to make assumptions so as to equalize autarky real

interest rates so as to isolate the effect on the trade pattern in nominal

assets of assets' risk measures and the risk characteristics of monetary

policies. Since interteinporal substitution and attitude towards risk cannot

be separated when preferences are represented by an additively separable

expected utility function, some special considerations are required.

        The home country being more risk averse means that the countries' von

Neuinann-Morgenstern utility functions are different. Everything else equal

this means that the autarky interest rates need not be equal, even if the

countries' period 2 outputs have the same marginal distribution or even if

their outputs are perfectly correlated and identical, since the expected

period 2 marginal utility in (4.2) need not be equal. Therefore, for autarky

interest rates to be equal, the subjective discount factor must be allowed to

differ, too. We hence make the following assumptions, which replace

(Al)- (A3) :24

(Al')       The home and foreign countries are identical in all respects except

            their von Neuinann-Morgenstern utility functions and their subjective



24
     Alternatively, we can use a special case of Selden's (1978) formulation,
which distinguishes between interteiiiporal preferences and attitudes towards
risk. The attitude towards risk is given by the risk utility function V(c),
by which the certainty equivalent period 2 consumption is defined by V(c2) =
E[V(c2(s)].  The intertemporal preferences are then given by U(c1) + flU(c2).
We can then assume that the two countries have different CARA risk utility
functions with the measures of absolute risk aversion fulfilling (A3'),
identical U(.) functions, and different subjective discount factors so as to
make autarky interest rates equal.
     See Svensson (1987) and Persson and Svensson (1987) for applications of
Selden's formulation in similar contexts.
                                           30



             discount factors. home and foreign period 2 output are equal and

             hence perfectly correlated.

(A2')        The subjective discount factors differ so as to make autarky

             interest rates equal.

(A3')        The von Neunianu-Morgenstern utility function has constant absolute

             risk aversion. The home country is more risk averse, that is,

             7 > 7*

We retain assumption (A4).

        Since by (4.6)

(7.3)        ll -
                    ll   =

it   follows that instead of the result (4.7) we now have

                                                     0   '"        0.
(7.4)
             q q             II   ll * Cov[y2,r]              z,
That is, the home autarky risk measure for asset j is lower (higher) then the

foreign autarky risk measure for asset j if and only if the returns are

negatively (positively) correlated with home and foreign period 2 output, that

is, if and only if asset j is less (more) risky than the indexed bond. Hence,

there is a tendency for the more risk averse home country to import assets

that are less risky than the indexed bond, and to export assets that are more

risky than the indexed bond.

        After this we are equipped to discuss how monetary policies affect the

trade pattern in nominal assets when the home country is more risk averse. We

consider the same combinations of monetary policy as above in section VI. The

results are summarized in Table 2.

        Let us again first consider t]1e situation when the foreign country

pursues a    passive     monetary policy (column (a) in Table 2). Then the foreign

currency bond is a perfect substitute for foreign stocks, but with home and

foreign output being perfectly correlated, home and foreign stocks are perfect

substitutes for a claim to world output. Furthermore, the covariance between
                                          31



period 2 output and world period 2 output is obviously positive. That is, a

claim to world output is more risky than the indexed bond. It follows that

the   more risk averse home     country has a tendency to   export foreign currency

bonds (n=w: Export) whenever the foreign country pursues a passive policy.

      Suppose   the home country also pursues a passive monetary policy     (row (1)

column (a)). Then the home currency bond is a perfect substitute for home

stocks,     and hence a   perfect substitute for world output and foreign currency

bonds. There is effectively only one       asset traded, and we have an exact
result.     The home country will export the asset, and have a capital account

surplus and a current account deficit (m=n=w: Export). Since home and foreign

period 2 outputs are perfectly correlated, this policy combination by (5.3)

implies that the period 2 exchange rate is constant. Hence, the policy

combination is equivalent to the home country pursuing a one-sided peg

(row (3) column (a)). Since the policy conibination also implies that the

world money stock is constant, it is equivalent to a two-sided peg (row (4)

column (c)).

      Suppose the home country instead stabilizes its price level (row (2)

column    (a)). Then the home currency bond is a perfect substitute for the
indexed bond. Since autarky interest rates are equal, and there is more than
one asset available, we cannot say whether home currency bonds will be
exported or imported (m=O: ?).
      The   case when the foreign country stabilizes its price level and the home
country pursues a passive monetary policy (row (1) column (b)) is identical to
the previous case in row (2) and column (a), except that the properties of
home and foreign currency assets are interchanged (m=w: Export, n=O: ?).

      For the case when both countries stabilize their price levels (row (2)
column (b)) home and foreign currency bonds are perfect substitutes for the

indexed bond. Autarky interest rates are equal and there is effectively only
                                    32



one asset traded. Then we have the exact result that there will be no trade

and zero capital and curreut accounts. Since the exchange rate is constant,

this case is identical to the foreign country pursuing a price-level

stabilizing policy, and the home country pursuing a one-sided peg (row (3)

column (b)).
                                           33


                                  VIII.   Conclusions

       We have made assumptions so as to isolate the effect of price level and

exchange rate risk on the trade pattern in nominal assets. Although the model

allows for (almost) any specified real and nominal assets, in the end we have

looked closely only at the case of home and foreign currency bonds. In

particular we have assumed that home and foreign currency bonds are the only

assets traded, and therefore that tile asset market is incomplete. Since

price-level and exchange rate risk depend on monetary policies, we have

examined the effect of a few bench-mark monetary policies on the risk

characteristics of home and foreign currency bonds and on the pattern of trade

in such bonds. We have dealt with the two cases when the countries differ

either with respect to their period 2 outputs or with respect to their

attitudes towards risk.

       Let us first summarize the results when the countries differ with respect

to their outputs, in that their period 2 outputs are less than perfectly

correlated.    (i) When   monetary policies are such that the exchange rate is

variable,   home and foreign currency bonds are imperfect substitutes. The risk
characteristics of a   countryts currency bond depend directly on the country's

monetary policy. If the couutrys monetary policy is passive, the bond is a

perfect substitute for a claim the country's output, which is more risky for

the   country than it is for the other country, and there is a tendency for the
country to export its currency bond. If the monetary policy is price-level
stabilizing, the bond is a perfect substitute for the indexed bond, and it may
be traded in any direction. (ii) When monetary policies are coordinated such
as to fix the exchange rate, home and foreign currency bonds are perfect
substitutes.    Their risk characteristic depend on the coordinated monetary

policies. If the exchange rate regime is a one-sided peg, and if the

non-pegging country is pursuing a passive       monetary   policy, home and foreign
                                      34


currency   bonds are perfect substitutes for a claim to the non-pegging

countryts output. Then the non-pegging country will export home and foreign

currency bonds and have a capital account surplus and current account deficit.

If the non-pegging country is pursuing a price-level stabilizing policy, home

and foreign currency bonds are perfect substitutes for the indexed bond.

There will be no trade, and capital and current accounts will each be

balanced. If the exchange rate regime is a two-sided peg, home and foreign

currency bonds are perfect substitutes for a claim to world output, there will

be no trade, and capital and current accounts will each be balanced.

     Second,   let us summarize the results when the countries differ with
respect to their attitudes towards risk, in that the home country is more risk
averse   than tile foreign country. Their period 2 outputs are assumed to be

equal and hence perfectly correlated. Their autarky interest rates are

assumed to be equal.    (i) When tile countries pursue different monetary

policies, the exchange rate is variable, and home and foreign bonds are

imperfect substitutes. For the country pursuing a passive monetary policy,

the countryt s currency bond is a perfect substitute for a claim to world

output, and there is a tendency for the bond to be exported by the more risk

averse home country. For the country pursuing a price-level stabilizing

policy, the countryts currency bond is a perfect substitute for the indexed

bond, and the bond may be traded iii ally direction.   (ii) When the countries

monetary polices are coordinated and tile exchange rate is fixed, home and

foreign currency bonds are perfect substitutes. If tile exchange rate regime

is a one-sided peg, and if the non-pegging country is pursuing a passive

monetary policy, home and foreign currency bonds are perfect substitutes to a

claim to world output. Then tile more risk averse home country will export

home and foreign currency bonds and have a capital account surplus and current

account deficit. This case is identical to the two-sided peg, since world
                                         35



 money supply is constant. If the non-pegging country is pursuing a

price-level stabilizing policy, home and foreign currency bonds are perfect

 substitutes to the indexed bond, there will be no trade and both countries'

capital and current accounts will each be balanced.

     We see that different monetary policies have dramatic effects on risk

characteristics of home and foreign currency bonds, which in turn has dramatic

effects on the pattern of trade and even the sign of the aggregate capital

accounts. The effects on the pattern of trade is of course not independent of

the assumption that home and foreign currency bonds are the only assets

traded. Monetary policy has real effects in this framework precisely because

asset markets are assumed to be incomplete, and because monetary policy

changes the risk characteristics of the real returns of available assets. If

indexed bonds and claims to home aiid foreign output is traded alongside with

home and foreign currency bonds, there is no effect on aggregate capital

accounts, for the different monetary policies we have considered. Neither is

there any   relevant   effect on the pattern of trade in "effective" assets, since

the number of linearly independent effective assets then does not change. If

the asset market would be complete, in the sense of the the rank of the real

return matrix being equal to the number of states of the world, any monetary

policies would in the present framework have no real effects at all. Clearly,

it is not restrictive to assume that real world internatiollal capital markets

are incomplete. Even the simple case of trade in only home and foreign

currency bonds has an attractive realistic touch, I think. The amount of

international trade in equity is so far relatively small, although rising.

International trade in anything remotely similar to an indexed bond is, as far

as I know, completely insignificant.25


25   Perhaps a partial explanation to why there is so little trade in indexed
bonds in the real world is that a bond indexed to one country's consumer price
index, say, would not in general be a perfect substitute for a bond indexed to
                                     36



     These results also provide another demonstration of something that is by

now widely acknowledged, namely tlia,t reduced-form asset demand functions are

very sensitive to the policy regime, in this case the monetary policy and

exchange rate regime. For instance, the asset demand functions presumed in

simple variants of the portfolio-balance approach to exchange rate

determination are simply not stable over the policy experiments usually

considered.

     The present framework can obviously easily incorporate a large variety of

real and nominal assets, and a large variety of monetary policies and exchange

rate regimes. Several goods caii be added to allow for a discussion of both

goods and asset trade. Let us however discuss some of the more severe

limitations inherent in the approach, and some related possible extensions.

The main advantage of Law of Comparative Advantage, in general and when

applied to our context, is that it requires information only about autarky

equilibria, and that it is iiot necessary to solve explicitly for the trade

equilibria. The main disadvantage is that it does not give exact results for

a given asset but only results in terms of   correlations,   when there are more

than one asset available for international trade. Roughly, the larger the

number of assets, the less precise the prediction for each individual asset.

More specific results about the pattern and volume of trade, for instance from

comparative statics experiments, requires the direct study of the trade

equilibria. Since it is frequently more difficult to solve for trade

equilibria than for autarky equilibria, solvability of the trade equilibria

may require additional restrictions on the model, restrictions not needed when

the Law of Comparative Advantage is used. Persson and Svensson (1987) make




another country's CPI, since the OPTs would generally differ. On a micro
level, a bond iiidexed to one investor's individual CPI would generally not be
a perfect substitute to a bond indexed to another investor's individual OPT if
their preferences and consumption baskets differ.
                                         37



additional assumptions that allow explicit and simple solutions of such trade

equilibria, and undertake a more specific study of how exchange rate

variability determine trade patterns and trade volumes in asset trade

equilibria.

      An important simplifying aspect of the specific model we use is that

assets' real return risk characteristics, suniniarized by the the real return

matrix, depends only oii outputs and monetary policies. Once the stochastic

properties of outputs and monetary policies are specified, the real return

matrix is given. In particular. for given monetary policies, the real return

matrix is the same in autarky and in a trade equilibrium. If output is

endogenously determined (for instance because investment is incorporated), or

if   the   demand for money is specified in some other way than with the

cash-in-advance     constraints we have assumed, the real return matrix would in
general not be exogenous once monetary policy is specified. In particular,
the real return matrix would iii general not be the same in a trade equilibrium
as   in   an autarky equilibrium.26

      Our approach can however still I)e used also when the real return matrix

is different in autarky and in trade equilibria. The trick is to derive the
real return matrix in the trade equilibrium, and then take that real return
matrix as given and compute the corresponding hypothetical autarky asset
prices for the given real return matrix. These hypothetical autarky prices
then predict the pattern of trade in assets. Of course, the operation
requires the solution of (at least part of) the trade equilibrium.




26   This complication also arises in the barter economy with real assets like
claims to output, when output is ciidogeiious. See Svensson (1987) for a
discussion within the context of the barter economy of that complication and
related ones when there many periods.
                                       38



     There is a related, and perhaps more fundamental, problem with applying

the Law of Comparative Advantage iii   a   iiionetary economy. The law requires the

Gains-from-Trade Theorem to hold. The Gains-from-Trade Theorem need not hold

if there are domestic distortions in autarky. Hence, it is crucial how money

is introduced. More specifically, it is crucial whether or not money is

introduced in such a way that the autarky equilibrium is distorted, that is,

whether or not the autarky equilibrium is Pareto efficient. When money is

introduced via cash-in-advance constraints and output is exogenous, the

autarky equilibrium is Pareto efficient (this is a special case of the result

by Helpman (1981) mentioned above, that a monetary trade equilibrium is

equivalent to a barter trade equilibrium). If money is introduced in a

different way so as to make the autarky equilibrium not Pareto efficient, it

must be checked whether there still are gains from trade, before the Law of

Comparative Advantage can be used. Whether there are gains from trade will

obviously depend on the details of how the demand for money is modeled, and on

what monetary policies are being pursued. Further research is needed on this

issue.
                                                     39


                     Appendix: The Seiuence of Markets and Transactions
        The precise sequence of markets and transactions is the following. In
the beginning of period 1 the consumer receives a transfer of home currency,
    front the home government. (This transfer equals the period 1 supply of
home currency.) After that he can trade currencies and assets on the world

asset market. He takes the set J of assets and the return matrix r as given.

Let         and N1 denote his holdings of home and foreign currency after trading

on the asset market. His budget constraint is then

(A.1)             M1 + etN1 +    <   i1
where         =
                   ()EJ    is the J-vector of asset         prices in   terms of home currency,
and    Q1z denotes the inner product                       After the transactions on the asset

market are completed, the consumer can purchase goods on the goods market. He

must pay for goods produced in the home country with home currency, and for

goods produced in the foreign country with foreign currency. Hence, he faces

the liquidity constraints

(A.2)             P1c       and p*l4       N1,

where P1 and             are the goods prices in home and foreign currency, and            c1 and
4     are   consumption of goods produced in the home and foreign country. Coods

produced in the home and foreign country are perfect substitutes in

consumption, and total period 1            consumption      is


(A.3)         c1 =
                        c + 4.
        At the end of period 1, or in the beginning of period 2, the consumer
receives revenues in home currency from tile sale of home output. He learns

the state of the world in period 2               ,   and receives a state-dependent cash

transfer     from the home government and tile state- dependent currency returns on
his   assets. He can then trade on a world currency market in the beginning of

period 2. His budget constraint in state s, is

(A.4)         M2(s) + e2(s)N2(s)          P1y1 + (i2(s)11) + (M1-P1c)
                                            40



                                   + e2(s)(NlP*l4) + P2(s)r(s)z.

The terms on the right-hand side are revenues from sales of home period 1

output,    the cash transfer from the home government     (which equals the expansion

of    the home money supply), home currency left over from the goods market in
period 1, the value in home currency of foreign currency left over from the
goods market in period 1 (e2(s) is the state-dependent exchange rate in period
2),    and the home currency value of the return on assets. (The expression

r(s)z denotes product Er(s)z.)27 On the left-hand side, M2(s) and N2(s)

are the holdings of home and foreign currency after trade on the currency

market is completed.

        After the currency market, the consumer can by goods produced at home and

abroad in the goods market, facing the liquidity constraints

(A.5)        P2(s)c(s) <M(s)       and P*2(s)c(s)     N(s), for all s,

where c(s) and c1(s) are consumption of goods produced in the home and

foreign country, respectively. Total consumption in period 2 is

(A.6)        c2(s) =
                       c(s)    + c(s),   for all s.
        Towards the end of period 2 the consumer receives revenues P2(s)y2 in
home currency from the sales of home output in state s in period 2. He has to
pay a tax T3(s) in home currency to the home government. Hence he faces the
constraints
(A.7)        0   P2(s)y2   +               - T3(s), for all s.
                               (M2(s)-P2(s)c(s))
(The second term on the right-hand side is home currency left over from the
period 2    goods   market.)




27   The home currency value of the ieturns, P2(s)r(s)z, equals the sum of
returns on home currency assets,              and the home currency value of

foreign    currency assets, e2(s)JEJ*R1(s)zJ, where      J*   C   J denotes   the subset of
foreign    currency assets.
                                                41


        The home consumer's decision problem is hence to choose consumption

(c1,(c2(s))), currency holdings (I1JI2(s)) and (N1,N2(s)), and asset import z,

so as to maximize the expected utility function (2.3) subject to the

constraints (A.1)- (A.7).

        The   home government supplies home currency          in period 1, and M2(s) in
state s in period 2, via net transfers to the home consumer. It also levels
the tax T3(s) oii the home consumer at tile end of period 2. This tax has to be
paid in home currency, but is is indexed such that its real value is equal to
home period 2 output in state s. hence it is given by28
(A.8)         T3(s) =   P2(s)y2,   for all s.

        This completes the description of the home country's transactions. The

foreign country also consists of a representative consumer and a government.

The foreign consumer chooses consumption (c*',c*2(s)), currency holdings

(M*l,M*2(s)) and (N*l,N*2(s)), and         asset     import z, so as to maximize his

expected utility subject to a similar sequence of constraints as the home

consumer. At the beginning of period 1 the foreign consumer receives a

transfer N1 of foreign currency from the foreign government. Thereafter he

can trade on the world asset and goods market and then faces constraints

analog    to (A.1)- (A.3). As the home consumer, he takes the set J of assets and
the return matrix r as given. At tile beginning of period 2 the foreign
consumer receives foreign currenc revenues from sales of foreign period 1
output, a foreign currency transfer N2(s)-N1 from its government, and returns

on its assets. The foreign consumer trades on the period 2 currency and            goods




28   The only role of this tax is to provide a rationale for the sale of
period 2 output, even though the revenues reach the consumer after the goods
market is closed. If the tax is introduced it need to be defined in real
terms to give a determinate price level iii the second period. Alternatively,
one can disregard the tax, and simply assume that period 2 output is supplied
and sold even though there is no use for the cash revenues received.
                                                    42



markets and then faces constraints analog to (A.4)-(A.6). Finally, at the end

of period 2 the foreign consumer receives foreign currency revenues from sales

of   foreign    period 2 output, and must pay a tax T*3(s) in foreign currency to

the    foreign government, hence facing the constraint analog to (A.7),
(A.9)        0        P*2(s)y*2+ (N*2(s)P*2(s)c2(s)) -             T*3(s),   for all s.

        The foreign government supplies foreign currency (N,N2(s)) and levies

the tax T*3(s) in foreign           currenc.y at the end of period 2          such that the taxts

real    value    is equal to foreign period 2 output, that is,

(A.1O)       T*3(s) =     P*2(s)y*2,       for all s.

        Equilibrium on the asset market in period 1 requires that demand and

supply of currencies are equal, and that home and foreign asset import sum to

zero. That is,

(A.11)            +       =        N1 +    N*l   = N1, and

(A.12)       z1 +     z   =   0.
Equilibrium      in the goods market iii          period 1 requires that home and foreign
consumption      of goods produced in the home country, and in the foreign country,

are equal to output of goods in the home and foreign country, that is,

(A.13) c +            c   = y1     and 4    + c1    =   y*1.
       Equilibrium on the period 2 currency market in each state of the world

requires

(A.14)       M2(s) + M*2(s) =        I2(s)       and N2(s) +   N*2(s)   N(s), for all s.

Equilibrium on the period 2 goods market in each state of the world implies

(A.15)       c(s) +       c2(s)   arid cf(s) + c2(s) = y2, for all s.
                                   = y2

       The   equilibrium can be determined from these market equilibrium
conditions      and   the behavioral functions derived from the home and foreign
consumers'      decision problems. There is. however, a much simpler way to

determine the equilibrium. The trick is to use binding liquidity constraints

to simplify the        consumers' budget constraints.            More precisely, we shall show
                                               43



that consumers' budget constraints in equilibrium are equivalent to those in a

barter economy.

        First, let us note that from (A.7)-(A.1O) it follows that in equilibrium

the liquidity constraints (A.5) and their analogs for the foreign country are

binding in each state in period 2.         (Constraint (A.5) for foreign currency

must bind if the consumer maximizes his utility. Constraints (A.7) and (A.8)

imply (A.5), hence the consumer caii in equilibrium fulfill (A.7) and still let

(A.5) for home currency bind.) Together with the goods market equilibrium

conditions (A.15) this implies that the home and foreign price levels in

period 2 fulfill the quantity-theory (-of-money) equations

(A.16)       P2(s) =   M2(s)/y2   and P*2(s)        N2(s)/y*2, for all s,

that is, (5.1).

        Under   the assumption that the nominal interest rates on home and foreign
currency bonds are positive it is optimal for the home and foreign consumers
not to hold any excess cash. Then it follows that the period 1 liquidity
constraints (A.2) and their analogs for the foreign country are binding, which

together with the period 1 goods market equilibrium condition (A.13) implies

that the period 1 home and foreign price levels fulfill the quantity-theory

equat ioiis29




29     If  the nominal interest rate on home currency bonds, say, is zero (that
is,    if the nominal price on the period 1 asset market of a claim to a sure
unit   of home currency in period 2 is equal to unity, 1/(1+i) =            = 1) the
consumers are indifferent to the amount of excess home currency balances they
hold. It can be shown that the period 1 home price level then is independent
of period 1 home currency supply and given by the more complicated equation
P1 =                         yt/M1. The equivalence of the monetary
       U(c1)/flE{U(c2)y2/I2]
equilibrium with that of a barter economy still holds, as Helpman (1981) has
demonstrated for the certainty case. (The argument for the uncertainty case
is easy to construct.)
     Our results about the trade patterii in nominal assets is independent of
whether period 1 liquidity constraints bind or not.
                                                     44



(A.17)      P1 =             and           =   Nh/y*l.
     We also note that in equilibriuiii the Law of One Price must hold. If it

would not, home and foreign consumers would shift all their demand towards

goods from one country. Hence,

(A.18)      P1 =    e'P*l    and P2(s) =         e2(s)P*2(s),   for all s,

that is, (5.2)

     It follows from (A.16)-(A.18) that the exchange rate equations are

(A.19)      e1 =    (Mh/Nl)(y*l/yl)            and e2(s) =   (M2(s)/N2(s))(y*2/y2),   for all s,

that is, (5.3).

     Using the quantity equations and the Law of One Price, it is easy to see

that the period 1 budget and licjuidity constraints for the home consumer can

be simplified to P1c1 + Q1z = P1y1, or

(A.20)      c1 + qz =       y1,
where q =             (t/P1) is the J-vector of asset prices measured in goods.
            (q)
This implies (2.7). Similarly, tile period 2 budget constraint simplifies to

P2(s)c2(s)    P2(s)y2 +           P2(s)r(s)z,      or

(A.21)      c2(s)     y2 +        r(s)z,   for all s,

that is, (2.5).
                                            45


                                        References
Deardorff, A.V.,        1980, "The General Validity     of the Law of Comparative
     Advantage," Journal of Political Economy 88, 941-957.
Dixit,   A.K., and V. Norman,      1980, Theory   of   International Trade, Cambridge:
     Nisbet and      Cambridge University Press.
Fama, E.F., and A. Farber, 1979, "Money, Bonds, and Foreign Exchange,"
     American Economic Review 69, 639-649.

Grauer, F.L.A., R.H. Litzenberger, and        R.E. Stehie, 1979, "Sharing Rules and
     Equilibrium in an International Capital Market under Uncertainty,"

     ournai
     1    1      -C P
                oi      inmuii 1
                             .   V.        • ")-
                               FjUOIIUtIIU •, L)- ZOO.
Helpinan, E., 1981, "An Exploration of tile Theory of Exchange-Rate Regimes,"
     Journal of Political Economy 89, 865-890.

Helpman, E., and A. Razin, 1982, "A Comparison of Exchange Rate Regimes in the

     Presence of Imperfect Capital Markets," International Economic Review 23,

     365-388.

Helpman, E., and A.Razin, 1984, "The Role of Saving and Investment in Exchange

     Rate Determination under Alternative Monetary Mechanisms," Journal of

     Monetary Economics 13, 3307-325.

Kouri, P.J.K., 1977, "International Investment and Interest Rate Linkages

     under Flexible Exchange Rates," in:          R.Z. Aliber, ed., The Political
     Economy   of    Monetary Reform, New York.

Lucas, R.E., Jr., 1982, "Interest Rates          and Currency Prices in a Two-Country
     World,"   Journal of Monetary Economics 10, 335-359.

Persson, T., 1982, Studies of Alternative         Exchange Rate Systems: An
     Intertemporal General Equilibrium        Approach,    TIES Monograph No. 13,

     Stockholm: TIES.
                                           46



Persson, T., 1984, "Real Transfers in       Fixed     Exchange Rate Systems and the

     International Adjustment Mechanism," Journal of Monetary Economics 13,

     349-369.

Persson, T., and A.C. Stockman, 1987, Theory of International Financial

     Markets, in progress.

Persson, T., and L.E.O. Svensson, 1987, "Exchange Rate Variability and Asset

     Trade," lIES, mimeo.

Rubinstein, M., 1976, "The Valuation of Uncertain Income Streams and the

     Pricing of Options," Bell Journal of Economics 7, 407-425.

Sandmo, A., 1974, "Two-Period Models of Consumption under Uncertainty: A

     Survey," Chapter 2 in J.I!. Dreze, ed., Allocation under Uncertainty:

     EQuilibrium and Optimalitv, New York and Toronto: Wiley.

Selden, L., 1978, "A New Representation of Preferences over 'Certain

     Uncertain' Consumption Pairs: The 'Ordinal Certainty Equivalent'

     Hypothesis," Econoinetrica 46, 1045-1060.

Stockman, A.C., 1983, "Real Exchange Rates under Alternative Nominal

     Exchange-Rate   Systems," Journal of International Money and Finance 2,
     147- 166.

Stockman,   A.C., and   L.E.O.   Svensson, 1987, "Capital Flows, Investment and

     Exchange Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics 19,          171-201.

Stulz,   R.M., 1984, "Currency Preferences, Purchasing Power        Risks, and the

     Determination   of Exchange Rates in an Optimizing Model," Journal of
     Money, Credit, and Banking       16, :302-316.

Svensson,   L.E.O., 1985, "Currency Prices, Terms of Trade and Interest Rates: A
     General Equilibrium Asset-Pricing Cash-in-Advance Approach," Journal of
     International Economics 18, 17-41.
Svensson,   L.E.O., 1987, "Trade in     Risky   Assets," TIES Seminar Paper   No. 391.
                                         47

                    Table 1. Summary of Results: Outvut Differences

                            (a)                         (b)              (c)
 Foreign    policy:       Passive         Stable price level        Two-sided peg
                          (k*=O)                   (k*=1)

  Home policy:

 (1) Passive           ni=h: Export             nih: Export
         (k=O)         n=f: Import                 n=O: ?


(2)      Stable           m=O: ?              m=n=O: No trade
      price level      n=f: Import
         (k=1)

(3) One-sided         m=n=f: Import           iii=n=O: No trade
      peg

(4) Two-sided                                                      m=n=w: No trade
      peg


            Table 2. Summary of Results: Home Country More Risk Averse


                            (a)                         (b)              (c)
 Foreign policy:         Passive          Stable price level       Two-sided peg
                          (k*=O)                   (k*=1)

  Home policy:

(1) Passive           m=n=w: Export             iu=w:   Export
         (k=O)                                    nO: ?

(2)      Stable          m=O: ?               iti=n=O: No trade
      price level      n=w: Export
         (k=1)

(3) One-sided         m=nw: Export            iii=ii=O: No trade
      peg

(4) Two-sided                                                      m=n=w: Export
      peg


      "Export" and "Import't for an asset denotes a tendency for the home
country to export or import the asset. "?" denotes either export or, import
(autarky asset prices are equal but other assets are also traded). "No trade"
denotes neither export nor import (autarky asset prices are equal, and no
other asset is traded).
