NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR INCOME DISTRIBUTION
AND UNEMPLOYMENT
Anton Korinek
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper 24174
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24174

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017

We would like to thank our discussant Tyler Cowan as well as Jayant Ray and participants at the
NBER conference for helpful comments. We also acknowledge research assistance from Haaris
Mateen as well as financial support from the Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET) and
the Rewriting the Rules project at the Roosevelt Institute, supported by the Ford and Open
Society Foundations, and the Bernard and Irene Schwartz Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Anton Korinek and Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Artificial Intelligence and Its Implications for Income Distribution and Unemployment
Anton Korinek and Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 24174
December 2017
JEL No. D63,E64,O3
ABSTRACT
Inequality is one of the main challenges posed by the proliferation of artificial intelligence (AI)
and other forms of worker-replacing technological progress. This paper provides a taxonomy of
the associated economic issues: First, we discuss the general conditions under which new
technologies such as AI may lead to a Pareto improvement. Secondly, we delineate the two main
channels through which inequality is affected – the surplus arising to innovators and
redistributions arising from factor price changes. Third, we provide several simple economic
models to describe how policy can counter these effects, even in the case of a “singularity” where
machines come to dominate human labor. Under plausible conditions, non-distortionary taxation
can be levied to compensate those who otherwise might lose. Fourth, we describe the two main
channels through which technological progress may lead to technological unemployment – via
efficiency wage effects and as a transitional phenomenon. Lastly, we speculate on how
technologies to create super-human levels of intelligence may affect inequality and on how to
save humanity from the Malthusian destiny that may ensue.

Anton Korinek
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
Wyman Park Building 531
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
akorinek@jhu.edu
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu

Introduction
The introduction of artificial intelligence (AI) is the continuation of a long process of
automation. Advances in mechanization in the late‐nineteenth and early‐twentieth century
automated much of the physical labor performed by humans. Advances in information
technology in the mid‐ to late‐twentieth century automated much of the standardized data
processing that used to be performed by humans. However, each of these past episodes of
automation left large areas of work that could only be performed by humans.
Some propose that advances in AI are merely the latest wave in this long process of automation
(see e.g. Gordon, 2016). Others, by contrast, emphasize that AI critically differs from past
inventions: as artificial intelligence draws closer and closer to human general intelligence, much
of human labor runs the risk of becoming obsolete and being replaced by AI in all domains. In
this view, progress in artificial intelligence is not only a continuation but the culmination of
technological progress – it could lead to a course of history that is markedly different from the
implications of previous waves of innovation, and may even represent what James Barrat
(2013) has termed “Our Final Invention.”
No matter what the long‐run implications of AI are, it is clear that it has the potential to disrupt
labor markets in a major way, even in the short and medium run, affecting workers across many
professions and skill levels.2 The magnitude of these disruptions will depend on two important
factors: the speed and the factor bias of progress in AI.
On the first factor, measured productivity has increased rather slowly in recent years, even as
the world seems to be captured by AI fever.3 If AI‐related innovations enter the economy at the
same slow pace as suggested by recent productivity statistics, then the transition will be slower
than e.g. the wave of mechanization in the 1950 – 1970s, and the resulting disruptions may not
be very significant. However, there are three possible alternatives: First, some suggest that
productivity is significantly under‐measured, for example because quality improvements are
not accurately captured. The best available estimates suggest that this problem is limited to a
few tenth of a percentage point (see e.g. the discussion in Groshen et al., 2017). Furthermore,
there are also unmeasured deteriorations in productivity, e.g. declines in service quality as
customer service is increasingly automated. Secondly, the aggregate implications of progress in
AI may follow a delayed pattern, similar to what happened after the introduction of computers
2

For example, Frey and Osborne (2017) warn that 47% of jobs in the US economy are at risk of being automated
by advances in AI‐related fields. Areas in which human intelligence has recently become inferior to artificial
intelligence include many applications of radiology, trading in financial markets, paralegal work, underwriting,
driving etc.
3
For example, Google Trends reveals that search interest in the topic “artificial intelligence” has quadrupled over
the past four years.

2

in the 1980s. Robert Solow (1987) famously quipped that “you can see the computer age
everywhere but in the productivity statistics.” It was not until the 1990s that a significant rise in
aggregate productivity could be detected, after sustained investment in computers and a
reorganization of business practices had taken place. Third, it is of course possible that a
significant discontinuity in productivity growth occurs, as suggested e.g. by proponents of a
technological singularity (see e.g. Kurzweil, 2005).
On the second factor, the disruptions generated by AI‐related innovations depend on whether
they are labor‐augmenting or labor‐saving, using the terminology of Hicks (1932), i.e. whether
at a given wage, the innovations lead to more or less demand for labor. Some suggest that
artificial intelligence will mainly assist humans in being more productive, and refer to such new
technologies as intelligence assisting innovation, IA, rather than AI. Although we agree that
most AI‐related innovations are likely to be complementary to at least some jobs – e.g. the ones
applying AI to solve problems – we believe that taking a broader perspective, progress in AI is
more likely to substitute for human labor, or even to replace workers outright, as we will
assume in some of our formal models below.
We believe that the primary economic challenge posed by the proliferation of AI will be one of
income distribution. We economists set ourselves too easy a goal if we just say that
technological progress can make everybody better off – we also have to say how we can make
this happen. The following paper is an attempt to do so by discussing some of the key economic
research issues that this brings up.4
In section 2 of our paper, we provide a general taxonomy of the relationship between
technological progress and welfare. We first observe that in a truly first‐best economy – in
which complete risk markets are available before a veil of ignorance about innovations is lifted
– all individuals will share in the benefits of technological progress. However, since the real
world does not correspond to this ideal, redistribution is generally needed to ensure that
technological progress generates Pareto improvements. If markets are perfect and
redistribution is costless, it can always be ensured that technological progress makes everybody
better off. The same result holds if the costs of redistribution are sufficiently low. In all these
cases, there can be political unanimity about the desirability of technological progress.
However, if redistribution is too costly, it may be impossible to compensate the losers of
technological progress, and they will rationally oppose progress. Even worse, if the economy
suffers from market imperfections, technological progress may actually move the Pareto
frontier inwards, i.e. some individuals may necessarily be worse off. Finally, we observe that the

4

An important, and maybe even more difficult, complementary question, which is beyond the scope of this paper,
is to analyze the political issues involved.

3

first welfare theorem does not apply to the process of innovation, and as a result, privately
optimal innovation choices may move the Pareto frontier inwards.
In section 3, we decompose the mechanisms through which innovation leads to inequality into
two channels. First, inequality rises because innovators earn a surplus. Unless markets for
innovation are fully contestable, the surplus earned by innovators is generally in excess of the
costs of innovation and includes what we call innovator rents. We discuss policies that affect
the sharing of such rents, such as antitrust policies and changes in intellectual property rights.
The second channel is that innovations change the demand for factors such as different types of
labor and capital, which affects their prices and generates redistributions. For example, AI may
reduce a wide range of human wages and generate a redistribution to entrepreneurs. From the
perspective of our first‐best benchmark with complete insurance markets, these factor price
change represent pecuniary externalities. We discuss policies to counter the effects of the
resulting factor price changes.
In section 4, we develop a simple formal model of worker‐replacing technological change, i.e.
we introduce a machine technology that acts as a perfect substitute for human labor. We study
the implications for wages and discuss policy remedies. In the short run, an additional unit of
machine labor that is added to the economy earns its marginal product, but also generates a
zero‐sum redistribution from labor to traditional capital because it changes the relative supply
of the two. In the long run, the machine technology turns labor into a reproducible factor. Thus,
in the long run, growth will likely be limited by some other irreproducible factor, and all the
benefits of technological progress will accrue to that factor. However, since it is in fixed supply,
they can be taxed and redistributed without creating distortions, and a Pareto improvement is
easily achieved.
In a second model, we demonstrate how changes in patent length and capital taxation can act
as a second‐best device to redistribute if lump sum transfers between workers and innovators
are not available. A longer patent life both delays how quickly innovations enter the public
domain, lowering consumer prices, and increases the incentives of innovators to produce
worker‐replacing machines. However, the resulting losses for workers can be made up for by
imposing a distortionary tax on capital and providing transfers, so long as the supply elasticity
of capital is sufficiently low. We also discuss the implications of endogenous factor bias in
technological change. Worker‐replacing technological progress should make capital‐saving
innovations more desirable, providing some relief to workers. We also note that our economy is
developing more and more into a service economy, and that the large role of government in
many service sectors (e.g. education, healthcare, etc.) creates ample scope for interventions to
support workers.

4

In section 5, we observe two sound economic reasons that may lead to technological
unemployment. The first category of reasons arises because wages cannot adjust, even in the
long run: efficiency wage theory implies that employers may find it efficient to pay “fair wages”
above the market clearing level so that workers have incentives to exert proper effort. If
technological progress continues unabated and the marginal product of workers declines below
their cost of living, then classic nutritional efficiency wage theories apply: unemployment would
result because workers could not survive working for the market‐clearing wage without
government support. The second category of technological unemployment arises as a transition
phenomenon, when jobs are replaced at a faster rate than workers can find new ones. We
discuss a variety of factors that may slow down the adjustment process. Efficiency wage
arguments may also play an important role as a transitional phenomenon, in particular if
workers’ notion of fair wages is sticky. Finally, we discuss that jobs may not only provide wages
but also meaning and note that, unless societal attitudes change with the proliferation of AI, it
may be welfare enhancing to subsidize jobs rather than simply redistributing resources.
In section 6, we take a longer‐term perspective that is somewhat more speculative and discuss
the potential implications of super‐human artificial intelligence. We consider two scenarios:
one in which some humans use technology to enhance themselves and attain super‐human
intelligence; and one in which autonomous machines that are completely separate from
humans reach super‐human intelligence. In both cases, the superior productivity of superior
intelligence will likely lead to vast increases in income inequality. From a Malthusian
perspective, the super‐intelligent entities are likely to command a growing share of the scarce
resources in the economy, pushing regular humans below their subsistence level. We discuss a
number of corrective actions that could be taken.

Technological Progress and Welfare: A Taxonomy
In 1930, Keynes wrote an essay on the “Economic Possibilities of our Grandchildren,” in which
he described how technological possibilities may translate into utility possibilities. He worried
about the quality of life that would emerge in a world with excess leisure. And he thought all
individuals might face that quandary. But what has happened in recent years has raised
another possibility: innovation could lead to a few very rich individuals—who may face this
challenge—whereas the vast majority of ordinary workers may be left behind, with wages far
below what they were at the peak of the industrial age.
So let us start by considering the arrival of a new technology that partially (or fully) replaces
workers and let’s ask the question: would their standard of living necessarily decline? We will
consider this question in a number of different settings, providing a taxonomy for how

5

technological progress might affect the welfare of different groups in society depending on the
environment:

First Best
We start with a first‐best scenario in which we assume that all markets are perfect, including
risk markets that allow individuals to insure against the advent of innovations “behind the veil
of ignorance,” i.e. before they know whether they will be workers or innovators. The main
purpose for considering this idealized setting is to demonstrate that from an ex‐ante
perspective, compensating workers for the losses imposed by technological progress is a
question of economic efficiency not redistribution.
If risk markets were perfect and accessible to all agents before they knew their place in the
economy, then all agents would be insured against any risk that might significantly affect their
well‐being, including the risk of innovation reducing the value of their factor endowment. For
example, workers would be insured against the risk of declining wages.5 This leads us to the
following observation:
Observation 1)
Consider a first‐best world in which all individuals have access to a perfect
insurance market “behind the veil of ignorance,” i.e. before they know whether they will
be innovators or workers. If an innovation occurs in such a world, the winners would
compensate the losers as a matter of optimal risk sharing. As a result, technological
progress always makes everybody better off, and there is political unanimity in supporting
it.
This is a powerful observation because it reminds us that if we had an ideal market, something
that very much looks like redistribution would naturally emerge. In our first‐best economy,
there are no losers from technological progress. Losers only exist if risk markets are imperfect
compared to this benchmark. In more technical language, worker‐replacing technological
progress imposes pecuniary externalities on workers, which lead to inefficiency when risk
markets are imperfect (see e.g. Stiglitz, 1981; Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1986; Geanakoplos and
Polemarchakis, 1986; or more recently Davila and Korinek, 2017).
This implies that policy measures to mitigate or undo the pecuniary externalities arising from
technological progress – for example redistribution programs –make the economy’s allocation
more efficient from an ex‐ante perspective, rather than “interfering” with economic efficiency.
They bring us closer to the allocation that a well‐functioning risk market would achieve.
Policymakers who oppose redistribution that compensates the losers of innovation because it
interferes with the free market seem to – inappropriately, in our view – take an ex‐post
5

We will discuss the reasons why this is typically not the case in practice below.

6

perspective, after an innovation has taken place and after individuals know their place in the
economy. Even though they may pretend to preach about idealized free markets, they clearly
have not understood the full implications of how an idealized free market would work, i.e. that
such a market would provide precisely the type of insurance that they are opposing.
In practice, even after they know that they are workers, the majority of workers replaced by
technological progress do not have insurance contracts against being replaced. Of course there
are good reasons for why such idealized risk markets are not present in the real world:
First, the limited lifespan of humans makes it difficult to write insurance contracts that stretch
over multiple generations. Workers would have had to obtain the described insurance a long
time ago, before AI was well‐conceived and its implications were clear, when the associated
insurance premium would have been commensurately low. Perhaps their far‐sighted ancestors
could have written state‐contingent contracts on their behalf. Today, obtaining insurance
against AI reducing wages would require workers to pay large amounts since the possibility is
very real. In short, effective insurance would have had to take place behind a “veil of
ignorance” about the likely advent of AI.
To put it another way, in this perspective, the first “insurable damage” to the individual occurs
at the time that the probability of an innovation becomes non‐negligible, for at that time, the
insurance premium required for income smoothing becomes significant, and her welfare is
lowered. The individual would have wanted to buy insurance against the risk that her insurance
premium would go up. Thus, in a perfect market, insurance markets would have to go back at
least to a date at which there was a negligible probability that the innovation occurs. This
presents a problem: it may be that at the moment that the concept of AI is formulated
precisely enough to be an insurable event (and therefore becomes an insurable event) it has a
non‐zero probability.
Second, even for more limited time periods, risk markets with respect to technological change
are clearly not perfect. Among the main reasons are information problems:
Describing the State Space: This starts with the basic problem of how difficult it is to describe
the future state space.6 We cannot easily write a contract on something before it has been
invented. Addressing this problem would require that an individual has to be insured against
any technological event that leads to lower wages.
Furthermore, the curse of asymmetric information which inhibits insurance markets is as
prevalent here as it is elsewhere:
Adverse Selection: Innovation leads to important adverse selection problems. Some people in
the market are more informed than others—including than those who might provide insurance.
6

Interestingly, this type of information problem is easy to deal with after innovation has occurred, because then
we know what has been invented and in which state we are, but very difficult to capture in ex‐ante contracts.

7

Although, there is no reason that workers would be more informed about the progress of AI
than insurers, in an ideal market, the winners of innovation would provide insurance to the
losers, and the winners (e.g. entrepreneurs) would almost certainly be better informed than the
losers (e.g. workers).
Moral Hazard: Innovation may also be subject to moral hazard problems, i.e. the presence of
insurance may affect the likelihood that the insured event occurs. Again, although workers are
unlikely to affect the pace of innovation in AI, the actions of innovators may be, to some extent,
affected. If they were to completely insure away all their returns from innovation, there would
be scant incentive to exert effort.7 Since, in a perfect insurance world, the winners would insure
the losers, full insurance may be infeasible.
Insurance and redistribution
A natural counter‐part to observation 1 is that in the absence of perfect insurance markets
“behind the veil of ignorance,” there generally is a need for redistribution. If workers have
access to some insurance against the risk of AI but not perfect insurance, this doesn’t remove
the need for redistributions. Redistribution is generally needed unless the sale of insurance
occurs “behind the veil of ignorance.”
For example, obtaining AI insurance today would require workers to pay a large premium. Of
course, conceptually, if one went back in time, before AI was well‐conceived and its
implications clear, one might argue that the premium would be low. But even that might not
be so, since premia for large events, even with small probability, can be high. In any case, at
the very moment of conception of AI—the first possible moment that one could conceivably
have written a policy—AI would still have distributional consequences; workers would have to
pay a premium to divest themselves of this risk, and thus they are worse off, and even more so,
when compared to the innovators, the winners.

Perfect Markets Ex‐Post and No Costs of Redistribution
Our next case pertains to a world that may be described as a 2nd‐best world without the perfect
insurance markets referred to earlier, but in which, ex post, all markets are functioning well and
there can be costless redistributions. This case covers several critical results that, although

7

Some might argue that this problem is equally hard to deal with before or after innovation has occurred. If we tax
innovators ex‐post, it destroys incentives just as much as if we fully insure away all returns from innovation. But
this may not be so. If Bill Gates had been told, ex ante, that government would take away 50% of his returns over
$10 billion, there is little reason to believe that it would have had any significant effect on innovation and
investment. Ex post, taxing the winners in “winner takes all games” may have even less effect.

8

obvious at some level, often get lost in the debate about AI and technological progress more
generally.
Observation 2)
If redistribution is costless and appropriate redistributions are made, then
technological progress is always desirable for all agents. In that case, there is political
unanimity in supporting technological progress.

U(workers)

For convenience, and in conformity to conventional usage, we will refer the world with costless
redistribution but otherwise perfectly functioning markets, as first best ex‐post; though we
remind the reader that the previous analysis suggested that in a true first best, workers would
have insurance against the risk of AI, such that net income (after insurance) would be
unaffected by the occurrence of the innovation. If the world is first‐best ex‐post in the sense
thus defined, then the utility possibilities curve (or Pareto frontier) moves out. We provide an
example in Figure 1, which depicts a utility possibilities frontier for two types of agents, workers
and entrepreneurs. In the example, technological progress increases the maximum utility level
of entrepreneurs for any given level of utility of workers.8 Innovation has increased production
possibilities, and with lump sum redistributions, an expansion in production possibilities
automatically implies an expansion in utility possibilities, i.e. that everybody could be better off.

E0
E1
U(entrepreneurs)

Figure 1: Pareto frontier before and after innovation with costless redistribution

The fact that they could be better off does not mean that they will be better off. That depends
on institutional arrangements. In Figure 1, we denote the initial equilibrium by E0 and the after‐
innovation equilibrium by E1. We have deliberately not called it a competitive market
equilibrium: markets don’t exist in a vacuum (see e.g. Stiglitz et al, 2015). They have to be
structured by rules and regulations, e.g. concerning intellectual property rights and anti‐trust

More generally, we could define a multi‐dimensional utility possibilities frontier
by adding any number of categories of individuals, or even naming the individuals.

8

9

policies, and there may be tax and other policies in place. We thus simply refer to E0 and E1 as
the before and after innovation (institution‐given) equilibrium. Note as drawn in the figure,
workers are worse off. That would normally be the case with what Hicks referred to as labor‐
saving innovations, i.e. innovations which at a given wage, lead to less demand for labor. AI
appears to be a labor saving innovation. In the simple formal models of worker‐replacing
innovations which we work out below, that is clearly the case.
This in turn has two important implications:
First, without adequate redistribution, it makes sense for workers to resist the innovation.
Luddism – the movement named after the possibly fictional character Ned Ludd that opposed
automation in the textile sector in late‐18th and early‐19th century England – is a rational
response for workers who are worse off from automation and who are not sufficiently
compensated.
Secondly, in a democracy in which workers are in a majority, it would make sense for
enlightened innovators to support redistribution, to make sure that workers are at least not
worse off. With redistribution, both innovators and workers can be better off. If appropriate
redistribution is made so that everybody shares in the fruits of technological progress, there
will again be political unanimity in supporting technological progress – progress will not be
politically contentious.
There might be significant debate about how much compensation workers should receive, i.e.
where in the “northeast corner of Eo“ society should be. On the one hand, this debate concerns
the distribution of the surplus generated by innovation. On the other hand, labor‐saving
innovation reduces wages, which generates a redistribution from workers to other factor
owners like rentiers and capitalists, for which workers may seek compensation. This
redistribution represents a pecuniary externality from the innovation, as we will discuss in
further detail in Section 3.
In Figure 1, we have marked in bold that part of the post‐innovation Pareto frontier which
represents a Pareto improvement and lies to the northeast of Eo. A range of philosophical
principles can be adduced for determining what is a “just” division of the fruits of innovation.
Behavioral economics may provide insights into what kinds of divisions might be acceptable.9

9

Consider a model in which workers and innovators have to agree on whether the innovation is acceptable. The
innovator has the power to set the division of the gains (i.e. where along the curve Northeast of Eo the new
equilibrium lies), but the workers has the power to accept or reject. This is the standard ultimatum game, for
which there is a large body of literature suggesting that at least some of the fruits of innovation have to be shared
with workers. If they perceive the allocation of benefits to be unfair, they would rather be worse off (e.g. at the

10

Of course, the innovation may not be labor saving, and the market equilibrium E1 itself could be
to the northeast of Eo. Although this case is easier, the distribution of the gains from innovation
and any associated pecuniary externalities and rents may still be contentious, especially if they
lead to large disparities in income. Distributive issues can also interact with production, as
emphasized e.g. by the efficiency wage theories that we consider in greater depth in Section 5.

Perfect Markets but Costly Redistribution
There is another possibility—that as we try to redistribute, the new utility possibility curve may
lie inside of the old utility possibilities frontier near the original equilibrium.
Observation 3)
If the world is first‐best (ex‐post, after the innovation), but redistribution is
limited or costly, then a Pareto improvement may not be possible, and some groups in
society may oppose technological progress. With a sufficiently inequality‐averse social
welfare function, societal welfare may be reduced.

U(workers)

This case is illustrated in Figure 2 below. The utility possibilities frontier is constrained by the
costs imposed by redistribution. Even though it might appear that innovation could make
everyone better off technologically, given the existing set of institutions of that economy, it
actually can’t – there may not be scope for avoiding utility losses for workers.

E0
E1
U(entrepreneurs)

Figure 2: Potential Pareto frontier with costly redistribution

Some economists argue that the world looks like figure 2, and that if we try to transfer from
innovators to workers, so much output is lost that workers are still worse off. If that is the case,
then one cannot say that the innovation is a Pareto improvement. One hesitates to use the
word “innovation.” It is a change, perhaps a technological change, which has had the effect of

original point without the innovation) rather than at the point that just makes them indifferent to where they were
before. See Fehr and Schmidt (2003).

11

making some people better off and others worse off. It is a distribution‐inducing change and
will be contentious.
A social welfare function that places no weight on inequality—which treats a dollar to rich
innovators the same as a dollar to a poor worker—would, of course, conclude that the
innovation is desirable. But with a more natural, inequality averse social welfare function, the
so‐called innovation is welfare decreasing.
The workers who lose out would rationally oppose the innovation. If workers are in a majority
and innovators wish to maintain their position, it would behoove the innovators to think harder
about how to engage in redistribution. This is, of course, a collective action problem for
innovators – for individual innovators, the contribution to economy‐wide inequality is typically
limited, even if their collective behavior makes workers worse off. As a result, innovators often
devote effort to actions which enhance their market power—lowering real incomes of workers
still further—and to not paying taxes (both via clever tax avoidance using the existing legal
framework, and via political lobbying to provide special exemptions from taxation for their
industries). Disregarding, in our view unwisely, that their actions may stir up political opposition
to innovation, some innovators go further and argue for weakening the progressivity of the tax
system and a smaller state, so there are less public resources to provide for the well‐being of
the workers who are hurt by innovation.
According to a long‐run version of “trickle‐down” economics, repeated innovations will
eventually increase the wealth of innovators so much that the benefits will trickle down to
regular workers. In this view, a Pareto improvement is always possible in the long run, as in
Figure 1, even if an entire generation of workers is hurt in the short‐ to medium run. This is a
possibility and, in fact, the first industrial revolution may be an example. During the industrial
revolution, workers eventually obtained enough human capital ‐ which was publicly provided,
as is in the interests of the innovators – so that the wages of almost all increased. However,
once machines are smart enough, innovators may no longer have incentives to support the
public financing of human capital accumulation, and it may well be that workers’ standard of
living decrease. In particular, in a political system dominated by money, the innovators,
increasingly rich, may use their economic and political influence to resist redistribution.
Furthermore, even if long‐run trickle‐down economics was correct, it may lead to tremendous
suffering and social upheaval in the short run. It may also – understandably – not be very
credible if innovators promise that once they are rich enough, they will support workers, but
that they are not quite rich enough yet.
This leads to the important question: How costly is redistribution in practice? As we noted
earlier, markets don’t exist in a vacuum. They are structured by laws and regulations and how
those laws and regulations are enforced. The outcome is the so‐called “market” distribution of
12

income, which is then subject to taxes and transfer, leading to an after‐tax distribution of
income. But this conventional distinction may not be quite accurate: the rules of the game
concerning redistribution affect the market income distribution. See Piketty et al. (2014) and
Stiglitz (2017). The points that we have denoted Eo and E1 describe the initial outcome and the
outcome after‐technological change, assuming that laws, regulations, institutions, etc. remain
unchanged. But, of course, it is not reasonable to expect that they would remain unchanged
with the advent of a change as significant as AI.
More particularly, each set of (feasible) laws, regulations, institutions, etc. defines a feasible
utility possibilities frontier. We can think of the 2nd‐best utility possibilities frontier as the outer
envelope of all these frontiers. As the outer envelope, the 2nd‐best utilities possibilities frontier
provides more flexibility for redistribution than does that associated with one particular set of
rules, regulations, and institutions. This reflects that any changes in laws, regulations, or
institutions etc. will also have redistributive effects. Given this additional flexibility, the
likelihood that a Pareto improvement as in Figure 1 can be achieved is greater. We provide
further arguments for why this is likely to be the case in Section 3 (although we cannot entirely
rule out a situation like that depicted in Figure 2 in which a Pareto improvement is not feasible).

Imperfect Markets
Let us also consider a fourth case, which does not necessarily reflect the specific situation with
advances in artificial intelligence, but which is important to understand and keep in mind when
we evaluate technological innovations.
Observation 4)
If the economy is not first‐best ex‐post, then the utility possibilities frontier
may move inwards in response to an expansion of production possibilities. Furthermore,
this may even be true with costless redistribution.
When we speak about an economy that is not first‐best, we mean an economy that deviates
from the Arrow‐Debreu benchmark, i.e. that exhibits market imperfections such as information
problems, missing markets, price and wage rigidities which can result in aggregate demand
problems, monopolies and monopsonies, and so forth. Typically, these mean that the market
equilibrium is not Pareto efficient. The utilities possibilities frontier represents the maximum
utility of workers, given that of entrepreneurs, taking the market failures as given.
This case is illustrated in Figure 3. The initial equilibrium is Eo, but the innovation, which would
have led to greater efficiency in the absence of these market imperfections, makes workers
worse off—and even with costless redistributions, there is no way that both workers and
entrepreneurs can be better off.

13

U(workers)

An example, elaborated on by Deli Gatti et al (2012a,b), were the agricultural improvements at
the end of the nineteenth century and beginning of the twentieth. The result was that
agricultural prices plummeted, and so too did incomes on farms and in the rural sector. But
mobility is costly—moving to the urban sector required capital, and many farmers saw their
capital disappear as the value of their farms decreased. Those with loans often went bankrupt.
Capital market imperfections (based on information asymmetries) meant that farmers couldn’t
borrow to move to the city to where the new jobs (hopefully) would be created. But as
incomes in the rural sector plummeted, they couldn’t buy the goods made by the
manufacturing sector. Workers in both the rural and urban sector were worse off.10 This
provides at least one interpretation of the Great Depression—at least in the short run, these
innovations proved Pareto inferior.

E0

^

E1
U(entrepreneurs)

Figure 3: Potential Pareto frontier with market imperfections

So too, now standard results show that free trade may lead everyone to be worse off in the
absence of good risk markets. (Newbery and Stiglitz, 1984). But that result can be interpreted
as one involving technological progress. Assume that there were no way of transporting goods
between the two countries. A technological advance allows goods to be transported freely.
Then, under the quite plausible conditions postulated by Newbery‐Stiglitz, welfare (of
everyone!) in both countries could decrease.
The theory of the second best (Meade, 1955; Lipsey and Lancaster, 1956) reminds us that in the
presence of market imperfections, improving the functioning of one market may deteriorate
overall welfare. There are reasons to believe that certain innovations in financial markets, e.g.
10

In the central Deli Gatti et al model, the agricultural sector has constant returns to scale and wages in the urban
sector are rigid (e.g. because of efficiency wage considerations), so that the agricultural innovations are
unambiguously welfare decreasing. In one variant of the model, where urban wages are flexible, wage decreases
lead to still higher unemployment. Though it is possible that entrepreneurs gain more from the wage reductions
than they lose from the loss of sales, social welfare is decreased with sufficiently inequality averse social welfare
functions.

14

structured financial products and certain derivatives like credit default swaps, especially in the
absence of appropriate regulations, contributed greatly to the Great Recession. (Financial Crisis
Inquiry Commission (2011)).11
It is important to appreciate this result to understand how crucial our institutions and our
market imperfections are in determining whether and how large a benefit society will derive
from innovation.
Ascertaining whether the economy is in Case 1, 2, 3, or 4.
It is not always easy to ascertain which case best describes the economy. We observe only that
the innovation has made some individuals better off, some worse off. (Here, we assume that it
has made workers worse off, entrepreneurs better off.) The presumption is that redistributions
are costly (so case 1 does not strictly apply) and markets are imperfect (so case 2 does not
strictly apply.) But the costs of redistributions may be sufficiently low and the market
imperfections sufficiently small that Figure 1 still applies: everyone could be made better off.
Alternatively, redistributions may be so costly that Figure 2 applies. Or market failures are
sufficiently large and redistributions sufficiently costly that Figure 3 applies.
We emphasize that which situation we are in depends not just on the possibilities of ex post
redistribution, but on the institutional flexibility, which determines the ex ante distribution.
As we noted, the 2nd‐best utilities possibilities frontier is the outer envelope of all conceivable
constrained utilities possibilities frontiers, which reflect all the conceivable institutional regimes
in an economy and all the market imperfections that the economy may potentially suffer from.
By institutional regimes we mean all explicit tax and redistribution systems (from negative
income tax systems to universal basic income to the regressive tax system currently in place),
intellectual property regimes, job programs, education programs, but even social norms such as
those related to charitable contributions. Market imperfections include all the market
arrangements that differ from the Arrow‐Debreu “optimal” benchmark, the conditions which
ensure the Pareto efficiency of the market. As we noted earlier, the term embraces
imperfections in information, competition, and risk and capital markets (including “missing”
markets) but also rigidities in factor reallocation or in prices that determine how easily factors
and products reallocate and which may be particularly important in the context of technological
progress.
Changing any of these institutions or market imperfections has an effect on workers’ welfare. In
general, it may be desirable to use a package of changes to all these institutions to ensure

11

At a theoretical level, Simsek (2013) and Guzman and Stiglitz (2016a, 2016b) have shown that opening up new
markets—through financial innovation‐‐ can lead to greater volatility in consumption.

15

Pareto improvements after technological change has occurred. For instance, in Section 4.3, we
show that a combination of a change in the intellectual property regime and a change in capital
taxation can ensure that an innovation is a Pareto improvement.
Finally, we also note that the possibility of achieving a Pareto improvement depends on how
broadly we define the classes of individuals which are affected by an innovation. Our earlier
example distinguished society, for simplicity, into two categories, workers and entrepreneurs.
More generally, different categories of workers, e.g. skilled and unskilled workers, or workers in
different sectors or tasks, are differentially affected by innovation. By the same token, different
categories of entrepreneurs or innovators are differentially affected by innovation – for
example, a given entrepreneur will generally be worse off if she is out‐competed by another’s
innovation. In the limit, if we consider the welfare of every single agent in the economy, clear
Pareto improvements in a strict sense will be very difficult to find. As a result, our scope of
analysis has to be targeted at the level that is relevant for the question at hand.
From both a political and a macroeconomic perspective, it is desirable that our welfare analysis
focuses on groups that are sufficiently broad so that they matter for the political or economic
equilibrium. It may also be useful to focus on groups that can be targeted with specific policy
measures. Having said that, there is also a useful role for social safety nets that insure single
individuals that lose out – for example, an innovator who goes broke because he was outpaced
by a competitor.

Endogenous Technological Progress
A last and fifth point to emphasize is that there is no 1st welfare theorem for endogenous
innovation. Generally speaking, the private returns to innovation in an economy differ from the
social returns.12
Observation 5)
The privately optimal choice of innovation may move the utility
possibilities frontier inwards, even if redistribution is costless and the economy is ex‐post
first‐best.
This implies that there may be benefits from intervening in the innovation process to generate
Pareto improvements, for example, by making it less labor saving (see e.g. Stiglitz, 2014b).
Again, this does not specifically refer to advances in artificial intelligence – it will probably not
12

It is hard to know who first had this insight. Certainly, Thomas Jefferson, America’s third president, recognized it
when he said that knowledge is like a candle: when it lights another, the light of the first candle is not diminished.
In the economics literature, it was clearly articulated by Arrow (1962) and Stiglitz (1987a). For a more recent
statement of why social and private returns to innovation differ, see Stiglitz and Greenwald (2015). These results
hold regardless of the intellectual property regime. Poorly designed intellectual property regimes can (and do)
impair innovation. For a simple theoretical model, see Stiglitz (2014a); for empirical evidence, see Williams (2013).

16

apply to most examples of innovation in AI – but it is easy to bring examples where privately
optimal innovation may generate Pareto deteriorations, for example in the context of high‐
frequency trading in financial markets (see e.g. Stiglitz (2014c)).

Relationship between Technological Progress and Globalization
Many of the effects of technological change in general and AI in particular are similar to those
of globalization. Indeed, globalization can be viewed as a change in technology, that of trading
with the rest of the world. In particular, trade of advanced countries with developing countries
is “labor saving” (in the sense of Hicks): the demand for unskilled workers, or workers in
general, decreases, at any given wage, implying that while the production possibilities curve
moves out, and the utilities possibilities curve may move out, the new equilibrium entails
workers being worse off, as in Figures 1 and 2. (In the absence of good risk markets, as we
noted, everyone can be worse off, as in Figure 3). Thus, the issue of whether globalization is
welfare enhancing comes back to the question addressed in this paper: is it possible to ensure,
either through redistributive taxes or changes in institutions/rules, that workers are not made
worse off. Again, there is a presumption that the gains to capital (or enterprises) could be
taxed, to provide the requisite redistributions.13
As we discuss in greater detail below, one of the side effects of innovation and IPR is the
creation of market power. Similarly, one of the consequences of globalization is to weaken the
market power of workers. This is important because there is ample evidence that labor
markets are far from perfectly competitive. The requisite compensation and/or offsetting
changes in institutional rules to ensure that globalization represents a Pareto improvement may
thus have to be all the greater.

Technological Progress and Channels of Inequality
There are two main channels through which technological progress may affect the distribution
of resources and thus inequality: first, through the surplus earned by innovators and secondly,
through effects on other agents in the economy.

13

Although a given country that opens up to trade is always made better off in a first‐best world, ensuring a global
Pareto improvement after a country reduces its trade barriers may be even more difficult than after technological
progress has occurred, since changes in trade barriers affect international terms of trade and lead to
redistributions across all other countries that can only be undone via cross‐country transfers. See e.g. Korinek
(2016). Furthermore, within each country, gains from trade inherently require changes in relative prices, which
means that large redistributions are even more likely than in the case of technological progress.

17

Surplus Earned by Innovators
Technology is an information good, which implies that it is non‐rival, but it may be excludable.
Non‐rival means that information can be used without being used up – in principle, many
economic actors could use the same technology at the same time. If information about an
innovation is widely shared, it can be used by all of society and provide welfare benefits to all.
The excludable nature of information means, however, that others can be prevented from
either obtaining or using a technology, for example by withholding it from the public (e.g. as a
business secret) or by using social institutions such as intellectual property rights (e.g.
copyrights or patents). This excludability may provide innovators with market power that
enables them to charge a positive price for the innovation and earn a surplus.
Society faces a difficult trade‐off in determining how to engineer the optimal level of
innovation. In a first‐best world, there are no agency problems in the process of innovation, and
an optimal solution would be for the public to fund innovations and make them freely available
to all (see e.g. Arrow, 1962). In fact, this model of financing innovation is common for basic
research and has given rise to some very significant innovations in history, including the
invention of the Internet. A closely related solution is the production of innovations for non‐
pecuniary rewards, such as e.g. the prevalence of open source technology, which is widespread
in the context of software and even artificial intelligence.14
However, in many circumstances, private agents are superior in producing innovation, and
when they fund innovation, they expect to earn a return. The surplus earned by innovators
then plays an important economic role because it rewards innovators for what they accomplish
– it represents the economic return to innovation activity. However, there is often market
power associated with innovations, especially when there is a system of IPR in place, and this
generally leads to inefficiencies compared to the first‐best allocation in which innovations are
distributed as public goods.15
We distinguish the following two cases, which determine whether innovators earn rents, i.e.
payoffs in excess of the cost of their innovative activity:
First, if entry into innovation activity is restricted, then the surplus or net income earned by
innovators is generally greater than the costs of innovation activity. A natural example of such

14

This approach relies on individuals or companies that are willing to innovate in exchange for non‐pecuniary
rewards such as prestige or, alternatively, on a calculated decision that providing free technology will steer
potential customers or employees towards an innovator’s platform, as seems to be the case in the field of AI.
15
For discussions of the merits of alternative ways of funding and incentivizing innovation, see Dosi and Stiglitz
(2014), Baker et al (2017), Stiglitz (2008) and Korinek and Ng (2017).

18

restrictions is when only a small number of people are endowed with special skills that enable
them to innovate. These innovators then earn rents based on their exclusive abilities.
Restrictions to innovative activity may also arise from market structure: in markets with
Bertrand competition, the first entrant who develops a costly innovation may enjoy a monopoly
position because any potential competitor knows that if she enters, the incumbent will cut
prices to marginal cost so that she cannot recoup the investment into an innovation.16
Secondly, if innovative activity is contestable, i.e. if there is a sufficiently large set of potential
innovators with equal skills, then the expected rents to innovative activity are competed down
to zero, i.e. the marginal entrant into innovative activity is indifferent between innovating or
not.17 However, given that the payoffs to innovation are highly stochastic, there will be winners
and losers ex‐post. In the context of new technologies, the distribution of payoffs seems to be
increasingly skewed, with a small number of entrepreneurs earning gigantic payoffs and the
vast majority earning little in return for their efforts. This gives rise to significant inequality even
among innovators.
In either case, the returns earned by an innovator may not correspond closely to the social
returns to the innovation; in particular, some of the returns may reflect the capture of profits
that would otherwise have gone to other entrepreneurs.
Policies to Share the Surplus of Innovators
There is a growing consensus that one of the sources of the growth of inequality is the growth
of rents, including the rents that innovators earn in excess of the cost of innovation (see e.g.
Korinek and Ng, 2017). Taxing and redistributing such rents has an important role in ensuring
that AI and other advances in technology are Pareto improving. Also, anti‐trust policies may
lower such rents, ensuring that the benefits of innovations are more widely shared, as more
competition lowers consumer prices from which all benefit. From the perspective of low
skilled workers who losing from innovation, targeted expenditure programs financed by high
rent taxes may be of greater benefit than the lowering of prices, the benefit of which will go
disproportionately to those who otherwise have spending power.

16
See Stiglitz (1987b) and Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1988). When the number of firms is limited and there is Cournot
competition, there will also be rents associated with innovation. For more general theoretical discussions of
industrial structure and innovation, see Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1980ab) and Stiglitz and Greenwald (2015, ch. 5).
17
Given the difficulty of predicting the success of innovative activity or of even assigning success probabilities, it is
questionable how efficiently this mechanism works in practice. For example, there may be excessive entry because
of over‐optimism by some potential entrepreneurs, or there may be insufficient entry because of imperfect
insurance markets for entrepreneurs.
If some are better at innovating than others (and know it), then these individuals will enjoy infra‐marginal
innovation rents (on average.)

19

Moreover, changes in intellectual property rights (IPRs) affect who receives the benefits of
innovation—and thus the “incidence” of innovation, since IPRs are instrumental in providing
extended market power to innovators.18
Additionally, public research – with government or the public at large appropriating the returns,
rather than allowing private firms to do so as now – together with stronger competition
policies, might reduce the scope for monopolies capturing large fractions of the returns to
innovation, and thus enhance the likelihood that AI will be Pareto improving.
Workers may also note that the innovations that ultimately led to AI – including those created
by private entrepreneurs – build on significant public support. Society as a whole, but not
necessarily this generation of innovators, paid for this knowledge, and should therefore share in
the surplus generated by the innovation. One proposal to ensure that workers share in the
benefits of innovation—and are less likely to lose from it—is to give workers shares in
enterprises to ensure that their welfare goes up in tandem with that of
shareholders/innovators as a whole.

Effects on Others
Innovation also leads to large redistributions among others in the economy who are not directly
involved in the process of innovation, for example workers who experience a sudden increase
or decline in the demand for their labor. These redistributions can thus be viewed as
externalities from innovation, and they are one of the main reasons why innovation raises
concerns about inequality. We distinguish two categories of such externalities, pecuniary and
non‐pecuniary externalities. We discuss both in detail in the following:
Pecuniary Externalities: Price and Wages Changes
Among the most prominent implications of technological change is that it affects the prices of
factors of production (including wages) and of produced goods. Hicks (1932) already observed
that innovations generally change the demand for factors and will, in equilibrium, lead to factor
price changes, especially changes in wages.
If – as many technologists predict – artificial intelligence directly replaces human labor, the
demand for human labor will go down, and so will wages. More generally, innovations typically
reduce demand for specific types of labor with specific human capital. For example, self‐driving
cars will likely depress the wages of drivers, or radiology‐reading AI may lower the wages of
traditional radiologists. Conversely, AI has certainly led to an increase in demand for computer

18

Especially when there is Bertrand competition, the benefits of innovation may be quickly shared with consumers
upon the termination of patents.

20

scientists and has greatly increased their wages, in particular in sub‐fields that are directly
related to AI. Since AI is a general purpose technology, there are reasons to believe that
advances in AI will reverberate throughout many different sectors and lead to significant
changes in wages throughout the economy in coming decades. Similar arguments can be made
about the demand for and the value of different types of specific capital, as well as the demand
for and prices of particular products.
Even though there are frequently losers, technological progress by definition shifts out the
production possibilities frontier. This implies that the total dollar gain of the winners of
progress exceeds the dollar loss of the losers lose19. In section 4 below, we will use this
property of technological progress to argue that, under relatively broad conditions, this should
enable the redistribution that is necessary to ensure that innovation leads to a Pareto
improvement: the gains that arise to some factor owners as a result of technological progress
are excess returns that are like unearned rents and could be taxed away without introducing
distortions into the economy.
The pecuniary externalities from innovation give rise to the need for potentially costly
redistributions, and they make the economy inefficient relative to the idealized insurance
setting that we analyzed in section 2: if “behind the veil of ignorance” risk markets are absent,
then redistribution is a substitute for missing insurance markets. Redistribution would insure
workers and the owners of human and physical capital against such pecuniary externalities.
Policies to Counter Wage Declines
There are a range of further policies to counter the wage declines that are experienced by
workers who are displaced by machines, even for low skilled jobs. These include wage
subsidies and earned income tax credits. If bargaining power in labor markets is biased towards
employers, an increased minimum wage can also help ensure that no one who works full time is
in poverty. Furthermore, ensuring high aggregate demand—and thus a low unemployment
rate—also increases the bargaining power of workers and leads to higher wages.
Other policies aimed at increasing the demand for especially low skilled labor include higher
wages in the public sector as well as an increase in public investments and other public
expenditures; all of these policies help to drive up wages in the economy more generally.
Policies that could be used to finance such measures include carbon taxes, which would
encourage resource saving innovation, at the expense of labor saving innovation. It would thus

19

If lump sum transfers were feasible, the winners could compensate the losers. This does not mean that social
welfare is higher in the absence of such compensation.

21

simultaneously address two of most serious global problems, global climate change and
inequality.20
Furthermore, the elimination of tax deduction for interest and the imposition of a tax on capital
would increase the cost of capital and induce more capital augmenting innovation rather than
labor saving innovation.
Non‐pecuniary Externalities
Innovation may also generate non‐pecuniary externalities on agents other than the innovator.
Classic examples for this are technological externalities – for example, if an innovation produces
public goods, or generates or alleviates pollution. In markets that deviate from the Arrow‐
Debreu benchmark, a variety of non‐pecuniary effects may arise: for example, innovation may
affect quantities demanded, or the probability of buying or selling a good or factor, including
the probability of being unemployed.
Some effects are such that they can be interpreted either as pecuniary or non‐pecuniary
externalities. For example, product innovations can be interpreted as a price changes – the
price of the newly invented good changes from infinity to some positive value – or as a change
in the price of the consumption services provided by the good. Alternatively, they can also be
interpreted in a non‐pecuniary manner by viewing a product (such as a smartphone) as
providing a bundle of services to consumers which can only be bought in fixed proportion (e.g.
since we cannot separately purchase different functions of the smartphone). In that view, an
innovation represents a change in the structure of incomplete markets because it changes the
bundle of consumption service available from a product. Similarly, changes in job quality can be
interpreted by viewing each job as a vector of transactions that are only available in pre‐
determined bundles, and the innovation changes the elements in the bundle that are available.
It is well‐known, that changes in the degree of market incompleteness for such bundles give
rise to externalities (a specific application of Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1986).

Worker‐Replacing Progress and Redistribution
This section considers a stark form of technological progress that we term worker‐replacing
technological progress. We develop two simple models to analyze the two channels generating
inequality that we discussed in the previous section. In Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we consider the
pecuniary externalities (redistributions) generated by worker‐replacing progress, both from a
static and a dynamic perspective. In Section 4.3., we focus on the distribution of the surplus

20

As we noted above, there is no first fundamental welfare theorem for innovation, and indeed, there is a
presumption that the market is biased towards labor saving innovation relative to innovations directed towards
“saving the planet.” See Stiglitz 2014b.

22

accruing to innovators in a model in which the surplus is determined by the level of patent
protection. Furthermore, in Section 4.4 we discuss the implications of endogenous factor bias in
technological progress.

Static Pecuniary Externalities of Worker‐Replacing Progress
For sections 3.1 and 3.2, we consider the simple model of worker‐replacing technological
change of Korinek and Stiglitz (2017). We assume a production technology that combines
capital and labor in a constant‐returns‐to‐scale (CRS) function, but where labor consists of the
sum of human and machine labor. Assuming that human and machine labor enter the
production function additively means that they are perfect substitutes for each other. The
details of the baseline model are presented in Box 1 below.
We analyze three questions: What does worker‐replacing technological change do to wages in
the short‐run and in the long‐run? And what can policy do about it?
First, we look exclusively at the short‐run before any of the other factors have adjusted:
Observation 1)
Machine Labor and Factor Earnings (in the short‐run): adding a marginal
unit of machine labor reduces human wages but increases returns of complementary factors
in a zero‐sum manner.
Intuitively, what happens if we add one unit of machine labor is that first, that unit will earn its
marginal return, but secondly, there is also a redistribution from labor to capital, which now
becomes relatively scarcer. The gains of capital are exactly the losses of the existing stock of
labor.
The redistribution generated by technological progress can be thought of as a pecuniary
externality, as we emphasized earlier. The income losses of wage earners and the income gains
of other factors owners are inefficient compared to the first‐best benchmark considered in
Section 2.1. In the given example, the owners of capital have obtained windfall gains but have
not done anything to earn these higher return. A compensatory transfer from capital owners to
workers simply undoes these windfall gains and leaves them equally well off as they were
before.
More generally, adding machine labor creates a redistribution away from human labor toward
complementary factors. More generally, the result holds no matter what the complementary
factor, for instance whether it is capital or land or unskilled versus skilled labor or
entrepreneurial rents. Policy can undo these redistributions by taxing windfall gains while
leaving the price system to work at the margin. The result also holds for decreasing‐returns‐to‐
scale production functions if we interpret the profits earned by the owner of the technology as

23

Box 1: Machine Labor and Factor Earnings
Assume a constant‐returns‐to‐scale production function that produces output Y by
combining capital K with labor, consisting of the sum of human labor H and machine labor
M.
Y = F(K, H + M)
In this formulation, human labor and machine labor are perfect substitutes so machine
technology is clearly what we call worker‐replacing.
In the competitive equilibrium, the wage is determined by the marginal product of labor,
w = FL
Proposition 1: Machine Labor and Factor Earnings: adding a marginal unit of machine labor
reduces human wages but increases the returns to capital in a zero‐sum manner, in addition
to increasing output by the marginal product of labor, which is equal to the wage.
Proof: Using Euler’s Theorem, we rewrite the production function:
∙

∙

,

We can now ascertain the effect of an additional unit of M:

0

or simplified:

Source: Korinek and Stiglitz (2017)

compensation for the implicit factor “entrepreneurship,” which takes part in the zero‐sum
redistribution.
Let us also emphasize that taxes on previously accumulated factors that suddenly earn an
unexpected excess return are non‐distortionary. This means that at least in principle, there is a
role for implementing costless redistribution and generating a Pareto‐improvement. (In
practice, there are some natural caveats to this result. For example, it relies on the assumption
that we can distinguish between previously installed capital that earns windfall gains and new
capital that would be distorted if it were taxed.)
24

Dynamic Implications of Worker‐Replacing Progress
In the longer run, worker‐replacing technological change will lead to significant economic
change. It implies that the biggest constraint on output – the scarcity of labor – is eventually,
and suddenly, lifted. As a result, greater amounts of complementary factors, here capital, are
accumulated.
Observation 2)
Machine Labor and Abundance of Labor: If not only capital but also labor is
reproducible at sufficiently low cost, then the economy will grow exponentially in AK‐
fashion, driven purely by factor accumulation, even in the absence of further technological
change.
In Korinek and Stiglitz (2017), we describe the dynamics of this transition, as machines made by
machines get increasingly efficient or equivalently, as the cost of producing machines
decreases. We identify a singularity point at which it becomes cost‐effective for machines to
start to fully replace human labor.21 In the simplest case, when complementary factors such as
capital adjust without friction, the human wage may actually be unchanged because capital K
grows in proportion to effective labor (H + M) so that the marginal productivity of labor and the
wage remain unchanged. In other words, investment is allocated between conventional
machines and human‐replacing robots in such a way that the return is equal to the
intertemporal marginal rate of substitution. Under the assumption that workers only care
about their absolute income, not their relative income, this outcome would not be too bad for
workers: in absolute terms, even though the human labor share would go to zero as an
increasing fraction of the labor in the economy is performed by machines, workers are no
worse off as a result of AI.
When factors are slow to adjust, the pattern of transition can be complex, with demand for
human labor typically going down temporarily.22 In general, the pattern of adjustment depends
on how fast the capital stock versus the stock of labor adjust. (For example, if the capital stock
rises in anticipation of an increased supply of machine labor in the future that has not yet
materialized, then human wages may even go up at intermediate stages.23)

21

This singularity captures the important economic aspects of what technologists such as Vernor Vinge (1993) or
Ray Kurzweil (2005) call the technological singularity. A similar point is also made in Aghion et al. (2017).
22
Berg et al. (2017) shows that it may actually take decades for the economy's complementary capital stock to
adjust after major revolutions in labor‐saving technology.
23

This assumes that capital is “putty‐putty,” i.e. that capital investments made before AI arrives are equally
productive after AI, as would be the case if humans and robots were in fact identical.

25

However, the following observation describes that workers are actually worse off as a result of
machine labor if there are non‐reproducible complementary factors that are in scarce supply,
such as land or other natural resources:
Observation 3)
Machine Labor and Return of Scarcity: if there are non‐reproducible
complementary factors, they eventually limit growth; human real wages fall, and the owners
of non‐reproducible factors absorb all the rents.
Intuitively, as the supply of effective labor proliferates due to the introduction of machine
labor, agents in the economy will compete for scarce non‐reproducible resources like land,
driving up their price.
A similar argument holds for non‐reproducible consumption goods: even if all factors in the
production process are reproducible so that productive output in the economy exhibits AK‐style
growth and workers’ product wages remain unchanged, competition for fixed resources that
are part of their consumption basket, such as land used for housing, may lead workers to
eventually be worse off. This may be particularly important in urban settings where, say,
economic activity occurs at the center. Rich rentiers may occupy the more desirable locations
near the center, with workers having to obtain less expensive housing at the periphery,
spending more time commuting. The advent of AI will thus lower their utility.
However, just as in the earlier case, at the margin, the redistribution from workers to non‐
reproducible factor owners is zero sum. Since taxes on non‐reproducible factors are by
definition non‐distortionary, there is scope for non‐distortionary redistribution.
Observation 4)
Non‐Reproducible Factors and Pareto Improvements: So long as non‐
distortionary taxes on factor rents are feasible, labor‐replacing innovation can be a Pareto
improvement.

Redistributing the Innovators’ Surplus via Changes in
Institutions
If outright redistribution is infeasible, there may be other institutional changes which result in
market distributions which are more favorable to workers. For example, intervention to steer
technological progress may act as a 2nd‐best device.
In this section, we provide an example in which a change in intellectual property rights—a
shortening of the term of patent protection—effectively redistributes some of the innovators’
surplus to workers (consumers) to mitigate the pecuniary externalities on wages that they
experience, with the ultimate goal that the benefits of the innovation are more widely shared.
If an innovation results in a lower cost of production, then the innovator enjoys the benefits of
26

Box 2: Intellectual Property Regime and Redistribution
Consider an economy with a unit mass of workers H = 1, in which the capital stock supplied
each period K(τ) is a function solely of a distortionary capital tax τ, the proceeds of which are
distributed to workers, and the effective stock of machine labor M(z) is an increasing
function of patent life z.
A worker’s total income I consists of her wage plus the revenue of the capital tax,
I = w + τ K(τ)
For any level of M(z), we define τ(M) as the value of the capital tax that keeps workers just
as well off as they were before the introduction of machine labor.
Proposition 1 As long as elasticity of capital supply is not too large, we can always increase z
from z = 0 and compensate workers by raising the capital tax τ.
Steady state dynamics
Consider a intertemporal setting in which the growth rate g = g(z, τ) is a function of the
length of the patent z and the tax rate τ on innovators. Assume that the share of output that
is invested is a function of the growth rate (i(g)) and that the fraction of output not spent on
investment that is appropriated by the innovator is b(z, τ). In steady state, the present
discounted value of the income of workers can be approximated as
PDV = (1 – i(g)) [1 – (1 – τ)b(z, τ)]/(r ‐ g)
where r is the discount rate. If we choose {z, τ} to maximize the PDV, in general, the
optimum will not be a corner solution in which innovation hurts workers.
Proposition 2 In general, the optimal {z*, τ*} entails g > 0.
It is easy to write down sufficient conditions under which proposition 2 holds: setting τ*
equal to zero, all that we require is that |gz| is not too large relative to |bz|.

the innovation in the form of higher profits during the life of the patent; but after the expiration
of the patent, society enjoys the benefits in terms of lower prices. The trade‐off is that
shortening the life of the patent may reduce the pace of innovation. But in the spirit of the
theory of the second‐best, there is generally an “optimal” patent life, in which there is still
some innovation, but in which the well‐being of workers is protected.

27

With network externalities, even after the end of the patent, the innovator may be able to
maintain a dominant position after the end of the patent, and may continue to earn the surplus
from her innovation. With taxes on monopoly profits, it should be possible to ensure that the
innovations are Pareto improving and that even human worker‐replacing technical change can
improves the well‐being of workers.

Factor biased technological change
So far, we have simply assumed that technological change – the introduction of AI – is worker‐
replacing. But advances in technology also make machines more productive, lowering the
return to traditional capital24. It is thus useful to think of the world as having three groups:
capitalists, workers, and innovators. Intellectual property rights (and anti‐trust laws) determine
the returns to innovators; but the nature of technological change in a competitive market
determines the divisions between workers and capitalists.
A long‐standing literature, going back to Kennedy (1964), Von‐Weizacker (1966), and
Samuelson (1965), describes the endogenous determination of the factor bias of technological
progress.25 The central result is that as the share of labor becomes smaller, the bias shifts
towards capital‐augmenting technological progress. If the world works as these models
suggest, this should limit the decline in share of labor (at least in a stable equilibrium) and in
inequality.26 As the share of labor decreases, the incentive to produce worker‐replacing
innovation such as AI decreases. But the relevant discounted future wage share near the point
of singularity may be sufficiently great that there is nonetheless an incentive to pass the point
of singularity.
Let us assume that land becomes the binding constraint once human labor is fully replaceable
by machine labor. In that case, provided the elasticity of substitution between land the other
production factors – capital cum labor – is less than unity, the share of land increases over time,
generating the result (analogous to that where labor is the binding constraint in the standard
literature) that in the long run, all technological progress is land‐augmenting. If the production
function is constant returns to scale in land, labor (including machine labor) and traditional
capital, then the long run rate of growth is determined by the pace of land‐augmenting
technological change.

24

As we noted earlier, IA (intelligence assisting) innovation may increase the productivity of humans, and thus
increase the demand for humans.
25
Important contributions were also made by Drandakis and Phelps (1965). More recently, there has been some
revival of the literature, with work of Acemoglu (2002), Stiglitz (2006, 2014b) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2016),
among others.
26
One can describe dynamics with standard wage‐setting mechanisms. The system is stable so long as the
elasticity of substitution between factors is less than unity (Acemoglu, 1998; Stiglitz, 2006, 2014b).

28

Role of the Service Sector
Currently, progress in AI focuses on certain sectors of the economy, like manufacturing. Partly
because of the resulting lower cost of manufacturing, partly because of the shape of
preferences, the economy is evolving towards a service sector economy. (If there is differential
productivity across sectors, and the elasticity of demand for the innovation sector is not too
high, then production factors will move out of that sector into other sectors. This is even more
so if preferences are non‐homothetic, e.g. demand for food and many manufactured goods
having an income elasticity less than unity.) Among the key service sectors are education,
health, the military, and other public services. The value of those services is in large part
socially determined, i.e. by public policies not just a market process. If we value those services
highly—pay good wages, provide good working conditions, and create a sufficient number of
jobs—this will limit increases in the inequality of market income. Governments typically play an
important role in these sectors and their employment policies will thus play an important role
in the AI transition. Many of these service sector jobs have limited skill requirements. However,
higher public sector wages services will – through standard equilibrium effects – also raise
wages in the private sector, will improve the bargaining position of workers, and will result in
such jobs having higher “respect.” All of this will, of course, require tax revenues. If the
elasticity of entrepreneurial services is low, we can impose high taxes to finance these jobs.

Technological Unemployment
Unemployment is one of the most problematic societal implications of technological progress–
new technology often implies that old jobs are destroyed and workers need to find new jobs.
Economists, of course, understand the “lump‐of‐labor fallacy” – the false notion that there is a
fixed number of jobs, and that automating a given job means that there will forever be fewer
jobs left in the economy. In a well‐functioning economy, we generally expect that technological
progress creates additional income, which in turn can support more jobs.
However, there are two sound economic reasons for why technological unemployment may
arise: first, because wages do not adjust for some structural reason, as described e.g. by
efficiency wage theories, and second as a transition phenomenon. The two phenomena may
also interact in important ways, e.g. when efficiency wage considerations slow down the
transition to a new equilibrium. We discuss the two categories in turn in the following
subsections.
The unemployment implications are especially problematic when technological progress is
labor‐saving, which – by definition – requires that either wages have to fall or that other
complementary factors like capital have to adjust enough for labor market equilibrium to be
restored.

29

Efficiency Wage Theory and Non‐Adjustment of Wages
The first category of technological unemployment arises when wages do not adjust for
structural reasons. Efficiency wage theory emphasizes that productivity depends on wages and
so employers may have reasons to pay wages above the market clearing level. The original
efficiency wage paper (Stiglitz, 1969) noted one of the reasons for this: that income disparities
can weaken worker morale. Akerlof and Yellen (1990) have formalized this into the “fair wage
hypothesis.”
If fairness considerations are significant enough, and workers think that a decrease in their
wages is “unfair” (for example because the income of entrepreneurs increases so
entrepreneurs could easily “afford” pay increases), it means that the scope of labor‐saving
progress which shifts the utility possibilities curve out without redistributions is very limited.
The new utility possibilities curve may lie outside the old one to the “north” of Eo, i.e. there is
scope for a Pareto improvement in principle; but it may lie inside of the old utility possibilities
curve near E1, i.e. the utility possibilities of workers decrease for a given level of utility of
entrepreneurs because workers reduce their effort so much that the effective labor supply
declines—any gains from technology are more than offset by increased shirking. Shapiro and
Stiglitz (1984) emphasize that paying a wage above the market‐clearing level reduces shirking,
leading to unemployment.
An even more daunting example of efficiency wages may arise if automation continues and the
marginal product of labor for low‐skill workers falls below their cost of living (even if they exert
their best effort). Unless basic social services are provided to such workers, a nutritional
efficiency wage model applies in that case, similar to what Stiglitz (1976) described for
developing countries: employers could not pay a market clearing wage because they know that
this would be insufficient for their employees to provide for themselves and remain
productive.27 We will follow up on this theme in the final section of our paper.
In traditional efficiency wage models, the unemployment effects of efficiency wages are
permanent. For example, if technological change leads to greater inequality (or better
information about the existing level of inequality), morale effects and the resulting efficiency
wage responses imply that the equilibrium level of unemployment rises.
However, efficiency wage arguments may also contribute to slowing down the transition to a
new equilibrium after an innovation, as we will explore in the next subsection.

27

Even worse outcomes could emerge in the presence of imperfect capital markets, if expenditures on health and
nutrition at one date affect productivity at later dates.

30

Minimum Wages and Non‐Adjustment of Wages
An alternative reason why wages may not adjust to the market‐clearing level are minimum
wage laws. Basic economics implies that there will be unemployment if wages are set to an
excessive level. Although this is a theoretical possibility, recent experience in the US has
repeatedly shown that modest increases in minimum wages from current levels have hardly
any employment effects but raise the income of minimum wage workers, which may have
positive aggregate demand effects since low‐income workers have a high marginal propensity
to consume (see e.g. Schmitt, 2013). From an economic theory perspective, these observations
are possible because wages are not determined in a purely Walrasian manner – there is a
significant amount of bargaining involved when prospective employers and employees match –
and increases in minimum wages substitute for the lacking bargaining power of workers (see
e.g. Manning, 2011).

Technological Unemployment as a Transition Phenomenon
The second category of technological unemployment is as a transition phenomenon, i.e. when
technological change makes workers redundant at a faster pace than they can find new jobs or
that new jobs are created. This phenomenon was already observed by Keynes (1930). It is well
understood that there is always a certain “natural” or “equilibrium” level of unemployment as a
result of churning in the labor market. In benchmark models of search and matching to
characterize this equilibrium level of unemployment (see Mortensen and Pissarides, 1994 and
1998), employment relationships are separated at random, and workers and employers need to
search for new matches to replace them. The random shocks in this framework can be viewed
as capturing, in reduced form, phenomena such as lifecycle transitions but also technological
progress in individual firms. In this view, an increase in the pace of technological progress
corresponds to a higher job separation rate and results in a higher equilibrium level of
unemployment.
The transition may be especially prolonged if technology implies that the old skills of workers
become obsolete and they need to acquire new skills and/or find out what new jobs match
their skills (see e.g. Restrepo, 2017).
Even if in the long run, workers adjusted to AI, the transition may be difficult. AI will impact
some sectors more than others, and there will be significant job dislocation. As a general
lesson, markets on their own are not good at structural transformation. Often, the pace of job
destruction is greater than the pace of job creation, especially as a result of imperfections in
capital markets, inhibiting the ability of entrepreneurs to exploit quickly new opportunities as
they are opened up, which has arguably been the case for globalization in many developing
countries.

31

The Great Depression as an Example of Transitional Unemployment
The Great Depression can be viewed as being caused by rapid pace of innovation in agriculture
(see Delli Gatti et al., 2012a). Fewer workers were needed to produce the food that individuals
demanded, resulting in marked decline in agriculture prices and income, leading to a decline in
demand for urban products. In the late 1920’s, these effects became so large that long
standing migration patterns were reversed.
What might have been a Pareto improvement turned out to be an immiserizing technological
change, as both those in the urban and rural sector suffered.
The general result is that noted earlier: with mobility frictions and rigidities (themselves partly
caused be capital market imperfections, as workers in the rural sector couldn’t obtain funds to
obtain the human capital required in the urban sector and to relocate) technological change
can be welfare decreasing. The economy can be caught, for an extensive period of time, in a
low level equilibrium trap, with high unemployment and low output.
In the case of the Great Depression, government intervention (as a by‐product of World War II)
eventually enabled a successful structural transformation: The intervention was not only a
Keynesian stimulus, but facilitated the move from rural farming areas to the cities where
manufacturing was occurring at the time; and facilitated the retraining of the labor force,
helping workers acquire the skills necessary for success in an urban manufacturing
environment, which were quite different from those that ensured success in a rural, farming
environment. It was, in this sense, an example of a successful industrial policy.
There are clear parallels to the situation today in that a significant fraction of the workforce
may not have the skills required to succeed in the age of AI.
Transitional Efficiency Wage Theory
Efficiency wage arguments may also slow down the transition to a new equilibrium after
technological progress. For example, if worker morale depends on last period's wages, it may
be difficult to reduce wages to the market‐clearing level after a labor‐saving innovation, and
unemployment may persist for a long time.28

Jobs and Meaning
An interesting debate that is brought up by the potentially widespread destruction of jobs –
discussed already in Keynes’ essay on Economic Possibilities of our Grandchildren – is that jobs
provide not only income but also other mental services such as meaning, dignity, and
28

In the limiting case, employers may simply keep wages fixed to avoid negative morale effects, and
unemployment would persist forever – or until some offsetting shock occurs.

32

fulfillment to humans. Whether this is a legacy of our past, and whether individuals could find
meaning in other forms of activities, mental or physical, is a matter of philosophical debate.
If workers derive a separate benefit from work in the form of meaning, then job subsidies are a
better way of ensuring that technological advances are welfare enhancing than simply
providing lump sum grants (a universal basic income), as some are suggesting in response to
the inequalities created by AI.
This discussion is, of course, a departure from the usual neoclassical formulation, where work
only enters negatively into individual’s well‐being. There are some that claim that individuals’
deriving dignity and meaning from work is an artifact of a world with labor scarcity. In a
workerless AI world, individuals will have to get obtain their identity and dignity elsewhere, e.g.
through spiritual or cultural values. The fact that most humans can find a meaningful life after
retirement suggests that there are good substitutes for jobs in providing meaning.

Longer‐Term Perspectives: AI and the Return of Malthus?
There is a final point that is worth discussing in a paper on the implications of artificial
intelligence for inequality and that relates to a somewhat longer‐term perspective. Currently,
artificial intelligence is at the stage where it strictly dominates human intelligence in a number
of specific areas, for instance playing chess or Go, identifying patterns in x‐rays, driving, etc.
This is commonly termed narrow artificial intelligence. By contrast, humans, are able to apply
their intelligence across a wide range of domains. This capacity is termed general intelligence.
If AI reaches and surpasses human levels of general intelligence, a set of radically different
considerations apply. Some techno‐optimists predict the advent of general artificial intelligence
for as early as 2029 (see Kurzweil, 2005), although the median estimate in the AI expert
community is around 2040 to 2050, with most AI experts assigning a 90% probability to human‐
level general artificial intelligence arising within the current century (see Bostrom, 2014). A
minority believes that general artificial intelligence will never arrive. However, if human‐level
artificial general intelligence is reached, there is broad agreement that AI would soon after
become super‐intelligent, i.e. more intelligent than humans, since technological progress would
likely accelerate, aided by the intelligent machines. Given these predictions, we have to think
seriously about the implications of artificial general intelligence for humanity and, in the
context of this paper, for what it implies for our economy as well as for inequality.
Assuming that our social and economic system will be maintained upon the advent of artificial
general intelligence and superintelligence,29 there are two main scenarios. One scenario is that
29

Researchers who work on the topic of AI safety point out that there is also a risk of doom scenarios in
which a sufficiently advanced artificial intelligence eradicates humanity because humans stand in the

33

man and machine will merge, i.e. that humans will “enhance” themselves with ever more
advanced technology so that their physical and mental capabilities are increasingly determined
by the state of the art in technology and AI rather than by traditional human biology (see e.g.
Kurzweil, 2005). The second scenario is that artificially intelligent entities will develop
separately from humans, with their own objectives and behavior (see e.g. Bostrom, 2013;
Tegmark, 2017). As we will argue below, it is plausible that the two scenarios might differ only
in the short run.
First Scenario: Human Enhancement and Inequality
The scenario that humans will enhance themselves with machines may lead to massive
increases in human inequality, unless policymakers recognize the threat and take steps to
equalize access to human enhancement technologies.30 Human intelligence is currently
distributed within a fairly narrow range compared to the distance between the intelligence of
humans and that of the next‐closest species. If intelligence becomes a matter of ability‐to‐pay,
it is conceivable that the wealthiest (enhanced) humans will become orders of magnitude more
productive—“more intelligent”—than the unenhanced, leaving the majority of the population
further and further behind. In fact, if intelligence enhancement becomes possible, then –
unless pre‐emptive actions are taken – it is difficult to imagine how to avoid such a dynamic.
For those who can afford it, the incentive to purchase enhancements is great, especially since
they are in competition with other wealthy humans who may otherwise leapfrog them. This is
even more so in an economy which is, or is perceived to be, a winner‐take‐all economy and/or
in which well‐being is based on relative income. Those who cannot afford the latest technology
will have to rely on what is in the public domain, and if the pace of innovation increases, the
gap between the best technology and what is publicly available will increase.
A useful analogy is to compare human enhancement technology to healthcare – technology to
maintain rather than enhance the human body. Different countries have chosen significantly
different models for how to provide access to healthcare, with some regarding it as a basic
human right and others allocating it more according to ability to pay. In the US, for example,
the expected life spans of the poor and the wealthy have diverged significantly in recent
decades, in part because of unequal access to healthcare and ever more costly new
technologies that are only available to those who can pay. The differences are even starker if
we look at humanity across nations, with the expected life span in the richest countries being
way of its goals. See e.g. Bostrom (2013) who elaborates on this using the example of a “paperclip
maximizer” – an AI that has been programmed to produce as many paperclips as possible, without
regard for other human goals, and who realizes that humans contain valuable raw materials that should
better be transformed into paperclips.
30
In many respects, the issues are parallel to those associated with performance enhancing drugs. In
sports, these have been strictly regulated, but in other arenas, they have not.

34

two thirds longer than in the least developed countries (see e.g. UN, 2015). Like with
healthcare, it is conceivable that different societies will make significantly different choices
about access to human enhancement technologies.
Once the wealthiest enhanced humans have separated sufficiently far from the unenhanced,
they can effectively be considered as a separate species of artificially intelligent agents. To
emphasize the difference in productivities, Yuval Harari (2016) has dubbed the two classes that
may result “the gods” and “the useless.” In that case, the long‐run implications of our first
scenario coincide with the second scenario.
Second Scenario: Artificially Intelligent Agents and the Return of Malthus
We thus turn to the scenario that artificially intelligent entities develop separately from regular
(or unenhanced) humans. One of the likely characteristics of any sufficiently intelligent entity –
no matter what final objectives are programmed into it by evolution or by its creator – is that it
will act by pursuing intermediate objectives or “basic drives” that are instrumental for any final
objective (Omohundro, 2008). These intermediate objectives include self‐preservation, self‐
improvement and resource accumulation, which all make it likelier and easier for the entity to
achieve its final objectives.
It may be worthwhile pursuing the logic of what happens if humans do not or cannot assert
ownership rights over artificially intelligent or super‐intelligent entities.31 That would imply
that sufficiently advanced AI is likely to operate autonomously.
To describe the resulting economic system, Korinek (2017) assumes that there are two types of
entities, unenhanced humans and AI entities, which are in a Malthusian race and differ –
potentially starkly – in how they are affected by technological progress. At the heart of
Malthusian models is the notion that survival and reproduction requires resources, which are
potentially scarce.32 Formally, traditional Malthusian models capture this by describing how
limited factor supplies interact with two related sets of technologies, a production and a
consumption/reproduction technology: First, humans supply the factor labor, which is used in a
31

If humans and artificially intelligent entities are somewhat close in their levels of intelligence, it may still be
possible for humans to assert ownership rights over the AI – in fact, throughout the history of mankind, those
determining and exerting property rights have not always been the most intelligent. For example, humans could
still threaten to turn off or destroy the computers on which AI entities are running. However, if the gap between
humans and super‐intelligent AI entities grows too large, it may be impossible for humans to continue to exert
control, just like a two‐year old would not be able to effectively exert property rights over adults.
32
If AI directs its enhanced capabilities at binding resource constraints, it is conceivable that each such constraint
might successively be lifted, just as we seem to have avoided the constraints that might have been imposed by the
limited supply of fossil fuels. At present, humans consume only a small fraction – about 0.1% – of the energy that
earth receives from the sun. By harvesting energy from beyond earth, even greater supplies of energy would be
available. Astrophysicists such as Tegmark (2017) note that the ultimate resource constraint on super‐intelligent AI
will be the availability of energy (or, equivalently, matter, since E=mc2) accessible from within our event horizon.

35

production technology to generate consumption goods. Secondly, a consumption/reproduction
technology converts consumption goods into the survival and reproduction of humans,
determining the future supply of the factor labor.
Throughout human history, Malthusian dynamics, in which scarce consumption goods limited
the survival and reproduction of humans, provided a good description of the state of humanity,
roughly until when Malthus (1798) published his Essay on the Principle of Population to
describe the resulting Iron Law of Population. Over the past two centuries, humanity, at least in
advanced countries, was lucky to escape its Malthusian constraints: capital accumulation and
rapid labor‐augmenting technological progress generated by the Industrial Revolution meant
that our technology to produce consumption goods was constantly ahead of the consumption
goods required to guarantee our physical survival. Moreover, human choices to limit physical
reproduction meant that the gains of greater productivity were only partly dissipated in
increased population. However, this state of affairs is not guaranteed to last forever.
Korinek (2017) compares the production and consumption/reproduction technologies of
humans and AI entities and observes that they differ starkly: On the production side, the factor
human labor is quickly losing ground to the labor provided by AI entities, captured by the
notion of worker‐replacing technological progress that we introduced earlier. In other words, AI
entities are becoming more and more efficient in the production of output compared to
humans. On the consumption/reproduction side, the human technology to convert
consumption goods such as food and housing into future humans has experienced relatively
little technological change – the basic biology of unenhanced humans is slow to change. By
contrast, the reproduction technology of AI entities – to convert AI consumption goods such as
energy, silicon, aluminum into future AI – is subject to exponential progress, as described e.g.
by Moore’s Law and its successors, which postulate that computing power per dollar (i.e. per
unit of “AI consumption good”) doubles roughly every two years.33
Taken together, these two dynamics imply – unsurprisingly – that humans will lose the
Malthusian race in the long run, unless counteracting steps are taken, to which we will turn
shortly. In the following paragraphs we trace out what this might entail and how we might
respond to it. (Fully following the discussion requires a certain suspension of disbelief.
However, we should begin by recognizing that machines can already engage in a large variety of
33

The original version of Moore’s Law, articulated by the co‐founder of Intel, Gordon Moore (1965), stated that
the number of components that can be fit on an integrated circuit (IC) would double every year. Moore revised his
estimate to every two years in 1975. In recent years, companies such as Intel have predicted that the literal version
of Moore’s Law may come to an end over the coming decade, as the design of traditional single‐core ICs has
reached its physical limits. However, the introduction of multi‐dimensional ICs, or multi‐core processors and other
specialized chips for parallel processing etc. implies that a broader version of Moore’s Law, expressed in terms of
computing power per dollar, is likely to continue for several decades to come. Quantum computing may extend
this time span even further into the future.

36

economic transactions – trading financial securities, placing orders, making payments, etc. It is
not a stretch of the mind to assume that they could in fact engage in all of what we now view as
economic activities. In fact, if an outside observer from a different planet were to witness the
interactions among the various intelligent entities on earth, it might not be clear to her if, for
example, artificially intelligent entities such as Apple or Google control what we humans do [via
a plethora of control devices called smartphones that we carry with us] or whether we
intelligent humans control what entities such as Apple and Google do. See also the discussion in
Turing (1950).) The most interesting aspects of the economic analysis concern the transition
dynamics and the economic mechanisms through which the Malthusian race plays out.
In the beginning, those lacking the skills that are useful in an AI‐dominated world may find that
they are increasingly at a disadvantage in competing for scarce resources, and they will see
their incomes decline, as we noted earlier. The proliferation of AI entities will at first put only
modest price pressure on scarce resources, and most of the scarce factors are of relatively little
interest to humans (such as silicon), so humanity as a whole will benefit from the high
productivity of AI entities and from large gains from trade. From a human perspective, this will
look like AI leading to significant productivity gains in our world. Moreover, any scarce factors
that are valuable for the reproduction and improvement of AI, such as human labor skilled in
programming, or intellectual property, would experience large gains.
As time goes on, the superior production and consumption technologies of AI entities imply
that they will proliferate. Their ever‐increasing efficiency units will lead to fierce competition
over any non‐reproducible factors that are in limited supply, such as land and energy, pushing
up the prices of such factors and making them increasingly unaffordable for regular humans,
given their limited factor income. It is not hard to imagine an outcome where the AI entities,
living for themselves, absorb (i.e. “consume”) more and more of our resources.
Eventually, this may force humans to cut back on their consumption to the point where their
real income is so low that they decline in numbers. Technologists have described several
dystopian ways in which humans could survive for some time – ranging from uploading
themselves into a simulated (and more energy‐efficient) world34 to taking drugs that reduce
their energy intake. The decline of humanity may not play out in the traditional way described
by Malthus – that humans are literally starving – since human fertility is increasingly a matter of
choice rather than nutrition. It is sufficient that a growing number of unenhanced humans
decide that given the prices they face, they cannot afford sufficient offspring to meet the

34

See e.g. Hanson (2016). In fact, Aguiar et al. (2017) document that young males with low education have already
shifted a considerable part of their time into the cyber world rather than supplying labor to the market economy –
at wages that they deem unattractive.

37

human replacement rate while providing their offspring with the space, education, and
prospects that they aspire to.
One question that these observations bring up is whether it might be desirable for humanity to
slow down or halt progress in AI beyond a certain point. However, even if such a move were
desirable, it may well be technologically infeasible – progress may have to be stopped well
short of the point where general artificial intelligence could occur. Furthermore it cannot be
ruled out that a graduate student under the radar working in a garage will create the world’s
first super‐human AI.
If progress in AI cannot be halted, our description above suggests mechanisms that may ensure
that humans can afford a separate living space and remain viable: because humans start out
owning some of the factors that are in limited supply, if they are prohibited from transferring
these factors, they could continue to consume them without suffering from their price
appreciation. This would create a type of human “reservation” in an AI‐dominated world.
Humans would likely be tempted to sell their initial factor holdings, for two reasons: First,
humans may be less patient than artificially intelligent entities. Secondly, super‐intelligent AI
entities may earn higher returns on factors and thus willing to pay more for them than other
humans. That is why, for the future of humanity, it may be necessary to limit the ability of
humans to sell their factor allocations to AI entities. Furthermore, for factors such as energy
that correspond to a flow that is used up in consumption, it would be necessary to allocate
permanent usage rights to humans. Alternatively, we could provide an equivalent flow income
to humans that is adjusted regularly to keep pace with factor prices.35

Conclusions
The proliferation of AI and other forms of worker‐replacing technological change can be
unambiguously positive in a 1st‐best economy in which individuals are fully insured against any
adverse effects of innovation, or if it is coupled with the right form of redistribution. In the
absence of such intervention, worker‐replacing technological change may not only lead to
workers getting a diminishing fraction of national income, but may actually make them worse
off in absolute terms.
The scope for redistribution is facilitated by the fact that the changes in factor prices create
windfall gains on the complementary factors, which should make it feasible to achieve Pareto
improvements. If there are limits on redistribution, the calculus worsens and a Pareto
improvement can no longer be ensured. This may lead to resistance from those in society who

35

All of this assumes that the super‐intelligent AI entities don’t use their powers in one way or another to abrogate
these property rights.

38

are losing. As a result, it is desirable to use as broad of a set of 2nd‐best policies as possible,
including changes in intellectual property rights, to maximize the likelihood that AI (or
technological progress more generally) generate a Pareto improvement.
AI and other changes in technology necessitate large adjustments, and while individuals and the
economy more broadly may be able to adjust to slow changes, this may not be so when the
pace is rapid, for example because of capital market imperfections. Indeed, in such situations,
outcomes can be Pareto inferior. The more willing society is to support the necessary transition
and to provide support to those who are “left behind,” the faster the pace of innovation that
society can accommodate, and still ensure that the outcomes are Pareto improvements. A
society that is not willing to engage in such actions should expect resistance to innovation, with
uncertain political and economic consequences.

39

References
Acemoglu, Daron. 1998. “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical
Change and Wage Inequality.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4):1055‐1089
_____ 2002. “Directed Technical Change.” Review of Economic Studies 69(4): 781‐809
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo. 2016. “The Race Between Machine and Man:
Implications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares and Employment.” NBER Working Paper
22252.
Aghion, Philippe, Benjamin Jones and Charles Jones. 2017. Artificial Intelligence and Economic
Growth. NBER Working Paper 23928.
Aguiar, Mark, Mark Bils, Kerwin Kofi Charles and Erik Hurst. 2017. “Leisure Luxuries and the
Labor Supply of Young Men.” NBER Working Paper No. 23552
Akerlof, George, and Janet Yellen. 1990. “The Fair Wage‐Effort Hypothesis and
Unemployment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(2): 255‐283.
Arrow, Kenneth. 1962. "Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention." In:
The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors, ed. by Richard R.
Nelson, 609‐26. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Baker, Dean, Arjun Jayadev and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2017. “Innovation, Intellectual Property, and
Development: A Better Set of Approaches for the 21st Century,” AccessIBSA: Innovation &
Access to Medicines in India, Brazil & South Africa.
Barrat, James. 2013. Our Final Invention: Artificial Intelligence and the End of the Human Era.
New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Berg, Andrew, Edward F. Buffie, and Luis‐Felipe Zanna. 2016. “Robots, Growth, and Inequality.”
Finance & Development no. 3 (September): 10‐13.
Bostrom, Nick. 2014. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Dasgupta, Partha and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1980a. “Uncertainty, Industrial Structure and the Speed
of R&D,” Bell Journal of Economics 11(1), pp. 1‐28.
_____ 1980b. “Industrial Structure and the Nature of Innovative Activity,” Economic Journal
90(358), pp. 266‐293.
_____ 1987. “Potential Competition, Actual Competition and Economic Welfare,” European
Economic Review 32, pp. 569‐577.

40

Dávila, Eduardo, and Anton Korinek. 2017. “Pecuniary Externalities in Economies with Financial
Frictions.” forthcoming, The Review of Economic Studies.
Delli Gatti, Domenico, Mauro Gallegati, Bruce C. Greenwald, Alberto Russo, and Joseph E.
Stiglitz. 2012a. “Mobility constraints, productivity trends, and extended crises.” Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization 83 (3): 375‐393.
_____ 2012b. Sectoral Imbalances and Long‐run Crises. In: The Global Macro Economy and
Finance, ed. by Franklin Allen, Masahiko Aoki, Jean‐Paul Fitoussi, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Robert
Gordon, Joseph E. Stiglitz. International Economic Association Series. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Dosi, Giovanni and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2014. “The Role of Intellectual Property Rights in the
Development Process, with Some Lessons from Developed Countries: An Introduction,” in:
Intellectual Property Rights: Legal and Economic Challenges for Development, Mario Cimoli,
Giovanni Dosi, Keith E. Maskus, Ruth L. Okediji, Jerome H. Reichman, and Joseph E. Stiglitz
(eds.), Oxford, UK and New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 1‐53.
Drandakis, Emmanuel and Edmund Phelps. 1965, “A Model of Induced Invention, Growth and
Distribution.” Economic Journal 76, 823‐840.
Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M. Schmidt. 2003. “Theories of Fairness and Reciprocity – Evidence and
Economic Applications.” In: Advances in Economics and Econometrics, Econometric Society
Monographs, ed. by Mathias Dewatripont, Lars Peter Hansen and Stephen J Turnovsky. Eighth
World Congress, Volume 1, pp. 208‐257. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2011). January, 2011. “The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report”.
Final Report of the National Commission. Available at http://www.gpoaccess.gov/fcic/fcic.pdf
Frey, Carl Benedikt, and Michael A. Osborne. 2017. “The future of employment: How
susceptible are jobs to computerisation?” Technological Forecasting and Social Change 114:
254‐280.
Geanakoplos, John, and Herakles Polemarchakis. 1986. “Existence, regularity, and constrained
suboptimality of competitive allocations when the asset market is incomplete,” In: Uncertainty,
information and communication: Essays in honor of KJ Arrow, ed. by W. Heller, R. Starr, and D.
Starrett, pp. 65–96. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press
Gordon, Robert. 2016. The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since
the Civil War. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Greenwald, Bruce, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1986. “Externalities in Economics with Imperfect
Information and Incomplete Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 101(2): 229‐264.

41

Groshen, Erica L., Brian C. Moyer, Ana M. Aizcorbe, Ralph Bradley, and David M. Friedman.
2017. “How Government Statistics Adjust for Potential Biases from Quality Change and New
Goods in an Age of Digital Technologies: A View from the Trenches.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 31(2):187–210
Guzman, Martin, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2016a. “A Theory of Pseudo‐Wealth,” In: Contemporary
Issues in Macroeconomics: Lessons from The Crisis and Beyond, ed. Joseph E. Stiglitz and
Martin Guzman. IEA Conference Volume, No.155‐II. Palgrave Macmillan.
_____ 2016b. Pseudo‐Wealth and Consumption Fluctuations,” NBER Working Paper No. 22838.
Hanson, Robin. 2016. The Age of Em. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Harari, Yuval N. 2017. Homo Deus: A Brief History of Tomorrow. New York: Harper.
Hicks, John 1932. The Theory of Wages. London: Macmillan.
Kennedy, Charles. 1964. “Induced Bias in Innovation and the Theory of Distribution.” Economic
Journal LXXIV: 541‐547.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1931. “Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren,” in Essays in
Persuasion, San Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace, pp. 358‐373.
Korinek, Anton. 2016. “Currency Wars or Efficient Spillovers? A General Theory of International
Policy Cooperation.” NBER Working Paper 23004.
_____ 2017. “Humans, Artificially Intelligent Agents, and the Return of Malthus.” Working
paper.
Korinek, Anton and Ding Xuan Ng. 2017. “The Macroeconomics of Superstars.” Working paper.
Korinek, Anton, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2017. “Artificial Intelligence, Worker‐Replacing
Technological Change, and Income Distribution.” Working Paper.
Kurzweil, Ray. 2005. The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology. New York:
Viking.
Lipsey, Richard, and Lancaster, Kelvin. 1956. “The General Theory of Second Best,” The Review
of Economic Studies 24(1): 11‐32.
Meade, James E. 1955. Trade and Welfare. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Malthus, Thomas Robert. 1798. An Essay on the Principle of Population. Project Gutenberg.
Manning, Alan. 2011. “Imperfect Competition in Labour Markets”, In: Handbook of Labor
Economics edited by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, volume 4. North‐Holland: Amsterdam

42

Moore, Gordon E. 1965. "Cramming more components onto integrated circuits". Electronics
38(8): 114:ff.
Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides. 1994. “Job Creation and Job Destruction in
the Theory of Unemployment.” The Review of Economic Studies 61(3):397‐415.
_____ 1998. “Technological Progress, Job Creation, and Job Destruction.” Review of Economic
Dynamics 1(4):733‐753
Newbery, David and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1984. “Pareto Inferior Trade.” Review of Economic
Studies 51(1):1‐12.
Omohundro, Stephen M. 2008. “The Basic AI drives.” In: Artificial General Intelligence 2008:
Proceedings of the First AGI Conference, edited by Pei Wang, Ben Goertzel, and Stan
Franklin, pp. 483‐492. Amsterdam: IOS.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2014. “Optimal Taxation of Top
Labor Incomes: A Tale of Three Elasticities,” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 6(1), 2014, pp. 230‐271.
Restrepo, Pascual. 2015. “Skill Mismatch and Structural Unemployment.” Working paper.
Samuelson, Paul. 1965. “A Theory of Induced Innovations Along Kennedy‐Weisacker Lines”
Review of Economics and Statistics XLVII: 444‐464.
Schmitt, John. 2013. Why Does the Minimum Wage Have No Discernible Effect on Employment?
Washington, DC: Center for Economic and Policy Research.
Shapiro, Carl and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1984. “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
Device.” American Economic Review 74(3):433‐444.
Simsek, Alp. 2013. “Speculation and Risk Sharing with New Financial Assets,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 128(3), pp.1365‐1396.
Solow, Robert. 1987. "We'd better watch out", New York Times Book Review, July 12, page 36.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1969. “Distribution of Income and Wealth Among Individuals.” Econometrica
37(3): 382‐397
______ 1976. The Efficiency Wage Hypothesis, Surplus Labour and the Distribution of Income in
LDCs. Oxford Economic Papers 28: 185–207.
______ 1987a. “On the Microeconomics of Technical Progress,” Technology Generation in Latin
American Manufacturing Industries, Jorge M. Katz (ed.), New York: St. Martin;s Press,
pp. 56‐77. (Presented to IDB‐CEPAL Meetings, Buenos Aires, November 1978.)
______ 1987b. “Technological Change, Sunk Costs, and Competition,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 3, pp.883‐947.

43

_____ 2006. “Samuelson and the Factor Bias of Technological Change,” Samuelsonian
Economics and the Twenty‐First Century, M. Szenberg et al, eds., Oxford University
Press: New York, pp. 235‐251.
_____ 2008. “The Economic Foundations of Intellectual Property,” Duke Law Journal 57(6), pp.
1693‐1724.
_____ 2014a. “Intellectual Property Rights, the Pool of Knowledge, and Innovation.” NBER
Working Paper 20014.
_____ 2014b. “Unemployment and Innovation,” NBER Working Paper 20670.
_____ 2014c. “Tapping the Brakes: Are Less Active Markets Safer and Better for the Economy?”
Presentation at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 2014 Financial Markets Conference
_____ 2017. “Pareto Efficient Taxation and Expenditures: Pre‐ and Re‐distribution.” NBER
Working Paper 23892
Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Bruce Greenwald 2015. Creating a Learning Society: A New Approach to
Growth, Development, and Social Progress, with Bruce C. Greenwald, New York:
Columbia University Press. Reader’s Edition published 2015
Stiglitz, Joseph E. with Nell Abernathy, Adam Hersh, Susan Holmberg and Mike Konczal, 2015.
Rewriting the Rules of the American Economy, A Roosevelt Institute Book, New York: W.W.
Norton
Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss. 1981. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
Information.” The American Economic Review 71(3):393‐410.
Tegmark, Max. 2017. Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artificial Intelligence. New York:
Knopf.
Turing, Alan M. 1950. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” Mind 59(236): 433‐460.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 2015. "United Nations World
Population Prospects: 2015 Revision."
Vinge, Vernor. 1993. “The Coming Technological Singularity: How to Survive in the Post‐Human
Era.” In: Proc. Vision 21: interdisciplinary science and engineering in the era of cyberspace, pp.
11–22. NASA: Lewis Research Center.
Weizacker, Von, C. 1966. “Tentative notes on a two‐sector model with induced technical
progress,” Review of Economic Studies 33: 245–251.
Williams, Heidi. 2010. “Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from the Human
Genome.” NBER Working Paper 16213.

44

