NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PARENTHOOD, FAMILY FRIENDLY WORKPLACES, AND THE GENDER GAPS
IN EARLY WORK CAREERS
V. Joseph Hotz
Per Johansson
Arizo Karimi
Working Paper 24173
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24173

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017, Revised June 2018

Previously circulated as "Parenthood, Family Friendly Firms, and the Gender Gaps in Early Work
Careers." We thank Oriana Bandiera, Stéphane Bonhomme, Nicholas Bloom, Lena Hensvik,
Henrik Kleven, Lance Lochner, Arnaud Maurel, Marjorie McElroy, Jessica Pan, Jörn-Steffen
Pischke, Maya Rossin-Slater, Seth Sanders, Modibo Sidibe, Isaac Sorkin, Kathryn Shaw,
Valentin Verdier, and seminar participants at University of Bristol, University of CaliforniaDavis, Duke University, Ragnar Frisch Centre for Economic Research (University of Oslo),
Humboldt University, Research Institute of Industrial Economics (IFN), Linnaeus University,
London School of Economics, University of North Carolina, University of Pennsylvania,
Stanford University, Swedish Institute for Social Research (Stockholm University), University of
Umeå, University of Western Ontario, the 2016 SOLE Meetings, the 2016 Uppsala Center for
Labor Studies (UCLS) Advisory Board meeting, the 2017 Nordic Register Data Meeting, and the
Conference on Gender Economics of Labor Markets at Uppsala University for their useful
comments on and discussion of earlier versions of this paper. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by V. Joseph Hotz, Per Johansson, and Arizo Karimi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Parenthood, Family Friendly Workplaces, and the Gender Gaps in Early Work Careers
V. Joseph Hotz, Per Johansson, and Arizo Karimi
NBER Working Paper No. 24173
December 2017, Revised June 2018
JEL No. J13,J16,J24,J31,J62
ABSTRACT
We consider the role that workplace attributes play in accounting for the divergence in the careers
of women and men, with the onset of parenthood. We exploit matched employer-employee data
from Sweden to characterize a model-based index of workplace “family friendliness” and analyze
the effect of more family friendly workplaces on the career gaps between mothers and fathers.
We find that exogenously moving mothers to more family friendly workplaces would raise their
wages and labor income. In contrast, such moves would entail reductions in the same outcomes
for fathers, resulting in sizeable improvements in the parental gender gap in wages and income.
At the same time, working in more family friendly workplaces would not reduce the penalty to
wage rates earned by women with their transition to motherhood (i.e., the motherhood penalty),
but it would reduce the motherhood penalty to earned income by facilitating mothers working
more hours. Furthermore, the benefits of family friendly workplaces appear to come at the
expense of the occupational skill progression of mothers relative to non-mothers, impeding
mothers’ ability to climb career ladders over the longer run. Finally, using auxiliary data based on
a survey, we find that jobs – as defined by our index – are more substitutable for one another in
family friendly workplaces. This substitutability of workers in more family friendly workplaces
appears to be the mechanism that facilitates mothers’ ability to balance work and family
responsibilities in such workplaces. At the same time, it also may partially explain our finding
that more family friendly workplaces slow mothers’ occupational skill-progression.
V. Joseph Hotz
Department of Economics
Box 90097
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
hotz@econ.duke.edu
Per Johansson
Department of Statistics
Uppsala University
Box 513
SE-751 20 Uppsala
Sweden
Per.Johansson@ifau.uu.se

Arizo Karimi
Department of Economics
Uppsala University
751 20 Uppsala, SWEDEN
Arizo.Karimi@nek.uu.se

1

Introduction
Despite the gender convergence in labor force participation rates, educational levels, and occupations

observed over the last few decades, significant gender gaps persist in all industrialized countries (Blau
and Kahn, 1992, 1995, 1996, 2003, 2017). A large economics literature suggests that the earnings and wage
growth of women are negatively affected by childbearing (see e.g. Angrist and Evans, 1998; Bronars and
Grogger, 1994; Fitzenberger, Sommerfeld, and Steffes, 2013),1 and that male and female earnings diverge
at the onset of parenthood (Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz, 2010; Angelov, Johansson, and Lindahl, 2016;
Kleven, Landais, and Søgaard, 2018).
In trying to explain the source of the wage penalty to mothers, an early literature focused on the role
of employer discrimination (Becker, 1971; Neumark, Bank, and Van Nort, 1996; Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004) and foregone investments in human capital (Mincer and Polachek, 1974).2 A more recent
literature explores the role of sorting across high- and low-paying jobs and firms for explaining the
gender wage gap (Loprest, 1992; Hospido, 2009; Del Bono and Vuri, 2011; Card, Cardoso, and Kline,
2016; Sorkin, 2017; Barth, Kerr, and Olivetti, 2017). A related literature suggests that occupations, jobs
and workplaces may differ with respect to the temporal flexibility that they provide women, especially
mothers, in their work and thereby account for some of the gender differences in career choices and outcomes (Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz, 2010; Goldin and Katz, 2011, 2010; Flabbi and Moro, 2012; Goldin,
2014; Cardoso, Guimarãs, and Portugal, 2016; Cortes and Pan, 2018), and of women with and without
children (Felfe, 2012b,a; Herr and Wolfram, 2012; Adda, Dustmann, and Stevens, 2017). Finally, recent
work has examined the importance of gender differences in negotiation skills (Babcock and Laschever,
2003), in the willingness to compete (Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007), and in social norms with respect to
appropriate behaviors and work-related activities (Bertrand, 2011; Kleven, Landais, and Søgaard, 2018;
Bertrand, Kamenica, and Pan, 2015) in accounting for male-female wage differences.
This paper considers the role that the characteristics, or attributes, of workplaces and/or jobs in which
one works play in accounting for the divergence in the careers of women and men, in terms of the wage
and non-wage attributes of jobs, with the onset of parenthood. We do so for at least three distinct, but
related, reasons. First, as noted above, recent studies by Goldin and co-authors (Bertrand, Goldin, and
Katz, 2010; Goldin and Katz, 2011, 2010; Goldin, 2014; Goldin and Katz, 2016) have focused on the role of
“workplace flexibility” or the “family-friendliness” of workplace amenities, as playing a large role in the
1 Using an alternative identification strategy, Hotz, McElroy, and Sanders (2005) find that teenage childbearing does not
have a persistent negative effect on earnings over teen mothers’ life cycle.
2 See Altonji and Blank (1999) for a survey of this earlier literature.

1

gender differences in wages between women and men. Much of this work (Felfe, 2012b,a) has focused on
differences across occupations in the intensity and flexibility of hours of work as a (dis)amenity of jobs
to account for the gender gap in wages. But the jobs in which women work compared to those of men
differ not only with respect to occupation but, as we show below, also with respect to the establishments
in which they work and the attributes of those workplaces.
Second, there is a much wider array of attributes of jobs than the intensity and flexibility of hours of
work that may be valued differently by men and women and by parents and non-parents, including the
structure of the management of workplaces, the skill and gender composition of a workplace’s workforce, the proximity of the workplace to workers’ home, etc. Again, as we show below, differences in
these attributes of jobs and workplaces play a central role in understanding gender gaps in early work
careers.
Third, our interest in the role of workplaces is motivated by the findings of Abowd, Kramarz, and
Margolis (1999)3 with respect to the existence of firm-level premia in wages and by the recent work
of Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016) and Sorkin (forthcoming) that demonstrates the important impact
of firm-level bargaining and sorting on the gender wage gap. In closely related work, Bayard et al.
(2003) and Cardoso, Guimarãs, and Portugal (2016) show that part of the gender wage gap found in the
U.S. and Portugal, respectively, can be attributed to women being segregated into low-paying jobs and
occupations within firms.
To analyze the impact that differences in the attributes of workplaces and jobs have on the early work
careers of women and men and mothers and fathers, we exploit rich employer-employee matched data
sets for Sweden. With respect to gender gaps in wages, earnings and other labor market outcomes and
the family friendliness of the workplaces and jobs in which they work, Sweden is a particularly interesting country to study. Since the 1970s, Sweden has introduced a series of policy reforms to facilitate
the combination of parenthood and careers.4 The financial support to workers with young children and
mandated job protections during parental leave are universal, extensive, and cover both mothers and
fathers. Despite the generous duration of job-protected parental leave with governmentally-paid parental leave benefits, Sweden still has a gender gap in the wages of parents. Examining the wages and
non-wage attributes of workers’ jobs in this policy context provides insights into the tradeoffs faced by
new parents over and above those that are addressed by universal family policies.
3 See

also Barth et al. (2016) and Card et al. (2018).
Björklund (2006) for a description of changes to the Swedish family policies from the 1960s onwards, and Jaumotte
(2004) for a characterization of family leave policies in different OECD countries.
4 See

2

Our paper makes three contributions to the literature on gender and parenthood gaps in work careers
and to our understanding of the role that job and workplace attributes play in them. In the first, we develop a model-based index of the family friendliness of workplaces. To do so, we characterize a model
of job/workplace choice and the timing of parenthood over the life cycle in which women and men
before becoming parents and after they enter parenthood choose their jobs and workplaces based on
preferences over the wages and non-wage attributes of workplaces and jobs. These preferences, which
vary by gender and parenthood status, characterize workers’ marginal willingness to pay (MWP) for the
latter attributes.5 Our model motivates an econometric strategy for estimating these preferences/MWPs
using individuals’ workplace-to-workplace transitions. In particular, we employ a fixed-effects conditional multinomial logit model which separately identifies these MWP valuations from unobserved
person-specific productivity and taste parameters that also influence the observed workplace choices
over workers’ early careers.6
We use the resulting estimates of MWP of workplace/job attributes of mothers to construct an index
of the family friendliness for each Swedish workplace in our data. Based on this index, we find that
family friendly workplaces are much more likely to be in the private versus government and municipal
sectors, are more likely to be populated by medium- and low-skilled workers than professionals and
tend to consist of workplaces in which many of their workers have the same occupation compared to less
family friendly workplaces. We also find that while young workers transition to more family friendly
workplaces over their early careers, once women become mothers they are much more likely to work in
family friendly workplaces compared to fathers.
In our second contribution, we estimate impact that working in more family friendly workplaces has
on wages, hours of work, labor earnings and the skill content of occupations7 for mothers and fathers
and how these impacts differ by gender and parenthood status. Previous work – most notably Goldin
and her co-authors (Goldin, 2014; Goldin and Katz, 2010, 2011) – has viewed wage differences between
women and men as compensating differentials (Rosen, 1986) that result from the interplay between
preferences for various job and workplace attributes, such as temporal flexibility in jobs or occupations,
5 See Wiswall and Zafar (2018) for an alternative strategy for estimating the workplace preferences and MWP for them using
the responses of undergraduate men and women to questions about hypothetical jobs that differ in workplace attributes.
6 See Sorkin (forthcoming) who uses the employer-to-employer job transitions to reveal worker preferences over firms and
their wage and non-wage attributes using matched worker-workplace administrative data for the U.S. See also Liu (2016) who
uses employer-to-employer transitions and those into and out of unemployment to identify gender differences in hours of
work and its role in explaining the gender wage gap in the U.S.
7 The skill-content of one’s job has been been found to be a predictor of their opportunities for subsequent career advancement.

3

and the costs to employers of providing them.8 Our objective is different from this previous literature.
Herein, we seek to identify the causal effect of changing the workplace attributes that mothers prefer,
on labor market outcomes of mothers and fathers and the gender gaps in and parenthood penalties
to these outcomes. Our index of family friendliness characterizes a bundle of attributes that make up
workplaces and jobs in them and weights these bundles by how mothers’ value them based on where
they choose to work. Our estimates of changes in the index allow us to measure whether moving to
such work environments would improve the labor market attainment of parents, especially mothers,
close parental gender gaps in outcomes and reduce the penalties of parenthood compared to working
in less accommodating workplaces. The extent to which changes in workplace environments are found
to improve these outcomes highlights a different mechanism for improving mothers’ and parents’ work
careers compared to governmental- or employer-provided parental leaves, parental leave benefits, child
care access and child care subsidies that have been the focus of previous research (Ruhm, 1998, 2011;
Waldfogel, 2001).9
We find that exogenously moving mothers to more family friendly workplaces would modestly
prove their wages, contracted hours of work and labor market earnings. For fathers, in contrast, such
moves would entail reductions in wages and income. Since mothers are the main caretakers of children, this could explain why workplace family friendliness mainly benefits mothers. Consistent with
this, we also find that moving to more family friendly workplaces would yield sizable improvements
in the parental gender gaps in wages and labor income, although it would have no to small effects on
the corresponding gaps in contracted hours of work and the skill-content of jobs. We also examine how
workplace family friendliness affects the motherhood penalty, that is, the difference in career outcomes between mothers and women without children. We find that such changes in workplaces would reduce the
motherhood penalties to contracted hours of work and labor income but would exacerbate the penalties
to wage rates and the skill-content of the jobs in more family friendly workplaces. The latter findings
suggest potentially long run adverse effects working in more family friendly workplaces on wage growth over career due to the lower skill-content of job in such workplaces. Furthermore, the extent to
which mothers disproportionately sort into more family friendly jobs may explain growth in career gaps
over the career between men and women. Thus, while there do appear to be tangible benefits of working
in more family friendly work environments for mothers, these benefits may not end up enhancing their
8 See

also Flabbi and Moro (2012) who use a search and bargaining model to characterize gender wage differences for job
flexibility, measuring such flexibility by whether women are able to work part time.
9 We note that Bianchi (2011) documents how workplaces in the U.S. have changed over time to accommodate the increasing
labor force participation of young mothers.

4

careers in the longer term.
In our third contribution, we take a closer look at the features of working in family friendly workplaces to better understand our findings for the impacts of working in them for parents’ labor market
outcomes. As noted above, Goldin (2014) argues that having flexibility in one’s job when women enter
parenthood, especially when their children are young, is crucial to reducing the gap in their wages relative to men.10 Thus, it is of interest as to whether the workplaces we classify as more family friendly
reflect this greater flexibility. To examine this, we use supplementary data which measures the flexibility
of jobs, including control over the hours when one can work and periods when one can take time off.
This data source also allows us to measure how easily jobs are substitutable for one another, by measuring the “autonomy” of jobs. We compare these measures of temporal job flexibility and substitutability
with our index of workplace family friendliness.
We find a stark negative relationship between the extent of job autonomy and the family friendliness
of workplaces. Moreover, working in more family friendly workplaces is not associated with having
greater temporal flexibility in one’s job. Rather, workers with more temporal flexibility in their jobs are
more likely to work in workplaces where jobs involve performing tasks that are not easily transferable
across co-workers, i.e., jobs in which workers are less substitutable in production. As we argue below,
this latter set of findings are consistent with those in Goldin and Katz (2016) concerning their explanation
for the gender evolution of the pharmacist occupation in the U.S.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we describe the various data sources
we use and the composition of our analysis samples of Swedish women and men over their early careers.
In section 3 we use these data to describe differences by gender and parenthood status in the wage and
non-wage attributes of Swedish jobs and workplaces. As we show, while women and men start out with
jobs and workplaces that are vary similar, once they become parents, mothers, and to a lesser extent
fathers, end up in very different ones.
In section 4, we lay out our model of job and workplace choice and the timing of parenthood over
the early careers of women and men to characterize gender- and parenthood-specific preferences over
jobs and workplaces. We use the model to characterize an econometric strategy for producing selectionadjusted estimates of these parameters, as well as their the marginal willingness to pay analogues, and
present separate estimates by gender and parenthood. We also discuss the construction of our index of
the family friendliness of the workplaces using these estimates and show that our index captures the
10 See also Cortes and Pan (forthcoming) for recent evidence on the returns to working long hours and the gender wage gap.

5

sorting of the jobs and workplaces men and women transition to after the onset of parenthood, found in
section 3.
In section section 5 we outline an estimation strategy for and present estimates of the impacts of
moving workers to more family friendly workplaces on the wages, hours of work, the labor incomes,
and the skill-content of jobs for mothers and fathers early in their careers. In section 6 we present results
for assessing the relative importance of job flexibility, autonomy and substitutability for the jobs and
workplaces in which mothers work. Finally, we offer concluding comments in section 7.

2

Data

The analysis is based on a matched employer-employee data set created by combining several Swedish
population-wide administrative registers. We use the multi-generational register, which links children
to their biological parents, and provides information on the birth year, birth month, and birth parity
of all children born before 2008 for the entire Swedish population. To these data we match individual
longitudinal information on demographic and background characteristics – such as age, sex, region of
residence, educational attainment, and country of origin – from the LOUISE register. LOUISE also includes annual labor income drawn from tax registers for each individual, with zero-income reported for
periods of non-work.11
We match this information to a linked employer-employee register that contains all employed individuals in Sweden, with unique identifiers for their employers and establishments, or workplaces at
which they are employed. More precisely, we link information about the establishment at which a person works, as this measure the person’s workplace and allows us to measure its characteristics. Establishments are physical workplace locations and may differ from the firm or employer of a worker, as a
firm/employer may have more than one establishment, e.g., a bank may have more than one branch or
a unit of government may have more than one office. That said, throughout the paper we shall use the
terms establishment, workplaces and firms to refer the same entity, namely a workplace.
The time-unit for our analysis is a calendar year, i.e., all observations represent person-workplaceyear units. In reality, a person can work in more than one workplace/establishment in a year or have
multiple employment spells for the same workplace in a year. To obtain one person-workplace obser11 The

multi-generational register allows linking couples with joint children, and the LOUISE register identifies married
couples with or without joint children. For non-married, cohabiting couples, however, the data only allows linking individuals
in couples if they have joint children. Thus, the data enables the identification of couples prior to having children only for a
subset of couples (cohabitation is a very common alternative to marriage unions in Sweden). For this reason we abstract from
modeling the role of spouses in the job decisions of workers in our model presented in section 4.

6

vation per year, we sum the income observations for the same employer per person-year, and retain
the workplace at which the worker earned their main income. In the majority of the cases, this implies
that we retain one observation per person-workplace-year. For the very few cases of individuals who
move establishments or workplaces of the same firm within a year, we record the workplace for that
year as where the individual earns their main income. Thus, our analysis data identifies within- and
between-workplace movers across years, but not within-year/within-firm mobility.
For each person-workplace-year pair, we then match information on wage rates and occupational
codes from the Wage Structure Statistics, collected by the Swedish National Mediation Office. The Wage
Structure Statistics is an annual survey of establishments that collects information on “contracted” work
hours, occupations, and full-time equivalent monthly wage rates for each employee that worked at least
one hour during the measuring month. A worker’s annual contracted work hours is stipulated in an
individual’s annual employment contract and indicates whether the individual is scheduled to work
full-time or some fraction of full-time. Contracted work hours does not measure how many hours a
worker actually works in a given period, as it does not take account of temporary time off from work
due to parental leave or sickness absence, for example. How much time an individual spends working is
reflected in their annual labor income, which measures their actual labor earnings. Thus, taking account
their monthly wage rate, an individual’s annual income a good summary measure for their annual labor
supply.
The occupational classification standard, SSYK, is a four-level hierarchical scheme that is based on
the International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO), with some adaptations to the Swedish
labor market. We use the first three digits of the SSYK to identify a person’s occupation category. The
skill requirements of the occupations range between 1 and 4, and correspond to the ISCED’s categorization, where occupations with level 1 require skills comparable to those attained with only 5 years of
schooling, and level 4 occupations require skills comparable to those attained from college education
(although the skills need not be attained through formal education). In Appendix A we provide the
levels of education corresponding to the skill requirements at each level of the skill content index of the
occupational classification (see Table A.2). In Appendix A, we also display the skill level required for
each major occupation group in the SSYK. As shown in Table A.3 of this Appendix, the highest level
of skill is required for occupations within the group containing ”legislators, senior officials, and managers”. As we explain in detail in Appendix A, the educational level associated with each occupational
skill level does not mean that the occupation requires the equivalent formal schooling; the worker may

7

have obtained the required skills through work experience. This is important as it implies that variation
in occupational skill content within individuals over their early careers is not primarily derived from
obtaining more education; it is derived from moving up or down the occupational ladder, or altogether
changing jobs.
All establishments and organizations within the public sector (government, county council, and municipality) are covered in the Wage Structure Statistics. For the private sector, all firms with 500 employees or more are covered, while a random sample is drawn on firms with fewer than 500 employees. (As
noted above, firms of any size may have multiple establishments.) The sampling is stratified based on
a cross-classification of industry and establishment size, with the end result covering around 50 percent
of all private sector workers in Sweden. The Wage Statistics also includes sample weights that allow
calculation of aggregate statistics that are nationally representative.12
In terms of workplace characteristics, the linked employer-employee data set includes industry classification (NACE), establishment size, and workplace location (municipality). We exploit the richness
of our data to construct a wide range of additional workplace attributes. Specifically, we characterize
the workforce of individuals’ workplace (excluding the focal worker’s characteristics) using data on all
individuals employed at their workplace, with the aid of the matched employer-employee data set combined with demographic information from LOUISE, and from the wage- and occupation information
from the Wage Structure Statistics. This allows us to measure the skill and gender composition and the
occupational diversity at each workplace, e.g., the share of workers with a managerial position. Finally,
for a sub-sample of firms in the manufacturing sector, our data includes information on value added per
worker, both at the firm and workplace level.
The employer-employee, LOUISE, and Wage registers cover the time period 1985 through 2007. However, the occupational classification is only available from 1996 onwards.

2.1

Analysis Sample & Summary Statistics

Our interest is in the wages, hours of work, income and the characteristics of jobs and workplaces and
career progression at the outset of workers’ careers. To this end, we construct a sample of individuals
12 Part

of our empirical strategy relies on within-person variation in the attributes of the establishments/workplaces in
which they work, which means that only individuals who appear in the wage structure statistics multiple years help identify
the coefficient of interest. To deal with the sampling issue, we use an imputed measure of wages for workers for whom we
observe an employment in the employer-employee full-population data set, but who are missing in the wage structure statistics.
In Appendix A we describe the imputation strategy and compare the wage structure with imputed missing wage information
to the true wage distribution.

8

who first enter the labor market as of 1996 or later.13 We restrict our analysis to cohorts of workers
entering after 1996, since the earliest year we have data on workers’ occupation is 1996. We further
restrict the sample to individuals whose first child was born after entering the labor market. Thus, all
individuals in our sample enter the labor market without children, and subsequently become parents at
some point during the observation period. That is, our sample consists only of women and men who
were observed to have become parents by 2008. Net of these sample restrictions, we end up with 328,812
unique individuals.
Table 1 displays summary statistics, separately by gender and measured in the year of labor market entrance. Comparisons of columns (1) and (2) show that female workers are slightly younger than
male workers when they enter the labor market. This age difference might be attributed to women
finding a first job more quickly compared to men, as shown by the average number of years between
the completion of highest attained education and finding a first job. Consistent with Bertrand, Goldin,
and Katz (2010), wages of male and female workers in our sample are relatively similar at the onset
of the career, with an initial raw wage gap of only 5 log points. Contracted work hours are somewhat
lower for women, who work, on average, 87% of a full-time equivalent job compared to 0.95 for male
workers. Despite a relatively small gender wage gap, there are large gender disparities in the sector of
employment. Around 48 percent of women start their careers in the public sector (county council, municipality) or government sectors, with the remaining 52 percent working in the private sector. For men,
the corresponding numbers are 26 percent in the public sector and 74 percent start out in the private
sector.14
In Table 2 we take a closer look at the attributes of the jobs and workplaces of female and male
workers at the onset of their careers. The results show that the establishments at which the typical
female worker is employed is characterized by a lower average wage, lower wage dispersion, lower
contracted work hours and a larger number of employees compared to the typical male’s workplace.
The difference in the share of female employees at men’s and women’s workplaces is striking, with
roughly 66 percent of a woman’s co-workers being female compared to 36 percent for men. Thus, there
is significant gender segregation across workplaces in Sweden. Moreover, women’s workplaces seem to
13 We

define labor market entry as the first job after completing the highest attained level of education, that lasted at least
four months, and yielded earnings exceeding three times the 10th percentile of the full wage distribution. Details are provided
in Appendix A.
14 The sample sizes vary in Table 1 and Table 2 due to some variables being drawn from population-wide data, and others
from the Wage Structure Statistics which includes the universe of public sector employees, but only around half of all private
sector workers. Therefore, we apply sample weights to all statistics calculated for variables drawn from the wage register. The
reported sample sizes are, however, the unweighted sample sizes.

9

exhibit a flatter organizational structure, as the share of employees with a managerial position is lower
at the typical female’s workplace. There so is a somewhat lower occupational diversity at the workplace
of women as measured by the number of distinct occupational titles. However, there is not a large
difference in the skill composition across men’s and women’s workplaces.15
Thus, the descriptive evidence provided in Tables 1 and 2 indicates that male and female wages
do not differ to a large extent at the outset of their careers, but the jobs of men and women and the
establishments in which they work do differ with respect to several important non-wage attributes. In
the next section, we take a closer look at how wages and non-wage attributes of men and women workers
transition over the career, especially with their entry into parenthood.

3

Wage & Non-Wage Attributes of Jobs & Workplaces Observed over the
Transition to Parenthood
In this section we provide an empirical description of the relationship between wages and the attri-

butes of the jobs and workplaces in which men and women work and parenthood status. We make no
attempt to adjust these estimates for selective differences in labor market productivity or tastes. Such
adjustments are developed in section 4.

3.1

Differences in Work Career Outcomes by Gender and Parenthood

To illustrate how wages and other career outcomes evolve for male and female workers in Sweden,
Table 3 compares the log wages, contracted work hours, annual labor income and occupational skillcontent of men and women, before and after becoming parents. Panel A displays the means and differentials for all women and all men, while Panels B and C repeat these estimates for non-parents (i.e.,
men and women before they become parents) and for parents (i.e., after they have had children). The
gender differences in this table are unadjusted, i.e., they are simple differences in means.
With respect to log wages, the overall gender gap for our sample is 13%. Consistent with our findings
in Table 1 it is lower for non-parents [10.09%], but the gap wides considerably among parents [15.78%].
The widening of the gender wage gap with parenthood is found in Angelov, Johansson, and Lindahl
(2016). There also is an overall gender gap in contracted work hours of 9%, again with the gap for
non-parents being smaller [6.09%] and for parents being larger [13.56%]. With respect to annual labor
15 The proportion medium skilled workers in Table 2 refers to the shares of a workplace’s workers with occupations requiring

skill level 2. These shares, along with those for low-skilled workers (skill level 1), professionals (skill level 3) and managers and
senior officials are found in Table A.2 of Appendix A.

10

income, which reflects both wage rates and actual hours worked, we find an unadjusted overall gender
gap of 141,288 SEK which is a 38% gap relative to men’s income. The gap in labor income also is smaller
among non-parents [59,548.8 SEK or 18.1% of men’s income] and much larger among parents [225,739.6
SEK or 53% of men’s income], where this latter gap in income between mothers versus fathers reflects
the fact that mothers take much more time off in the form of parental leave than do fathers. Finally, with
respect to the occupational skill-content index described in the previous section, there is a gender gap for
all men and women [0.0498], one that is slightly smaller among non-parents [0.0403] and larger among
parents [0.0645], although all of these gaps, as a percentage of men in each group are relatively small.

3.2

Differences in Workplace Attributes by Gender and Parenthood

As seen in Table 2, the jobs of men and women differ with respect to several non-wage attributes already
at the start of their careers. But how do women’s and men’s job and workplace choices, i.e., choices
of the non-wage attributes of jobs, evolve over the life cycle? To address this, we estimate a simple
difference-in-differences specification, regressing a set of workplace attributes on an interaction term
between being female and having at least one child, while controlling for age and calendar year effects.
The resulting coefficients on this interaction term from each regression are presented in Table 4. We find
that the wages and average contracted work hours of co-workers are lower in the workplaces of mothers
compared to those of men and non-parent women. Motherhood also is negatively associated with the
share of managers at mothers’ workplaces, the share of the workforce with professional occupations,
and the within-workplace wage dispersion. Moreover, the share of female co-workers, share of part-time
workers, and the share of female co-workers with young children are positively related with parenthood
for female workers. Finally, the firm growth rate and the firm-level value added per worker also is
negatively associated with motherhood, suggesting that women may be more likely to move to lower
productivity workplaces after becoming parents than male and/or non-parent workers.

3.3

Transition to Parenthood & Career Outcomes

Given the findings in Table 4, we next examine how the career outcomes of men and women change
as they transition to parenthood. To do so, we employ an event-study approach in the spirit of Kleven,
g

Landais, and Søgaard (2018). Let Gist denote an outcome for individual i of gender g that occurred in
calendar year s when i is age t, t ≥ t0 , where t0 is the age of entry into the workforce. We want to
examine how outcomes change before and after the birth of i’s first birth. Using the notation developed
11

g

in section 4, we let κi denote the age at first birth, or the beginning of childrearing, for individual i
g

of gender g. Then, we construct a (unbalanced) panel of observations for individuals over ages κi −
g

5, ..., κi + 10 and estimate the following equation:16
g

g

Gist = η0 +

10

∑

j=−4

g

g

η1j 1{t = κi + j} +

K

L

∑ η2k tk + ∑ η3s 1{s = Year0 + `} + νist ,
g

k =1

g

g

(1)

`=0

g

g

g

where 1{t = κi + j} is the indicator function for age t = κi + j; ∑kK=1 η2k tk is a polynomial function
of age t; 1{s = Year0 + `} is an indicator for (calendar) year, s, in which the individual is age t, where
Year0 is the year in which the oldest cohort in the sample was age 15; and the outcomes (G) are wage
rates, contracted work hours (measured as the percentage of full-time), the yearly income earned from
g

market work, and the skill-level of one’s occupation. Thus in (1) the η1j s, j = −4, ..., 0, ...10, measure the
deviations of outcome G relative to five years before that birth (j = −5), netting out age (t) and calendar
year (s) effects. We estimate (1) separately for female (g = 1) and male (g = 0) workers for each labor
market outcome, G, and restrict our analysis sample to those women and men who gave birth to their
first birth within the first ten years after labor market entry.17
Since almost all women are on parental leave during the year of birth of their first child,18 we have
very few observations on the variables obtained from the wage structure register in the year of childbirth
for women. Moreover, those that are present at the workplace in the year of the birth are likely to be a
select group of mothers.19 To avoid this source of selectivity, we impute missing information in the year
of childbirth using the preceding year’s values of the workplace attributes and own wages, conditional
on being employed in the same workplace in the two adjacent years. We perform this imputation for
women only, since very few fathers are absent from the workplace in the year of the birth of their first
child.
Figure 1 depicts the percentage deviations in labor market outcomes relative to five years before their
first birth (j = −5) for women and men. The graphs plot the estimated coefficients on the 1{t = κ + j}
g

16 While

g

we do not observe the full panel of observations over ages κi − 5, ..., κi + 10 for each individual in our sample, we
are able to construct synthetic life cycles due to that the inflow of individuals to the labor market and into parenthood occurs
at different calendar points in time for our sample.
17 In Figure B.1 of Appendix B we display the distribution of the timing of first births, defined as the number of years elapsed
between labor market entry and the first birth, for the women and men in our sample, as well as the distribution of ages at first
births by gender.
18 All parents in Sweden are entitled to up to 480 days of government-mandated paid parental leave with job protection, and
nearly all mothers take-up parental leave benefits.
19 Recall that the Wage Structure Statistics only covers workers with at least one hour of work during the survey month, so
that wage observations for individuals on e.g., parental leave are censored. However, the matched employer-employee data
set includes all individuals with an employment, allowing us to identify the workplaces of those that are absent from work
during the survey month of the Wage Structure Statistics.

12

variables (j = −5, ..., 0, ..., 10) from (1) divided by predicted values of the four labor market outcomes,
where the predicted values also adjust for age (t) and year (s) and where the values for j = −5 are equal
to zero for both females and males. As one can see in Figure 1-A, there is not a sizable difference in the
trends in average wage rates across gender in the years preceding first births, but immediately after the
first birth women’s wages fall behind males’ wages (which do not change after having their first child).
Ten years after the first child is born, women have approximately 15 percent lower wages compared
to five years before they gave birth to their first child. Panel (B) shows the corresponding results for
contracted work hours, and shows that women resort to part-time work after the first child is born,
whereas no change is found for men. Panel (C) shows that in terms of earnings, there is a substantial
drop in women’s earnings immediately upon becoming a parent, and their earnings do not catch up
even 10 years after birth. Finally, panel (D) shows that, before first birth, the average skill-level of men’s
and women’s occupations are parallel, but start to diverge in the second year after birth, with women’s
skill progression falling behind men’s to an increasingly larger extent over time. These findings are
suggestive that childbearing has very different impacts on the careers of male and female workers, with
an apparent “mommy-track” consistent with evidence from previous studies.

3.4

Transition to Parenthood & Workplace Switching

Finally, given the findings of differences in the workplace attributes of mothers in Table 4, we examine
the extent to which women and men change workplaces around the time of their first births. To do so, we
estimate the specification in (1), where, instead of labor market outcomes, the outcome variable is whether an individual’s workplace changes from one year to the next, conditional on being employed. The
estimated probabilities of switching workplaces by age for this specification are presented in Figure 2.
While men’s job-to-job mobility steadily decreases over the life cycle, women’s job-to-job mobility appears to be closely linked to the timing of parenthood, with lower mobility in the years immediately
surrounding birth, but higher mobility before.

4

Modeling Worker Preferences for Jobs & Workplaces for Constructing an
Index of Family Friendly Workplaces

The descriptive analyses presented in section 3 suggest that the entry into parenthood results in differences in the attributes of jobs and workplaces of both women and men. In this section, we develop a
13

model-based strategy for measuring the family friendliness of workplaces in Sweden.
Jobs and workplaces are characterized by a set of observed attributes, over which workers have preferences, which can vary by a worker’s gender and whether or not they are parents. Our econometric
strategy for estimating worker preferences is based on a revealed preferences strategy, using data on
the observed choices of whether to remain in their incumbent job and workplace or change it. Below,
we outline a model of worker choice that guides our estimation approach. The model is based on a set
of assumptions about the labor market environment which are grounded in Swedish laws and regulations governing parental leave, employment and worker rights. As discussed below, these laws and
regulations constrain workers’ choices in significant ways.
We allow preferences over jobs and workplaces to differ by the gender and parenthood status of workers. The timing of the entry into parenthood is subject to choice, but also is influenced by the inherent
stochastic nature of the human reproductive process. Below, we characterize the features of a simple
model of the timing of entry into parenthood and the arrivals of first births and their consequences for
estimating job and workplace preferences that are conditional on parenthood.
As noted in section 1, job and workplace preferences can be used to characterize a worker’s marginal
willingness to pay (MWP) for non-wage attributes. While such measures have been the focal point of
past analyses of gender wage differences, we use these MWPs for mothers to construct a measure of an
index of the “family friendliness” of workplaces. Below, we describe the construction of our index of
family friendliness for every Swedish workplace in our data and examine the nature of worker sorting
by the family friendliness of workplaces as young men and women transition into parenthood, and how
the labor market outcomes of women and men vary by the family friendliness of the establishment in
which they work. We postpone until section 5 a discussion of how we identify and estimate the causal
impacts that working in more family friendly jobs and workplaces have on these labor market outcomes
for mothers and fathers.

4.1

Choices of Jobs & Workplaces and Timing of Parenthood

4.1.1

Parenthood & Childbearing

In this section we characterize the onset of parenthood and the children over the life cycle. We postpone
to section 4.1.5 a discussion of the decision of exactly when individuals enter parenthood.
All individuals, indexed by i, begin their labor market careers at age t0 , the age at which an individual
completes their education and enters the labor market. Throughout, we index the gender of individual i
14

with the indicator gi , where gi = 1 is a female, so that 1 − gi = 1 denotes a male. Let pit denote the indicator
of individual i being in the state of parenthood at age t and, consistent with the individuals in our analysis
sample, all of them are not parents at t0 , i.e., pt0 = 1. The state of parenthood (pit = 1) starts at that age
when an individual begins trying to have their first birth.20 Entering parenthood is an irrevocable decision,
i.e., once pit = 1, pi,t+s = 1 for s = 1, 2, ..., T − t, where T is the age of death. Individuals in the state of
parenthood keep trying to have children until they succeed. Let τ denote the age of the onset of parenthood,
i.e., τ is the age such that pi,τ −k = 0, k = 1, 2, ..., τ, and pi,τ +k0 = 1, k0 = 0, 1, 2, ..., T − τ.
Let cit0 denote the indicator for being in the state of having children at age t0 and let κ denote the age
at which i first has children, or i’s age at first birth. Similar to the state of parenthood, the state of having
children (cit = 1) is an absorbing state, Thus, ci,κ −` = 0, ` = 1, 2, ..., κ, and ci,κ +` = 1, `0 = 0, 1, 2, ..., T − κ.
It follows that the state of parenthood not only includes the period after the arrival of one’s first child,
t > κi , but also the period one is trying to conceive the first birth, i.e., t ∈ (τi , κi ).
While individuals in our model can choose when they start trying to be a parent, they cannot choose
the exact date when they actually become one. In particular, while births can be avoided, i.e., contraception is assumed to be perfect, births are stochastic events, occurring at random after women start trying
to become pregnant. Consider an individual at age t. Births occur probabilistically. Let e, e ∈ (0, 1),
denote the probability that a pregnancy occurs at the end of age t. It follows that the probabilities for
individual i to become pregnant and have their first birth, conditional on being and not being a parent
as defined above is given by:

Prob(cit = 1 | pit = 0) = 0,
Prob(cit = 1 | pit = 1) = e.

(2)

It follows that the probability that a parent who is trying to have their first birth will wait exactly k years
before succeeding is given by:
Prob(ci,t+k = 1 | pit = ... = pi,t−k = 1 & ci,t+1 = 0 = ... = ci,t+k−1 = 0) = (1 − e)k−1 e,

(3)

and that the difference between κ and τ, is a random interval governed by a stochastic birth process
discussed above.21 While, as discussed in section 4.1.5 below, we allow the age of entry is the state
20 Trying
21 We

to have children can be characterized as couples no longer using contraception during sexual intercourse.
assume that all subsequent births after the first are governed by the same birth process defined in (2) and (3).

15

parenthood to be a choice made by individuals (with their spouses or partners), we note that preceding
assumptions about the stochastic nature of the birth process imply that the age of entry into the state of
childhood is, in part, random. The latter randomness helps to identify selection-adjusted estimates of
the preferences of workers over the attributes of their jobs and workplaces.

4.1.2

Jobs & Workplaces and Worker Preferences over Them

A job is defined as a position located in firm – or, more accurately, workplace – f in which an individual
works. We assume that a job that an individual holds, or may seek, at age t is completely characterized
by the vector of characteristics, (wi f t , zi f t ), where wi f t denotes the wage that i receives at age t from
a job that is located at workplace f and zi f t denotes the vector of non-wage attributes of that job and
workplace. Note that some of the non-wage attributes of a job are characteristics that are specific to the
person holding that job, such as the occupational category of the job, e.g., professional, technician, etc.,
while others are characteristics specific to the workplace f , firm and its work environment, such as the
sector in which the workplace is located (e.g., private or public), its size, or the gender composition of
the workplace’s workforce.
We assume that individuals make their parenthood and job choices so as to maximize expected utility.
Furthermore, as noted above, we simplify the ways in which job and workplace choices and childbearing
interact over the life cycle in the way they characterize individuals’ per period preference functions.
Individuals are assumed to have the following per period utility functions over working in a job at
workplace f at age t:
p

p

p

p0

p

U p (wi f t , zi f t , φi , ζ it ) ≡ φi + θ0 + θ1 wi f t + θ2 zi f t + ζ it ,

(4)

where (wi f t , zi f t ) are the observable traits of a job in workplace f at age t; φi is age-invariant personspecific parameter that characterizes their other preferences and/or a worker’s innate abilities that affect
their returns to working in any job;22 and ζ it , is a transitory preference shock, which we assume to be
independently and identically distributed over time. Note that the preference function in (4) and its
parameters are allowed to differ by individual i’s parenthood status, p, and by individual i’s gender.
Consistent with the assumptions in section 4.1.1, we allow an individual’s preference function to switch
from that for a non-parent (p = 0) to that for a parent (p = 1) before the actual occurrence of a birth
(cit = 1) in order to characterize job and workplace choices made in anticipation of first births.
22 In principle, we can allow φ to vary with parenthood status, p . In the empirical analysis discussed below, we discuss the
i
it
consequences of relaxing this invariance assumption on φi .

16

The marginal utilities of wages and other job and workplace attributes for working in job/workplace
p

p

f , θ1 and θ2 , respectively, can be used to characterize an individual’s marginal willingness to pay (MWP)
out of wages for attribute k of a job/workplace of parents and non-parents:
p

p

θ2k /θ1 , p = 0, 1,
4.1.3

(5)

Types of Job and Labor Force Transitions

An individual’s job can change for a number of reasons. It can change over the course of working in a
particular workplace or as the result of changes in the workplace itself. Furthermore, a worker can leave,
or be forced to leave, employment altogether. In this section we characterize the types of transitions we
account for in our model, but we begin with a discussion of those that we do not.
An important feature of the Swedish welfare state is a set of laws and regulations which create incentives and worker rights that constrain work-related transitions of individuals. For example, under
Swedish job protection laws it is difficult for employers to fire or layoff workers, especially if the (female)
worker is pregnant or for parents with a newborn or young child (Teknikföretagen, 2012; L&E Global
Sweden, 2017). While individuals in Sweden do experience spells of unemployment and being out of
the labor force, the risk of becoming unemployed before and after the birth of a child is low due to three
key features of the Swedish government’s parental leave program. First, the parental leave benefits received when someone takes such leave is a function of one’s wage and employment history, creating
a strong incentive to establish such a history before beginning parenthood and taking a parental leave.
Second, when parents do take parental leave they remain an employee of the workplace they left – albeit
recorded as working zero hours – since, by law, they can return to the workplace and their position at
the end of their leave. (This leave may be taken, with benefits, for up to 18 months after a birth and
intermittently until each child reaches age eight.) Third, during those first eight years, a parent has the
right to reduce their contracted hours of work to less than full-time and employers must accommodate
this request. Finally, we note that these policies apply to both mothers and fathers.
Thus, most of the action in job turnover in Sweden around the onset of parenthood is due either to
the changing of jobs within a workplace or to changing workplaces (and jobs). Studying the job mobility
patterns in Europe, Japan, and in the US, Borghans and Golsteyn (2012) find that job-to-job mobility23
in Sweden is at the European average, that job-to-job transition rates are the same across the genders,
23 Job-to-job

mobility in this study include changes in employers and/or in titles of the function or job description.

17

and that voluntary job-to-job mobility is the main reason for mobility in Sweden, around 91% of all
mobility. As can be seen in Figure 3, we see that among the women and men in our sample the rates
of transitions to and from non-employment are very low both before and after their first births and that
workplace-to-workplace transitions dominate the movements of members of our sample. We note that
the corresponding figure in other countries is lower than in Sweden, e.g., voluntary job-mobility in the
US is estimated to account for 62% of job movements.
Given these findings, we ignore transitions to and from unemployment and not-in-the-labor-force,
as well as layoffs and firings, in the modeling of labor market turnover used to estimate worker job and
workplace preferences of Swedish women and men in our sample.
The two remaining sources of year-to-year job turnover for Sweden are:
(a) within workplace job changes, i.e., (wi f t , zi f t ) changes from (wi f t , zi f t ) to (wi f ,t+1 , zi f ,t+1 ) or
(b) workplace-to-workplace job changes, i.e., (wi f t , zi f t ) changes from (wi f t , zi f t ) to (wi f 0 ,t+1 , zi f 0 ,t+1 ) due to
the move from workplace f to workplace f 0 .
Within workplace job changes are due to individuals moving up (or down) internal job ladders or changes in the workplace itself due to changes in the profitability of the firm or growth in the establishment’s
workforce. While the latter may be exogenous to the individual, the literature characterizes the latter
transitions be the result of a worker’s acquisition of firm-specific human capital (Becker, 1962; Lazear,
2009) and/or job assignment via internal promotions based on their abilities (Gibbons and Waldman,
1999b,a; Lazear and Oyer, 2013). With respect to workplace-to-workplace transitions – often referred
to as either “job-to-job” or “employer-to-employer” transitions – the literature has viewed them as the
sorting of workers across firms via job search (Garibaldi and Moen, 2010; Garibaldi, Moen, and Sommervoll, 2016) and find that they are a sizable share of labor force flows (Davis and Haltiwanger, 1999) and
are important for wage growth and productivity (Lentz and Mortensen, 2005; Postel-Vinay and Robin,
2002; Sorkin, forthcoming).
In our modeling to recover worker preferences over job/workplace attributes, we focus on workplaceto-workplace transitions for several reasons. First, we have much less information about the internal
mechanisms for within-workplace transitions, making it difficult to separate out more exogenous yearto-year changes in job/workplace attributes from those that result from workplace-specific human capital acquisition or job ladders. Second, while previous models of labor market turnover – see Sorkin
(forthcoming) among others – face similar data restrictions and employ various assumptions to sepa18

rate out these factors, we establish below that we can identify worker preferences solely off of observed
workplace-to-workplace transitions.24 The latter do require some assumptions about how workers make
their decisions to change workplaces, to which we now turn.
In our model, we allow workers to search for new workplaces (and jobs) via a job lottery. Job lotteries
have been used as a mechanism in bargaining models of labor markets with on-the-job search to “convexify” the payoff space, where the lotteries are over wage offers (Shimer, 2006; Bonilla and Burdett,
2010). Employment lotteries are used in macro models of labor markets to deal with the indivisibility
of labor supplied when all agents are homogeneous (Hansen, 1985; Rogerson, 1988; Ljungqvist, 2002).
The cost of entering the lottery is r, denoted in units of utility.25 The lottery will produce a new job,

(wi f 0 t , zi f 0 t ), that is drawn from a distribution of jobs, Ft (w f 0 , z f 0 ), which is known to agents. Individuals must decide to enter the lottery before seeing the actual draw and they must accept this new offer,
regardless of whether it is dominated, ex post, by the terms of one’s t − 1 job, (wi f ,t−1 , zi f ,t−1 ).
Job lotteries provide a mechanism for individuals to change workplaces in our model and allows
us to account for workplace-to-workplace turnover that we see in our data (Figure 3) in a theoretically
manageable way.26 We note that this mechanism also allows for the common finding in other studies of
labor market turnover that some workers change to jobs that have lower wages and/or less desirable
job and workplace attributes relative to one’s previous job.

4.1.4

Decision Rule for Changing Workplaces

Consider the decision rule for whether an individual changes their workplace. At each age t and conditional on either being in the state of non-parenthood (p, p = 0) or parenthood (p = 1), individual i makes
a decision as to whether to change her/his job or remain in their incumbent job by comparing the value
of remaining in their incumbent job with the value of entering the job lottery to obtain a new workplace
and job.
A key feature of the decision to change workplaces is how workers form expectations about the

job/workplace that this job lottery is expected to produce. Let Eit (w), Eit (z) denote individual i’s
expectation at age t of the wage and non-wage attributes of the job that the lottery would produce. We
assume that the environment in which workers make their decisions is temporally stationary, but we
24 Below,

we comment on estimates of these preferences based on an empirical specification that also includes withinworkplace job changes.
25 Note that we implicitly assume that at age t , i.e., an individual’s first job and its attributes, is generated by such a lottery.
0
26 An alternative to the use of job lotteries as the mechanism for changing workplaces would be to allow for search in which
actually see a job offer from another employer/workplace and decide whether or not to take it.

19

allow for individual differences in these expectations.27 As a result, Ft (w f 0 , z f 0 ) = F (w f 0 , z f 0 ), so that


Eit (w), Eit (z) = Ei (w), Ei (z) .
Let V (φi , gi f t ) denote the value of employment to individual i with characteristics φi in workplace f
with job characteristics gi f t and let L(φi , r ) denote the the worker’s value of the job lottery with cost r.
These two values are characterized by the following functions:


V p (φi , gi f t ) = U p (gi f t , φi ) + βE max V p (φi , gi f ,t+1 ), L(φi , r )

(6)



L p (φi , r ) = r + Ei U p (g, φi ) + βE max V p (φi , gi f 0 ,t+1 ), L(φi , r )

(7)

and

where β is the discount rate. Note that the last term in each of these valuation functions is the same,
characterizing the expected value of the decisions they make from age t + 1 onward. Let ∆Jit be indicator
for whether i chooses to change employers, i.e., enter the job lottery, at age t. Then ∆Jit = 1, if and only
if:
L p (φi ,r ) − V p (φi , gi f t )

p
= Ei U p g, φi + r p − U p gi f t , φi , ζ it


p
p
p0 
= r p + θ1 Ei (w) − wi f t + θ2 Ei (z) − zi f t + ζ it
p

p0

p

p

= ψi − θ1 wi f t − θ2 zi f t + ζ it > 0

(8)

where third line in (8) follows from linear specification of U p in (4) and where
p

p

p0

p

ψi ≡ θ0 + θ1 Ei (w) + θ2 Ei (z),

(9)

is a person-specific fixed effect and ∆Jit = 0 if inequality in (8) is ≤ 0. As we discuss below in section
4.2, the decision rule for workplace changes in (8) facilitates a relatively straightforward strategy for
p

p

estimating the parameters, θ1 and θ2 , that we use to construct our index of the family friendliness of
workplaces in Sweden.
27 The latter assumption allows individuals to condition their job/workplace decisions on their personal knowledge, which
may vary by their education, knowledge of local labor market conditions, etc., when making their forecasts about the wages
and non-wage attributes of jobs that would be generated if they chose to enter the job lottery.

20

4.1.5

The Decision to Enter Parenthood

As noted above, the decision of individuals to enter the state of parenthood is likely to be endogenous.
In Appendix C, we characterize the decision-rule for choosing at what age over their life cycle to enter this state. There, we establish the latter rule in terms of the per-period payoff function in (4) and
its parameters. Thus, in principle, one uses the latter rules in conjunction with those for the withinparenthood job change decision rule in (8) to characterize those job changes that coincide with the entry
into parenthood. (Recall from Figure 2 that many job changes, especially for women, coincide with first
births.) However, as we argue in Appendix C, the decision rule for the timing of first births are highly
p

non-linear in the parameters of U p (wi f t , zi f t , φi , ζ it ) in (4), including the individual-specific fixed effects,
which greatly complicates their estimation. Accordingly, in the next section, we restrict ourselves to data
on within-parenthood job changes to identify these parameters.

4.2

Estimating Worker Preferences over Wage & Non-Wage Attributes of Jobs & Workplaces

In this section we characterize the identification and strategy for estimating the MWP parameters for
p

p

parents, i.e., θ1 and θ2 . Intuitively, we want to examine parents’ decisions to change jobs, since such
observable changes induce observable variation in w and z. We use the workplace change decision rule
in (8) to form our estimator, treating the φi s in (9) as individual-specific fixed effects. This allows us to
hold constant the individual’s permanent intrinsic productivity, workers’ occupations and other factors,
such as tastes, allowing the factors captured by φi to differ by parenthood status, i.e., φi0 need not equal
φi1 for individual i. We also exploit our assumption that the birth process is stochastic. Finally, we restrict
ourselves to the job changes that occur in the interval (τ, κ ) to identify parental preferences over jobs in
an attempt to avoid the confounding effects of non-random changes in jobs that result from the presence
of an infant, e.g., changing jobs to be closer to where one lives.
To proceed, we also invoke a distributional assumption for the transitory taste shocks. In particular,
we assume that ζ itm , has a type 1 extreme value distribution that is independent across an individual’s
life cycle. It follows conditional on parenthood status, p = 0 for non-parents and p = 1 for parents,
our model of job changes has a fixed-effects logit specification. It can be estimated using the conditional
p

fixed effects estimation strategy of Chamberlain (1980), where we treat the ψi s as incidental parameters
which need not be directly estimated.

21

In the empirical implementation of our model, we note that some of the measures of characteristics
of workplaces in zi f t s, such as the share of female co-workers in one’s workplace, are not direct measures
of job or workplace amenities, the focus of research on compensating wage differentials, but, as with the
share of female co-workers in a workplace, are the aggregation of workers’ endogenously-determined labor market choices. Below, in section 4.4, we return to this issue and consider the potential consequences
of this observation for estimation of workers’ preferences for workplaces and jobs.
Unfortunately, we do not directly observe the onset of parenthood for women in our sample, i.e.,
we don’t observe the age τ such that pi,τ −1 = 0 and piτ = 1, t = 0, 1, ..., T − τ. All we observe is the
age of the onset of childbearing, i.e., κ. To solve this problem, we assume that age κ − k, where k is
a fixed lag length, falls in the interval (τ, κ ) for all i. This allows us to make use of all of the above
results by using τ̃ = κ − k in place of τ and appropriately redefining the interval of parenting without
the arrival of the first birth from (τ, κ ) to (τ̃, κ ). To define τ̃ = κ − k, we explored different values for
k, examining whether the pre-parenthood and immediate post-parenthood changes in jobs for men and
women looked markedly different, i.e., produced different estimates of the parameters in 8. Based on
this exploration, we settled on using k = 2 as the lag length for defining τ̃. We note that we did not
obtain substantially different results for a lag length of k = 1.
The same fixed-effects logit strategy can be applied to the job changes of women and men before they
p

p

enter parenthood, i.e., during the period (t0 , τ̃ ). We present estimates of θ1 and θ2 for non-parent women
and men below.
Finally, we note that we also estimated a version of this model in which we allowed changes in both
p

p

workplaces and jobs within workplaces to identify the parameters, θ1 and θ2 . While we argued against
using the latter variation in identifying these parameters above, we find that the resulting estimates are
not quantitatively very different from those based on only using between workplace variation. Furthermore, they produce vary similar values of the family friendliness index defined below and of the
effects of the family friendliness of workplaces that we define and present in section 5 below. It appears
that once one control for person-specific fixed effects the particular sources of within-person variation in
workplaces and jobs one uses are largely random.

4.3

Estimates of MWP for Non-Wage Job & Workplace Attributes
( g,p)

In Table 5 we present estimates of the marginal utility parameters, θ1

( g,p)

and θ2

, in the per period

utility function in (4) for women before they enter parenthood [( g, p) = (1, 0) and = (0, 0)] in columns (1)
22

and (2), respectively, and for women and men after they enter parenthood [( g, p) = (1, 1) and = (0, 1)]
in columns (3) and (4), respectively. Looking across the estimated marginal utilities for wages and nonwage attributes of jobs, there appears to be substantial differences by gender and by parenthood status.
For example, that the marginal utility of the (log) wage worker i received, is higher for non-parents
than for parents and for women versus men, although the gender gap is larger among non-parents than
parents. Given these differences in the estimated marginal utilities of wages, we focus on assessing the
gender and parenthood status differences in the estimated MWPs of these attributes.
As noted above, many of the attributes of jobs and workplaces included in our specification of the
utility function in (4) may not be viewed as direct measures of workplace and job amenities by most
economists, but rather as the aggregations of individuals’ labor market choices. Recall our earlier reference to using the share of female co-workers as one of our attributes. The results in Table 5 show that
mothers and fathers value the gender composition of their workplace differently. However, despite the
highly gender-segregated labor market in Sweden, there was no statistically significant difference in this
valuation among non-parents. Both of these results are not unexpected, as we are holding occupation,
productivity, and other covariates fixed. The reason for the differences between mothers and fathers
in the valuation of the share of women in one’s workplace is likely related to mothers’ dual work and
family commitments. If mothers are rational, they will search for jobs that are more easily combined
with family so, conditional on everything else, the share of female workers is likely to be higher in those
workplaces that mothers favor. Thus, most of the variables displayed in Table 5 should not be viewed as
job amenities, per se, but as indicators or correlates of more traditional, but unmeasured, workplace/job
amenities. The fact that these job amenities stem from choices does not mean that we have a reverse
causality problem in the estimation of the impacts of working in family friendly workplaces on the labor
market outcomes of parents presented below (see section 5), since the MWP estimates used to construct
our family friendliness index are estimated using data immediately prior the arrivals of first births.
Using these parameter estimates and the formula in (5), we construct estimated MWPs for each of
the non-wage attributes by gender and parenthood status. These estimates are displayed in Table 6,
again separately for mothers and fathers and women and men who have not yet reached parenthood.
In addition, we provide, in columns (5) – (8), gender differences in MWPs for parents [column (5)] and
differences by parenthood status within genders [columns (6) and (7)].
Given our estimation strategy, these estimates net out differences in productivity between women
and men and parents and non-parents. Furthermore, our fixed-effects estimation strategy nets out dif-

23

ferences in occupations by gender and parenthood that might bias how non-parents and mothers and
fathers value attributes of jobs and workplaces. Examining the MWP estimates in Table 6, it is clear that
notable differences between mothers and fathers and parenthood differences for mothers and fathers in
the valuation of jobs and workplaces remain. For instance we see that mothers, relative to fathers, value
workplaces that have a larger share of female co-workers with young children, and larger proportion
of female co-workers in general. And, relative to non-parent women, women place less value on wage
dispersion and on workplaces with a larger proportion of highly educated co-workers.
Taken together, the estimates of the MWPs in Table 6 indicate that gender and parenthood both matter
in what individuals value in jobs and their workplaces. Furthermore, as noted above, these differences
are over and above any differences in preferences for jobs, and possibly workplaces, that are attributable
to gender differences in preferences, as has been the focus of much of the earlier literature (Bertrand,
Goldin, and Katz, 2010; Goldin and Katz, 2011; Goldin, 2014; Goldin and Katz, 2016).

4.4

Indexing the Family Friendliness (FF) of Workplaces

p
p
b2,CML
As noted above, we use the estimates, θb1,CML and θ
, that were estimated with data on the job choices

of mothers during the interval (τ̃, κ ) to form the index of the family friendliness of workplace f in year
s, FFf s as follows. First, for each worker k in workplace f in year s, we calculate the following workerspecific index:


"


FFk f s = 1 + exp 

(1,1)
b
θ2,CML
(1,1)
θb1,CML

0
 zk f s

# −1


,

(10)

which measures a transformation of the valuation worker k would place on the non-wage attributes of
their job in workplace f (zk f s ), where the valuation is based on the willingness to pay that a mother
[( g, p) = (1, 1)] has for these attributes. Then the family friendly index for the job/workplace f in which
a particular individual i in our analysis sample is working in year s, i.e., FFi f s , is defined as the average
of the FFk f s s for all N f s workers – women and men – working in workplace f in year s:28

FFi f s ≡

1
∑ FFk f s .
N f s − 1 k∈(
f ,s)

(11)

We use the MWP estimates for mothers in Table 6 to construct the worker-specific FFi f s in (10) – re28 We also have created versions of FFi f s below where we sum the individual indices over all workers in each workplace
except for individual i’s index, and note that our results are not sensitive to the inclusion of i in forming the workplace-level
family friendliness index.

24

gardless of the gender of worker i – and, thus, to construct an FFf s for each workplace f in each year s
included in our analysis. We do so for the following reason. While the dual earner family is now the
most common family form in the OECD countries,29 there is a great deal of evidence indicating that the
responsibilities for childrearing, especially the time-intensive components, continue to be shared unequally by mothers and fathers. Women are both active in the labor market and perform the majority of
household work, while men predominantly specialize in market work (Boye, 2008; Booth and Van Ours,
2009; Evertsson and Duvander, 2010; Tichenor, 1999). More effort in home production in general implies
less time and effort is available to spend in market work. Time use studies in Sweden consistently show
that time spent on market work is higher for men, but that total time worked (market and non-market
work) is about the same for women as for men (Statistics Sweden, 2009). This result is well in line with
time-use studies from the U.S., Germany, and the Netherlands (Burda, Hamermesh, and Weil, 2008). It
also is well established that an unequal gender division of household and market work emerges first
when couples become parents (Van Der Lippe and Siegers, 1994; Sanchez and Thomson, 1997; Gauthier
and Furstenberg, 2002; Gjerdingen and Center, 2005; Baxter, Hewitt, and Haynes, 2008), and that fertility
decreases women’s labor supply.30
In our estimation of workplace family friendliness, we analyze women who change jobs two years
prior to having their first child. We argued in section 4.2 that job changes in this interval may better
identify the MWP of parents for the attributes of jobs. However, the “burden” of dual roles of family
and a work career may, for some women, become apparent only after giving birth to their first child,
when job changes are made to reconcile family obligations and work. Such a pattern is consistent with
that shown in Figure 2, with greater workplace mobility for women in the four years following the
first birth compared to the years immediately before it. This pattern suggests that if our index captures
something that characterizes the family friendliness of jobs and workplaces, we should see an increase
in job mobility of mothers (relative to fathers) to workplaces that are more family friendly based on our
index.
To evaluate this conjecture, we estimate a version of the event-study specification in equation (1),
using the family friendliness index (FF) of the workplace in which men and women work at each age
as the outcome variable. Specifically, we classify workplaces by whether their index is above the 25th
29 The employment rate for mothers with children below the age of 15 in the Sweden was 80.8 percent in 2010 (OECD, 2017),
and according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011), the U.S. labor force participation of rate of mothers with children
under the age of 18 was 71.3 percent in March 2010.
30 See, for example, Angelov, Johansson, and Lindahl (2016); Angrist and Evans (1998); Jacobsen, III, and Rosenbloom (1999);
Fitzenberger, Sommerfeld, and Steffes (2013).

25

or 50th percentile cut points of the FF distribution. The results are displayed in Figure 4. We see that
there is a clear increase in the probability of working at a family friendly workplace among women after
they have their first child. This result is not surprising, given that our index is constructed using the
preferences of mothers. But, what is of more interest is that the family friendliness of the workplaces
that mothers and fathers choose differ after their first births and this difference is larger the higher is
the threshold defining family friendliness, with women, relative to men, moving to workplaces in the
upper tail of the distribution of family friendliness once they become mothers. This, combined with the
finding that the job and workplace attribute preference coefficients of mothers and fathers are statistically
different, make clear that our index is capturing the workplace and job attributes that matter to mothers
as they attempt to balance work and family.
Note also that the likelihood of working in family-friendly workplaces/jobs increases for both men
and women after they begin their work careers, but that such jobs are equally attractive for women
and men prior to the arrival of their first birth. However, the likelihood of working in family friendly
starts to diverge by gender immediately after the first birth, a pattern that is very similar to that shown in
Figure 2 with workplace mobility. Given the observed gender divergence before parenthood in contracted
work hours, labor income, and (to some extent), wage rates seen in Figure 1, the parallel pre-parenthood
trends in the mobility of men and women to family friendly jobs in Figure 4 suggests that our strategy of
using job changes that occur immediately before the first birth and of controlling for person-specific fixed
effects appears to be successful in netting out any productivity- or occupational differences between men
and women in the estimation of our family friendly index.

4.4.1

Characteristics of Workplaces across the Distribution of FF

In Table 7, we examine the characteristics of workplaces located at different places in the distribution family friendliness, FFf . We divide workplaces into quartiles of the family friendliness index distribution
and display the workplace attributes for each quartile. In Panel A of Table 7 we display of the characteristics of workplaces that were included in the index, while Panel B displays workplace characteristics
that were not included in the index.31 We include this second set of characteristics to see if our FF index
indeed manages to capture heterogeneity across workplaces in their non-wage attributes beyond those
used in its construction.
p

31 The

p

workplace attributes included to estimate the parameters for the MWP of mothers, θ1 and θ2 in (4), do not fully
overlap with attributes listed in Table 7. This is because to construct the FF index, we include workplace attributes for which
we have full coverage due to being drawn from the population-wide data.

26

Examining Table 7, one sees that the within-workplace wage dispersion is almost monotonically decreasing with workplace family friendliness. Moreover, family friendly workplaces appear to be more
specialized, as the share of co-workers with the same occupational title increases monotonically with
the workplace family friendliness index, and the number of occupational titles decreases monotonically.
There also are differences with respect to the skill composition of the workplaces’ employees: more
family friendly workplaces are associated with a lower fraction of workers with highly skilled occupations, such as professionals and associate professionals and technicians, and significantly higher fraction
of workers with medium-skilled jobs. The similarity of occupations and their skill content are consistent
with family friendly workplaces having relatively compressed within-workplace wage distributions. At
the same time, this similarity of occupations suggest that there is less scope for climbing the career ladder – and, thus, for wage growth – within family friendly workplaces. In Table D.1 of Appendix D we
display the most common occupational category of workplaces in the lower end of the FF distribution is
comprised by professionals (e.g. teaching professionals and public service administrative professionals),
while the most common occupation groups in the upper end of the FF distribution are those in service
or shop sales occupations, and various manufacturing jobs. Finally, more family friendly workplaces are
more likely to be located in the private, rather than government or municipal, sectors.
To summarize, all of the evidence points to women transitioning to family friendly workplaces as
they become mothers. Such workplaces may be more accommodating to workers with children, in terms
of attributes that make market work more easily combined with family responsibilities. In Table 7, we
found that workplaces in the upper part of the family friendliness distribution were characterized by a
larger fraction of part-time workers, a lower wage dispersion, and a lower skilled and more specialized
workforce.

5

Impacts of Working in More Family Friendly Workplaces on the Career
Outcomes of Parents
In this section we examine what the impact of working in more family friendly workplaces has on

the wages, contracted hours of work, actual labor earnings and the skill-content of jobs of mothers and
fathers, on the parental gender gaps, and the penalties of motherhood and fatherhood on these outcomes. Our objective is to estimate the causal effects of moving workers from less to more family friendly
workplaces on these labor market outcomes, based on our index of family friendly workplaces. Isolating

27

such causal impacts requires us to control for individual differences in workers’ unmeasured (by the econometrician) productivities and tastes. Below, we characterize a fixed-effects estimation strategy which,
much like the one used to identify worker preferences over workplace attributes in section 4.2, exploits
within-person changes in workplaces and jobs to identify these effects. We then present our estimated
impacts on the labor market outcomes of mothers and fathers and the gender gaps of parents and the
parenthood penalties for these outcomes and discuss their implications. We conclude this section with a
discussion of some checks on the robustness of our findings to alternative specifications of our outcome
equations and of an assessment of the exogeneity of the variation in individuals’ workplaces and jobs
over their early careers.

5.1

Estimating the Impacts of Working in More FF Jobs/Workplaces on Labor Market Outcomes
As noted above, our interest is in estimating the effects of exogenously moving workers from less to

more family friendly workplaces on the labor market outcomes of mothers and fathers, on the parental
gender gaps in these outcomes and the parenthood penalties associated with labor market attainment
in workers’ early work careers. Let yit denote individual i’s outcome (e.g., wages, earnings, etc.) at age
t, where, when appropriate, we further index these outcomes by (g, p) for the gender and parenthood
( g,p)

status of individual i at age t, i.e., yit

. The causal effects of moving from the least family friendly

workplaces, which we define as those in the bottom quartile of the FF distribution (FF Q1), to higher
quartiles of the distribution (FF Qk, k = 2, ..., 4, on the labor market outcomes of mothers and fathers,
respectively, are defined as:
( g,p)

| g = 1, p = 1, FF = Qk) − E(yit

( g,p)

| g = 0, p = 1, FF = Qk) − E(yit

(1,1)

≡ E(yit

(0,1)

≡ E(yit

ϕk
ϕk

( g,p)

| g = 1, p = 1, FF = Q1),

(12)

( g,p)

| g = 0, p = 1, FF = Q1).

(13)

It follows that the causal effects of moving to more family friendly workplaces on the parental gender gap
is defined to be:
(·,1)

λk

≡

h

i
( g,p)
( g,p)
E(yit | g = 1, p = 1, FF = Qk ) − E(yit | g = 0, p = 1, FF = Qk )
h
i
( g,p)
( g,p)
− E(yit | g = 1, p = 1, FF = Q1) − E(yit | g = 0, p = 1, FF = Q1) .

(14)

Finally, we define the causal effects of moving to more family friendly workplaces on the penalties to

28

motherhood and fatherhood, respectively, as:
(1,·)

µk

(0,·)

µk

i
( g,p)
( g,p)
E(yit | g = 1, p = 1, FF = Qk ) − E(yit | g = 1, p = 0, FF = Qk )
h
i
( g,p)
( g,p)
− E(yit | g = 1, p = 1, FF = Q1) − E(yit | g = 1, p = 0, FF = Q1) ,
h
i
( g,p)
( g,p)
≡ E(yit | g = 0, p = 1, FF = Qk) − E(yit | g = 0, p = 0, FF = Qk)
h
i
( g,p)
( g,p)
− E(yit | g = 0, p = 1, FF = Q1) − E(yit | g = 0, p = 0, FF = Q1) ,

≡

h

(15)

(16)

We note that we are not interested in identifying the causal effects of either the parental gender gap or
the penalties of parenthood associated with different labor market outcomes at various points of the FF
distribution, per se, but only in identifying the causal effects of changing the family friendliness of these
constructs. Below, we discuss the sources of variation that we will use to identify these latter causal
effects.
In order to identify the above causal effects, we estimate the following individual-specific fixed effect
regression function for each labor market outcome:32

yit = αi + δ1 cit + δ2 cit 1{ gi = 1} +
4

+ ∑ δ9+k−2 FFitk cit +
k =2

4

4

k =2

k =2

∑ δ3+k−2 FFitk + ∑ δ6+k−2 FFitk 1{ gi = 1}

4

∑ δ12+k−2 FFitk cit 1{ gi = 1} + γ1 Xit + γ2 Xit2 + ε it ,

(17)

k =2

which is estimated by pooling observations on mothers and fathers and non-parents and where αi is
an individual fixed-effect, cit is an indicator variable for whether individual i has experienced their first
birth at age t, 1{ gi = 1} is an indicator for whether individual i is a woman and Xit is the years of
work experience i has at age t. It follows that the causal impacts defined in (12) – (16) are the following
32 We

have tested this model specification against one that allows for individual- and parenthood-specific fixed effects for
each of the labor market outcomes that we consider. We reject the more restrictive model for wage rates and labor income, and
marginally reject it for contracted working hours and occupational skill content. The F-statistic for these tests are 0.97, 0.84,
1.17, and 1.35 for wages, labor income, contracted working hours, and occupational skill content, respectively. The results are
available upon request.

29

functions of the parameters in (17):
(1,1)

= δ3+k−2 + δ6+k−2 + δ9+k−2 + δ12+k−2 ,

(18)

(0,1)

= δ3+k−2 + δ9+k−2 ,

(19)

(·,1)

= δ6+k−2 + δ12+k−2 ,

(20)

= δ9+k−2 + δ12+k−2 ,

(21)

= δ9+k−2 ,

(22)

ϕk
ϕk

λk

(1,·)

µk

(0,·)

µk
for k = 2, ..., 4.

The specification in (17) that includes person-specific fixed effects, αi and, thus, presumes that withinworker changes jobs and/or workplaces that generate changes in the value of the FFitk s over time are
random vis-á-vis the other unobserved factors captured in ε it . This is consistent with the identification
strategy used to estimate the workplace preferences parameters in the utility functions in (4) discussed
in section 4.2. Note, however, that in the estimation of the parameters in (17) we use both within-person
variation of job changes within a workplace as well as changes in workplaces to identify these parameters. As discussed at the end of section 4.2, we found that using both sources of within-person variations
in job and workplace changes, versus only the latter, to estimate the parameters of the utility functions
of workers in (4) produced very similar results.
More formally, using these sources of within-person variation in workplace and job changes to estimate the specification in (17) requires that the following exogeneity conditions hold:
h


k
E (ε it − ε i,t−1 ) FFitk − FFi,t
−1
h


k
E (ε it − ε i,t−1 ) FFitk 1{ gi = 1} − Fi,t
− 1 1 { gi = 1 }
h


k
E (ε it − ε i,t−1 ) FFitk cit − Fi,t
c
i,t
−
1
−1

h

k
E (ε it − ε i,t−1 ) FFitk cit 1{ gi = 1} − Fi,t
c
1
{
g
=
1
}
i
−1 i,t−1

Xit

i

= 0,

Xit

i

= 0,

Xit

i

= 0,

Xit

i

= 0, for k = 2, ..., 4,

(23)

The conditions in (23) require that any changes in the FF k s, and their interactions with childhood status
(cit ) and gender (gi ), for individuals is not a response to innovations in the idiosyncratic components of y.
For example, if y is an individual’s wage, (23) requires that any idiosyncratic changes in an individual’s
wages, such as a cut in one’s wages, does not generate a worker’s decision to change workplaces and,
thus, result in a change in the family friendliness of their workplace. Similarly, (23) requires that such a
30

wage change (cut) does not lead to a worker’s decision to have a child. Rather, our model assumes that
the decisions to change jobs or have a birth at age t are driven by a combination of an individual’s permanent factors that affect their preferences and productivities, as well as totally random factors that result
from the stochastic process generating birth occurrences (see equation (2) in section 4.1.1). In Appendix E, we provide evidence on the reasonableness of the conditions in (23) needed for our identification
strategy based on controlling for person-specific fixed effects. We return this matter in section 5.3.
Below, we present estimates of the parameters of the specifications in (17) for each of the four labor
outcomes. We present estimates of the causal effects defined in (12) – (16) in terms of the parameters in
(17) for each labor outcome.
As we discussed in section 4.1.5, the timing of entry into parenthood – and thus an individual’s parenthood status – is endogenously determined, although the timing of first births, conditional on entry
into parenthood, is assumed to be exogenous. As a result, the identification of the effect of parenthood
status (i.e., the parenthood penalty) in (17), is contentious. However, as noted above our focus is not
on identifying the effects of parenthood per se, but rather the effects of changes in the family friendliness of workplaces on the penalties of parenthood for women and men. And, following the logic of
the identification of worker preferences in section 4.2, the effects of these changes in the family friendliness of workplaces are identified by the within-individual variation in workplaces (and their family
friendliness) in which individuals work over their early careers.

5.2

Estimates of Impacts of Moving to More FF Workplaces/Jobs on Labor Market Outcomes
In this section we present the results of the estimation of selection-adjusted impacts of FF on the

monthly wage rates, contracted working hours, annual labor income, and the occupational skill content
for mothers and fathers. Columns (1) – (4) in Table 8 present the coefficient estimates from the individualfixed effects specification in (17) for, respectively, the log of monthly full-time equivalent wage rates,
contracted hours of work (measured as the fraction of full-time hours), annual labor income and the
index of the skill-content of workers’ jobs.
Using these estimates, we present, in Table 9, estimates of the impacts of exogenously moving from
less (FF Q1) to more (FF Q4) family friendly workplaces for each of the impacts defined in (18) through
(22). The rows labeled “FF Q1” display estimates of the age- and calendar-year adjusted mean outcomes
for the impacts defined in each of the columns, while the subsequent rows labeled “Difference from FF
Q1” give the effects of moving to the three higher quartiles of the FF distribution of workplaces. Finally,

31

the rows labeled “%∆ from FF Q1 to FF Q4” display the percentage change in the various columns of
the move from FF Q1 workplaces to those in FF Q4. In what follows, we discuss the findings for the
various labor outcomes for each set of impacts displayed in Columns (1) – (4).
5.2.1

Impact on Outcomes for Mothers and Fathers

In columns (1) and (2) of Table 9 we present estimates of the impacts of being assigned to workplaces/job in FF Q2, Q3, and Q4 relative to FF Q1 on the labor outcomes of mothers and fathers, respectively,
( g,1)

i.e.,ϕk

, g = 1, 2, k = 2, ..., 4. We find that, in terms of wages, mothers would always gain by moving up

the FF distribution, with the largest gain observed between the lowest and highest quartile of workplace
family friendliness. However, relative to the mean wage rate of women in FF Q1, this increase in wage
rates is small; 0.09 percent. For fathers, on the other hand, moving to a workplace in the upper tail of
the FF distribution would have a negative effect on their wages. The differential impact on mothers and
fathers suggests that workplace family friendliness primarily benefits mothers, likely because they are
the main caretakers of children and, therefore, the group for which family friendliness may facilitate the
combination of market work and raising a family.
With respect to contracted hours of work (Panel B of Table 9), moving from FF Q1 to FF Q4 would
slightly increase contracted hours of both mothers (1.1 percent) and fathers (0.9 percent). For mothers,
the net effect of increased wage rates and contracted hours of work results in a positive effect on their
annual earned income from market work (Panel C) of 3.5 percent. However, for fathers, the net effect of
moving to FF Q4 of the slightly higher contracted work hours and lower wage rates would reduce total
earned income by 3.8 percent, relative to the mean earnings of fathers in FF Q1.
Finally, we estimate the impact of exogenously moving mothers and fathers from workplaces in FF
Q1 to workplaces in the upper quartiles of the FF distribution on their occupational skill content. In
Table 7 we found that more family friendly workplaces were characterized by a specialized workforce,
with fewer distinct occupational titles within the workplace, and an overall lower skill level compared
to workplaces in the lower end of the FF distribution. Therefore, moving to more family friendly workplaces would reduce the scope for occupational upgrading. Indeed, moving from FF Q1 to FF Q4 would
reduce the skill-content of jobs by the same percentage for both mothers and fathers (1.6 percent).
Given the differential impacts of moving from FF Q1 to FF Q4 on the wage rates and earnings of
mothers vis-à-vis fathers, the next section examines how such moves would affect the gender gaps in
labor outcomes between women and men with children.

32

5.2.2

Impacts on Parental Gender Gaps

With respect to wages, the opposing effects of exogenously moving an average mother and an average
father from FF Q1 to FF Q4 would yield a reduction in the parenthood gender gap (Column 3 of Table 9)
by almost 15 percent. Moreover, the parenthood gender gap in contracted hours also is reduced, albeit
by only 0.4 percent.
With respect to annual labor income, the combination of improving the gender gap in wages while
reducing it for contracted hours of work implies that the differential impacts of moving from the lowest
to the highest quartiles of the workplace family friendliness distribution would yield a sizable reduction
in the parenthood gender gap in total income by roughly 15 percent.
Finally, with respect to the occupational skill-content of jobs, we find that moving the average parent
from FF Q1 to FF Q4 would reduce the parental gender gap, albeit only by 0.7 percent.
Thus, while the consequences of moving to more family friendly workplaces has relatively modest
impacts on the labor outcomes of mothers and fathers displayed in Column (1) and (2) of Table 9, the
gender gaps between mothers and fathers are improved for all four of the labor outcomes, with especially sizable reductions in the parental gender gaps in wages and labor income.

5.2.3

Impacts on Penalties for Motherhood and Fatherhood

Based on the results presented in the preceding subsection, we conclude that mothers would benefit
from working in more FF workplaces and they benefit more than do fathers. However, women may
not benefit overall from moving to more family friendly workplaces, if such moves do not reduce the
penalties that they experience as mothers relative to their labor market careers before becoming parents.
In this section, we investigate how the within-gender parenthood penalties are affected by moving from
workplaces in the lowest quartile of the FF distribution to more family friendly workplaces. The results
discussed below are presented in columns (4) and (5) of Table 9.
While exogenously moving an average mother from FF Q1 to FF Q4 had positive impacts on her
wages, the same move would increase the motherhood penalty to wages. That is, moving to more family
friendly firms would reduce the wages of mothers relative to those of their non-parent women counterparts. At the same time, moving to the most family friendly workplaces would reduce the motherhood
penalty to contracted hours of work by almost 44 percent. This reduction in the hours penalty to motherhood yields a net reduction in the motherhood penalty to earned labor income of 6.5 percent. Thus,
in contrast to the results of moving to the most family friendly workplaces for mothers’ income, the re33

duction in the motherhood penalty to earned income is driven by the sizable increase in contracted hours,
even though such a move increases the motherhood penalty to wage rates. Finally, moving to the most
family friendly workplaces would increase the motherhood penalty to the occupational skill-content of
jobs by almost 11 percent (see Col. (4) in Panel D of Table 9). The fact that moving to more family friendly
workplaces would reduce the skill-content of jobs is likely to account for some, if not all, of the increase
in the motherhood penalty to wage rates noted above.
Finally, working in more family friendly workplaces would worsen the fatherhood penalties to both
wages and annual labor income, as well as have fathers work more hours than their non-father counterparts. Furthermore, in contrast to the motherhood penalty, moving to more family friendly workplaces
would improve the skill-content of the jobs of fathers relative to non-fathers by 19.4 percent. This latter
finding suggests that the overall adverse consequences of moving to more family friendly firms for fathers relative to non-fathers may be ameliorated over time, given that having jobs with more skill-content
are likely to produce higher rates of wage growth. Furthermore, these findings and the fact that women
are more likely than men to transition to more family friendly workplaces after becoming a parent (see
Figure 4),appear to provide a partial explanation for the gender gaps in career progression over the life
cycle that have been found in other studies (e.g. Angelov, Johansson, and Lindahl, 2016; Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz, 2010; Barth, Kerr, and Olivetti, 2017; Adda, Dustmann, and Stevens, 2017; Albrecht et al.,
2018).

5.3

Robustness Checks: Controlling for Industries & Sectors, Occupations, and Exogeneity
of Workplace Mobility
In this section, we describe several checks on the robustness of our findings presented above on the

impacts of working in more family friendly workplaces on the labor market outcomes of mothers and
fathers and to the validity of conditions we require to hold in their estimation.
We begin by examining the extent to which the effects of working in family friendly workplaces
on the labor market outcomes of parents, the parental gender gap and the penalties to parenthood are
actually driven by differences in industries and/or sectors in which individuals work rather than the
characteristics and nature of workplaces, per se. For example, Swedish union confederations and employers’ industry associations may negotiate different working conditions by industry that may differ in
their family friendliness. To assess this possibility, we re-estimated the individual-specific fixed effects
specifications for (17), adding dummy variables for the industry and sector (private, municipal and fe34

deral governments) of the workplaces of workers to this specification. The resulting coefficient estimates
are presented in Table E.1 of Appendix E and estimates of the impacts of effects of moving to more family friendly on the outcomes of married men and women, the parental gender gaps and the penalties
to parenthood for our four labor outcomes are found in Table E.2. The estimates in the latter table that
control for industry and sector differ little from those in Table 9, indicating that our findings concerning
the effects of moving workers to more family friendly workplaces are driven largely by differences in
workplaces and not the industry or sector in which women and men work.
We also examine whether the estimated impacts of family friendliness discussed in Section 5.2 reflect,
in part or largely, differences in the occupations in which men and women worked and, per se, not differences in the organization and structure of workplaces. The previous literature on gender differences in
the labor market has found an important role for gender differences in occupations in accounting for gender gaps in the labor market outcomes (Bayard et al., 2003; Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz, 2010; Goldin and
Katz, 2011; Goldin, 2014; Goldin and Katz, 2016; Cardoso, Guimarãs, and Portugal, 2016; Blau and Kahn,
2017; Cortes and Pan, 2018).33 Furthermore, as discussed above, we find that exogenously moving workers to more family friendly workplaces systematically affect the skill-content of their jobs/occupations.
Thus, it is possible that the effects of changing workplace family friendliness are not just effects of differences in how workplaces are organized and structured, but may be, in part or principally, the effects of
differences in the composition of occupations used in such workplaces.
To assess this second possible explanation for our findings, we re-estimated (17) including dummy
variables for the occupations of workers. The estimates for this specification are found in Table E.3,
where we do not estimate this augmented version of (17) for the occupational skill-content of jobs since
these measures are, by construction, a function of occupations. We also present, in Appendix E, the
impact estimates of moving to more family friendly workplaces, net of occupations, that correspond to
those for the first three of our labor outcomes presented in Table 9. Again, we find that the estimated
impacts of moving to more family friendly workplaces, here controlling for workers’ occupations, are
qualitatively and quantitatively very similar to those found in Table 9. Thus, it appears that our findings with respect to the impact of exogenously changing workers’ on mothers and fathers, the parental
gender gaps and the penalties associated with parenthood reflect something about how workplaces are
organized and structured and not simply differences in the occupations found in such workplaces.
33 As

noted in the Introduction, Bayard et al. (2003) and Cardoso, Guimarãs, and Portugal (2016) find that part of the gender wage gap found in the U.S. and Portugal, respectively, can be attributed to the segregation of women into low-paying
occupations within firms.

35

We conclude this section with an assessment of the validity of the exogeneity conditions in (23). These
conditions require that any changes in FFit∗ for individuals is not a response to innovations in the idiosyncratic components of the outcome variable. Here, we provide some evidence one the reasonableness
of these conditions in (23) based on our estimation strategy in which we control for person-specific fixed
effects. The strategies that we use for assessing the plausibility of these exogeneity conditions are similar
to those used in Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016). Specifically, if workers’ decisions to change jobs are
driven by their permanent factors affecting their preferences or productivities, and not by responses to
idiosyncratic changes in, say, their wage rates, the wage trends should be stable – i.e., not exhibit dips or
peaks – prior to changing jobs. Moreover, we expect no systematic difference in the wage trends prior to
job changes between individuals switching between different workplace types defined by FF. Therefore,
we study the wage trends in the three years prior to and one year after a job switch for individuals who
switch from workplaces in the lowest quartile of the FF distribution to workplaces in the upper part of
the distribution. Similarly, we look at the same trends of workers switching from workplaces in the uppermost quartile of the FF distribution to workplaces in the lower ends of this distribution. We separate
out job changes made before parenthood (when women and men are non-parents) from the workplace
changes that we observe during the first three years after individuals have given birth to their first child
(when they are parents).
The results of this exercise are presented in Figure E.1 and Figure E.2 in Appendix E for non-parents
and parents, respectively. We draw several conclusions based on these graphs. First, the wage trends
prior to changing jobs are very stable for both genders and for all types of job-switchers, suggesting
that individuals are not changing jobs as responses to idiosyncratic changes to the wage rate. Second,
although there are differences in the wage levels between workers moving from workplaces in the lowest
quartile of the FF distribution to those in its upper quartiles, the trends are very similar across all types
of switchers, and across gender. Third, with few exceptions, the wage trends are roughly parallel not
only within but also across parenthood status. Finally, we note that job changes – for most parenthoodgender-workplace-type combinations – appear to be associated with wage increases, suggesting that
workers make decisions about job changes based on comparative advantage. The latter finding poses no
issues for the identification strategy that we use due to the triple differencing by gender- and parenthood
statuses in specification (17).

36

6

Workplace Family Friendliness, Job Flexibility and Substitutability of Jobs
Recent studies have argued that temporal job flexibility is a key determinant of differences in the career

choices and outcomes of women and men, and of women with and without children (Goldin, 2014;
Herr and Wolfram, 2012; Flabbi and Moro, 2012).34 In this paper, we did not account for the temporal
flexibility of jobs in the construction of the index of workplace/job family friendliness. Rather, our
index was based on a set of more direct measures of a workplace’s structure and performance and the
composition of its workforce. In this section we examine more closely how our family friendliness index
is related to measures of temporal job flexibility as well as the substitutability of jobs within workplaces
in an attempt to better understand the mechanisms by which where individuals work affect gender gaps
and parenthood penalties.
To this end, we use a supplementary data set; the Swedish Living Conditions Survey (ULF/SILC), to
study how job flexibility and the degree of substitutability varies with our index. The SILC survey is conducted annually and covers 11,000–13,000 nationally representative individuals per year. Respondents
are asked about various issues concerning their health status, financial situation, housing arrangements,
and the characteristics of their jobs. The survey is matched with individual register data on occupation
and industrial classification. We extract four variables that measure different dimensions of temporal job
flexibility: the extent to which workers are free to decide (a) when to start and end their workday, (b)
when during the day to take breaks, (c) when during the year that their vacations are scheduled, and (d)
the physical location of work (e.g., the possibility to work from home).
To obtain a measure of whether jobs in workplaces are easily substitutable across workers, we extract
a separate set of variables from SILC that measure varying dimensions of a worker’s “autonomy” in their
jobs. We include measures of the extent to which the worker is free to: (i) plan their own work, (ii) to
structure their own work, (iii) to decide how to allocate hours across different tasks, and (iv) to decide the
general direction of their work. Jobs that give workers more autonomy are arguably less substitutable
across workers, as they imply more discretion on the part of the worker in how the tasks should be
structured and performed.
The SILC survey does not contain firm identifiers, and cannot be matched on an individual level to
our main data set. Instead, we collapse these job characteristics by (2-digit) industry affiliation, which
are then matched to our analysis data. The variation in job characteristics derived from SILC are thus at
34 In

related work, Pertold-Gebicka, Pertold, and Datta Gupta (2016) study employment adjustments around childbirth in
Denmark and find that women are more likely to switch from the private to the public sector after birth, and that part of this
job mobility can be explained by occupational characteristics such as the convexity of pay and time pressure.

37

the industry level. Nevertheless, because our main data set covers firms in all sectors and industries, we
are able to analyze how firm family friendliness varies with the job characteristics in SILC.
In Appendix F we examine how workers’ responses in the SILC survey described above vary with
the family friendliness quartiles (see Table F.1). We also examine how an additional set of measures
collected in the SILC survey about whether workers feel their jobs are stressful and whether workers
work during the day, evenings/nights, or in shifts to see how these measures vary across our index of
family friendliness. We find that jobs in the upper end of the family friendliness distribution tend to be
less stressful, are more likely to have irregular hours of work or shifts, and give workers less freedom to
structure and plan their work.
To arrive at a summary measure of job flexibility and job autonomy, we construct indices of the two
variables using principal components analysis.35 Figure 5 displays how the averages of these indices
vary across the distribution of our FF index. With respect to job autonomy – the converse of jobs in
which workers are easily substituted – there is a stark negative relationship between the extent of job
autonomy and the family friendliness of jobs for both women and men. Thus, jobs that score higher
on the family friendliness index are arguably substitutable across workers relative to jobs that are less
family friendly. Interestingly, family friendly jobs do not seem to be equivalent to flexible jobs. Rather
our evidence indicates a non-monotonous relationship, with the most flexible jobs appearing between
the 20th and the 40th percentiles of the FF distribution, i.e., in the same part of the distribution where
wages were observed to be the highest. Hence, contrary to what might be expected, family friendly jobs
do not necessarily entail greater flexibility. Rather, jobs that are more autonomous (and less substitutable
across workers) require more intensive work schedules (at the workplace or from home), entail tasks that
are not easily transferable across co-workers, and, by extension, appear to be less easily combined with
family responsibilities.
To further validate our FF index and describe what goes into a family friendly job, we return to
the SILC database and construct the same indices of job flexibility and job autonomy, and tabulate these
across occupational categories. The results for these tabulations are found in Table F.4 of Appendix F. We
find that that jobs that score highly on the job autonomy and job flexibility indices tend to be jobs with
high skill requirements – namely legislators, senior officials and managers, professionals, technicians etc.
– while jobs that require little or no formal training or experience, or jobs that are likely to be of a routine
or manual nature – e.g., plant and machine operators and assemblers and elementary occupations –
35 The

results for this construction are found in Table F.2 and Table F.3 of Appendix F.

38

score lower on both job autonomy and job flexibility. These findings are in line with our previous results
showing that family friendly workplaces are characterized by predominantly private sector workplaces
that have a low- to medium-skilled workforce.
Taken together, our findings in this section suggest that the most temporally flexible jobs are not necessarily the most family friendly ones. Thus, giving women, notably mothers, more temporal flexibility
in their jobs may not be sufficient, by itself, to close the gender wage gap. Rather, job flexibility seems
to go hand-in-hand with jobs that are less substitutable across workers and potentially increases what
Goldin (2014) refers to as the non-linearity of wages with respect to hours worked (see also Cortes and
Pan, forthcoming).
This latter finding of greater substitutability of jobs across workers in more family friendly workplaces is consistent with findings on the evolution of the pharmacist occupation studied by Goldin and
Katz (2016). These authors argue that, due to technological advances and changes in the organizational
structure of the pharmacy industry, pharmacists are much more substitutable for one another in today’s
pharmacies. They show that these changes have led to more women and mothers in this occupation,
a lower gender wage gap with little or no penalty to part-time work, and to an occupation that is now
a much more family-friendly and gender egalitarian profession.36 Our evidence on the importance of
substitutability of workers in jobs and its consequences for the gender gaps in early careers indicates
that this phenomena applies more than just to occupations, but to workplaces as well. And, our results
suggest that “flexibility in production” – rather than “flexibility in work hours” – is key in reducing the
work penalties to motherhood and the gender gaps in the work careers of women.

7

Conclusion

The last several decades have seen a closing of the gender gaps in labor force participation and in educational attainment. However, significant gender gaps in wages persist in all industrialized countries.
Recent evidence suggests that the remaining gender wage gap can largely be accounted for by motherhood, as women, compared to men, continue to have primary responsibility for child rearing. Along
36 These

findings also are in line with those of Azmat and Ferrer (2017), who study gender gaps among associate lawyers
in the U.S. Though the work by lawyers may have changed by the advances made in information technology, substitutability
is arguably low as it is hard to take over clients from colleagues. Azmat and Ferrer (2017) show that male lawyers work
more hours than female lawyers, and that gender gaps in performance (measured as annual hours billed and the amount
of new client revenue brought to the firm) can explain around 50 percent of the earnings gap. These gender differences in
performance are severely affected by the presence of preschool-aged children in the household. Our evidence points to a
greater pervasiveness of the substitutability of workers and its consequences for the gender gaps in early careers, with it
occurring not just within certain occupations but also within and across workplaces and workplaces in different industries and
sectors.

39

with the other Nordic countries, Sweden has long been at the forefront of introducing policies aimed
at facilitating the combination of a career and family. To date, Sweden offers job protected parental leave with governmentally paid leave benefits to both mothers and fathers. Despite these universal and
gender neutral family policies, the gender wage gap in Sweden is pronounced, persistent and, consistent with evidence for other countries, emerges with the onset of parenthood. Thus, it appears that the
challenges facing mothers to combine family responsibilities with market work are not fully addressed
by such family policies. This paper considers the role played by the workplace environment and the
attributes of jobs in these workplaces in accounting for the divergence in the careers of women and men
with the onset of parenthood. To this end, we exploit a rich matched employer-employee longitudinal
data set from Sweden that includes a wide range of worker characteristics and workplace wage and
non-wage attributes.
We find that childbearing has very different impacts on the careers of male and female workers
after the onset of parenthood, with women falling behind men in terms of wages, working hours, labor
income, and occupational progression. While women are as likely to switch workplaces as men early
in their careers, women’s job mobility, relative to that for men, increases with the onset of parenthood.
To examine the roles for the workplace environment in affecting where parents work and in explaining
the wage differences of women and men and of mothers and fathers, we develop a model-based index
of the “family friendliness” of Swedish workplaces, where the latter index is a function of a large set of
workplace-level characteristics that are revealed to differentially attract women and men based on their
parenthood status.
We find that women, to a greater extent than men, switch to more family friendly workplaces after
their first birth and that exogenously moving mothers from the lower to the upper tails of the family
friendliness distribution of workplaces would raise their wages and labor market earnings. For fathers,
in contrast, such moves would entail reductions in the same outcomes, thereby resulting in sizeable
reductions in the parental gender gap in wages and income, but would not change the gender gap in
contracted work hours. In addition, we find that the income penalty to motherhood – that is, the change
in labor income at the transition into motherhood – also would decline with improvements in the family
friendliness of workplaces. This reduction in the motherhood penalty comes as the result of facilitating
mothers being able to work more hours, rather than improving the wages they receive relative to nonmothers.
Finally, we find that exogenously moving mothers to more family friendly workplaces would nega-

40

tively affect their occupational skill content, relative to non-mothers. Given our finding that women are
more likely to transition to more family friendly workplaces after becoming a parent than is the case for
men, these findings with respect to the skill-content of the jobs could provide a partial explanation for
the observed increase in gender gaps in career progression over the life cycle.
Thus, while there does appear to be tangible benefits of working in more family friendly work environments for mothers, these benefits may not end up enhancing their careers in the longer term. This
may be due to the fact that – as our data shows – family friendly workplaces exhibit a lower- to mediumskilled, and occupationally specialized workforce, lower within-workplace wage dispersion, and have
altogether less room for climbing the career ladder. These patterns in the attributes of family friendly
jobs and workplaces suggest that it is easier to substitute workers in jobs found in “family friendly”
workplaces, thereby reducing the potential losses incurred on employers of workers with family responsibilities.
To corroborate this conjecture, we use data from a supplementary survey data set that measure the
“autonomy” of jobs, which is arguably correlated with the degree of substitutability of jobs, as well as
measures of “temporal job flexibility,” including ones concerning workers’ control over when they can
work and when they can take time off. We find that there is a stark negative relationship between the
extent of job autonomy and the family friendliness of jobs. Moreover, temporal job flexibility is not
increasing with the family friendliness of jobs. Such flexibility seems instead to be found in jobs that
require intensive working hours with tasks that are not easily transferable across co-workers, and in
extension perceived by mothers to be less easily combined with family responsibilities. As such, neither
temporal flexibility in one’s jobs nor access to universal paid parental leave with job protection may be
sufficient to close the gender wage gap among parents.
Finally, while we find evidence of some benefits to mothers’ wages and labor income from working
in family friendly workplaces early in their parenthood and in their work careers, it is less clear that
working in such establishments benefit mothers in the longer run. In particular, our findings with respect
to the consequences of working in a family friendly workplace for the occupational skill content of one’s
jobs suggest that mothers may fall behind men in terms of the wages they earn over the course of their
labor market careers.

41

References
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis. 1999. “High Wage Workers and High Wage
Firms.” Econometrica 67 (2):251–333.
Adda, Jérôme, Christian Dustmann, and Katrien Stevens. 2017. “The Career Costs of Children.” Journal
of Political Economy 125 (2):293–337.
Albrecht, James, Mary Ann Bronson, Peter Thoursie, and Susan Vroman. 2018. “The Career Dynamics
of High-Skilled Women and Men: Evidence from Sweden.” European Economic Review 105:83–102.
Altonji, Joseph G. and Rebecca M. Blank. 1999. “Race and gender in the labor market.” In Handbook of
Labor Economics, vol. 3, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. North Holland, 3143–3259.
Angelov, Nikolay, Per Johansson, and Erica Lindahl. 2016. “Parenthood and the Gender Gap in Pay.”
Journal of Labor Economics 34 (3):545–579.
Angrist, Joshua D. and William N. Evans. 1998. “Children and Their Parents’ Labor Supply: Evidence
from Exogenous Variation in Family Size.” American Economic Review 88 (3):450–477.
Arcidiacono, Peter and Robert A. Miller. 2011. “Conditional Choice Probability Estimators of Dynamic
Discrete Choice Models with Unobserved Heterogeneity.” Econometrica 79 (6):1823–1867.
Azmat, Ghazala and Rosa Ferrer. 2017. “Gender gaps in performance: Evidence from young lawyers.”
Journal of Political Economy 125 (5):1306–1355.
Babcock, Linda and Sara Laschever. 2003. Women Don’t Ask: Negotiation and the Gender Divide. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Barth, Erling, Alex Bryson, James C. Davis, and Richard Freeman. 2016. “It‘s Where You Work: Increases
in the Dispersion of Earnings across Establishments and Individuals in the United States.” Journal of
Labor Economics 34 (2, 2):S67–S97.
Barth, Erling, Sari Pekkala Kerr, and Olivia Olivetti. 2017. “The Dynamics of Gender Earnings Differentials: Evidence from Establishment Data.” Working Paper 23381, NBER.
Baxter, Janeen, Belinda Hewitt, and Michele Haynes. 2008. “Life Course Transitions and Housework:
Marriage, Parenthood, and Time on Housework.” Journal of Marriage and Family 70 (2):259–272. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-3737.2008.00479.x.
Bayard, Kimberly, Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and Kenneth Troske. 2003. “New Evidence on
Sex Segregation and Sex Differences in Wages from Matched Employee-Employer Data.” Journal of
Labor Economics 21 (4):887–922.
Becker, Gary S. 1962. “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy
70:9–49.
———. 1971. The Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press, 2nd ed.
Bertrand, Marianne. 2011. “New Perspectives on Gender.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4b, edited
by David Card and Orley Ashenfelter. North Holland, 1543–1590.
Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2010. “Dynamics of the Gender Gap for
Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (3):228–255.

42

Bertrand, Marianne, Emir Kamenica, and Jessica Pan. 2015. “Gender Identity and Relative Income within
Households.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (2):571–614.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “Are Emily and Greg More Employable than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination.” American Economic Review
94:991–1013.
Bianchi, Suzanne M. 2011. “Changing Families, Changing Workplaces.” Future of Children 21 (2):15–36.
Björklund, Anders. 2006. “Does family policy affect fertility?” Journal of Population Economics 19 (1):3–24.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. 1992. “The Gender Earnings Gap: Learning from International
Comparisons.” American Economic Review 82 (2):533–538.
———. 1995. “The Gender Earnings Gap: Some International Evidence.” In Differences and Changes in
Wage Structures, edited by Richard Freeman and Lawrence Katz. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
105–143.
———. 1996. “Wage Structure and Gender Earnings Differentials: An International Comparson.” Economica 63 (250):S29–S62.
———. 2003. “Understanding International Differences in the Gender Pay Gap.” Journal of Labor Economics 21 (1):106–144.
———. 2017. “The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and Explanations.” Journal of Economic LIterature
55 (3):789–865.
Bonilla, Roberto and Kenneth Burdett. 2010. “On-the-Job Search and Labor Market Equilibrium.” B.E.
Journal of Macroeconomics 10 (1).
Booth, Alison L. and Jan C. Van Ours. 2009. “Hours of Work and Gender Identity: Does Part-time Work
Make the Family Happier?” Economica 76 (301):176–196. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0335.
2007.00670.x.
Borghans, Lex and Bart H.H. Golsteyn. 2012. “Job Mobility in Europe, Japan and the United States.”
British Journal of Industrial Relations 50 (3):436–456. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8543.2011.
00848.x.
Boye, Katarina. 2008. Happy hour? Studies on well-being and time spent on paid and unpaid work. Ph.D.
thesis, Stockholm University.
Bronars, Stephen G. and Jeff Grogger. 1994. “The Economic Consequences of Unwed Motherhood: Using
Twin Births as a Natural Experiment.” American Economic Review 84 (5):1141–1156.
Burda, Michael C., Daniel S. Hamermesh, and Philippe Weil. 2008. “The Distribution of Total Work in
the EU and the US.” In Working Hours and Job Sharing in the EU and the USA: Are Europeans Lazy or
Americans Crazy?, edited by Tito Boeri, Michael C. Burda, and Francis Kramarz. New York: Oxford
University Press, 13–91.
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2018. “Firms and Labor Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory.” Journal of Labor Economics 36 (S1):S13–S70.
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick Kline. 2016. “Bargaining, sorting, and the gender wage
gap: Quantifying the impact of firms on the relative pay of women.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
131 (2):633–686.

43

Cardoso, Ana Rute, Paulo Guimarãs, and Pedro Portugal. 2016. “What drives the gender wage gap? A
look at the role of firm and job-title heterogeneity.” Oxford Economic Papers 68 (2):506–524.
Chamberlain, Gary. 1980. “Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data.” Review of Economic Studies
47 (1):225–238.
Cortes, Patricia and Jessica Pan. 2018. “Occupation and Gender.” In Oxford Handbook of Women and the
Economy, edited by Susan Averett, Laura M. Argys, and Saul D. Hoffman. Oxford University Press,
425–452.
———. forthcoming. “When Time Binds: Returns to Working Long Hours and the Gender Wage Gap
among the Highly Skilled.” Journal of Labor Economics .
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger. 1999. “Gross Job Flows.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3,
edited by Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card. North Holland, 2711–2805.
Del Bono, Emilia and Daniela Vuri. 2011. “Job Mobility and the Gender Wage Gap in Italy.” Labour
Economics 18 (1):130–142.
Evertsson, Marie and Ann-Zofie Duvander. 2010. “Parental Leave – Possibility or Trap? Does Family
Leave Length Effect Swedish Women’s Labour Market Opportunities?” European Sociological Review
27 (4):434–450.
Felfe, Christina. 2012a. “The motherhood wage gap: What about job amenities?”
19 (1):59–67.

Labour Economics

———. 2012b. “The Willingness to Pay for Job Amenities: Evidence from Mothers’ Return to Work.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 65 (2):427–454.
Fitzenberger, Bernd, Katrin Sommerfeld, and Susanne Steffes. 2013. “Causal effects on employment after
first birth – A dynamic treatment approach.” Labour Economics 25:49–62.
Flabbi, Luca and Andrea Moro. 2012. “The effect of job flexibility on female labor market outcomes:
Estimates from a search and bargaining model.” Journal of Econometrics 168 (1):81–95.
Garibaldi, Pietro and Espen R. Moen. 2010. “Job to Job Movements in a Simple Search Model.” American
Economic Review 100:343–347.
Garibaldi, Pietro, Espen R. Moen, and Dag Einar Sommervoll. 2016. “Competitive On-the-Job Search.”
Review of Economic Dynamics 19:88–107.
Gauthier, Anne H. and Frank F. Furstenberg. 2002. “The Transition to Adulthood: A Time Use Perspective.” The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 580 (1):153–171.
Gibbons, Robert and Michael Waldman. 1999a. “Careers in Organizations: Theory and Evidence.” In
Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3, edited by Orley C Ashenfelter and David Card. North Holland,
2373–2437.
———. 1999b. “A Theory of Wage and Promotion Dynamics inside Firms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
114 (4):1321–1358.
Gjerdingen, Dwenda K. and Bruce A. Center. 2005. “First-time parents’ postpartum changes in employment, childcare, and housework responsibilities.” Social Science Research 34 (1):103–116.
Goldin, Claudia. 2014. “A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter.” American Economic Review
104 (4):1091–1119.
44

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2010. “The Career Cost of Family.” Tech. rep., Sloan Foundation
Conference on Workforce Flexibility, Washington, DC.
———. 2011. “The Cost of Workplace Flexibility for High-Powered Professionals.” ANNALS of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science 638 (1):45–67.
———. 2016. “A Most Equalitarian Profession: Pharmacy and the Evolution of a Family-Friendly Occupation.” Journal of Labor Economics 34 (3):705–746.
Hansen, Gary D. 1985. “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle.” Journal of Monetary Economics 16:309–
327.
Hensvik, Lena. 2012. “Competition, Wages and Teacher Sorting: Lessons Learned from a Voucher Reform.” Economic Journal 122 (561):799–824.
Herr, Jane Leber and Catherine D. Wolfram. 2012. “Work Environment and Opt-out Rates at Motherhood
across High-Education Career Paths.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 65 (4):928–950.
Hospido, Laura. 2009. “Gender differences in wage growth and job mobility of young workers in Spain.”
investigaciones económicas 33 (1):5–37.
Hotz, V. Joseph, Susan Williams McElroy, and Seth G. Sanders. 2005. “Teenage Childbearing and Its Life
Cycle Consequences: Exploiting a Natural Experiment.” Journal of Human Resources XL (3):683–715.
Hotz, V. Joseph and Robert A. Miller. 1993. “Conditional Choice Probabilities and the Estimation of
Dynamic Models.” Review of Economic Studies 60 (3):497–529.
Jacobsen, Joyce P., James Wishart Pearce III, and Joshua L. Rosenbloom. 1999. “The Effects of Childbearing on Married Women’s Labor Supply and Earnings: Using Twin Births as a Natural Experiment.”
Journal of Human Resources 34 (3):pp. 449–474.
Jaumotte, Florence. 2004. “Labor Force Participation of Women: Empirical Evidence on the Role of Policy
and Other Determinants in OECD Countries.” OECD Economic Studies 37:51–108.
Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, and Jakob Egholt Søgaard. 2018. “Children and Gender Inequality:
Evidence from Denmark.” Working Paper 24219, NBER.
Kramarz, Francis and Oskar Nordström Skans. 2014. “When Strong Ties are Strong: Networks and Youth
Labour Market Entry.” Review of Economic Studies 81 (3):1164–1200.
Lazear, Edward P. 2009. “Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach.” Journal of Political
Economy 117 (5):914–940.
Lazear, Edwawrd P. and Paul Oyer. 2013. “Personnel Economics.” In Handbook of Organizational Economics, edited by Robert Gibbons and John D. Roberts. Princeton University Press, 479–519.
L&E Global Sweden. 2017. “Employment Law Overview 2017: Sweden.”
Lentz, Rasmus and Dale T. Mortensen. 2005. “Productivity Growth and Worker Reallocation.” International Economic Review 46 (3):731–749.
Liu, Kai. 2016. “Explaining the Gender Wage Gap: Estimates from a Dynamic Model of Job Changes and
Hours Changes.” Quantitative Economics 7 (2):411–447.
Ljungqvist, Lars. 2002. “How Do Lay-Off Costs Affect Employment.” Economic Journal 112:829–853.

45

Loprest, Pamela J. 1992. “Gender differences in wage growth and job mobility.” American Economic
Review 82 (2):526–532.
Mincer, Jacob and Solomon Polachek. 1974. “Family investments in human capital.” Journal of Political
Economy 82 (2, 2):S76–S108.
Neumark, David, Roy J. Bank, and Kyle D. Van Nort. 1996. “Sex Discrimination in Restaurant Hiring:
An Audit Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111:915–941.
Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund. 2007. “Do Women Shy away from Competiion? Do Men Compete
Too Much.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3):1067–1101.
OECD. 2017. “OECD Family Database.” Tech. rep., OECD.Stat. URL http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?
DataSetCode=FAMILY#.
Pertold-Gebicka, Barbara, Filip Pertold, and Nabanita Datta Gupta. 2016. “Employment adjustments
around childbirth.” Discussion Paper 9685, IZA.
Postel-Vinay, Fabien and Jean-Marc Robin. 2002. “Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker and Employer Heterogeneity.” Econometrica 70 (6):2295–2350.
Rogerson, Richard. 1988. “Indivisible Labour, Lotteries and Equilibrium.” Journal of Monetary Economics
21 (1):3–16.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1986. “The Theory of Equalizing Differences.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 1,
edited by Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richards Layard. North-Holland, 641–691.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 1998. “The Economic Consequences of Parental Leave Mandates: Lessons from
Europe.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (1):285–317.
———. 2011. “Policies to Assist Parents with Young Children.” Future of Children 21 (2):37–68.
Sanchez, Laura and Elizabeth Thomson. 1997. “Becoming Mothers and Fathers: Parenthood, Gender,
and the Division of Labor.” Gender & Society 11 (6):747–772. URL http://gas.sagepub.com/content/
11/6/747.abstract.
Shimer, Robert. 2006. “On-the-Job Search and Strategic Bargaining.” European Economic Review 50:811–
830.
Sorkin, Isaac. 2017. “The Role of Firms in Gender Earnings Inequality: Evidence from the United States.”
American Economic Review 107 (5):384–387.
———. forthcoming. “Ranking Firms using Revealed Preference.” Quarterly Journal of Economics .
Teknikföretagen. 2012. “A Short Introduction to Swedish Labour Law.” Stockhom, Sweden.
Tichenor, Veronica J. 1999. “Status and Income as Gendered Resources: The Case of Marital Power.”
Journal of Marriage and Family 61 (3):638–650.
Van Der Lippe, Tanja and Jacques J. Siegers. 1994. “Division of Household and Paid Labour between
Partners: Effects of Relative Wage Rates and Social Norms.” Kyklos 47 (1):109–136. URL http://dx.
doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6435.1994.tb02252.x.
Waldfogel, Jane. 2001. “International Policies toward Parental Leave and Child Care.” Future of Children
11 (1):98–111.
Wiswall, Matthew J. and Basit Zafar. 2018. “Preference for the Workplace, Investment in Human Capital,
and Gender.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (1):457–507.
46

TABLE 1.
Workers’ characteristics at labor market entry by gender
Women
(1)
Foreign born
Age
Highest Level of Education:
Compulsory schooling
High school
College
Years between graduation & 1st job
First Job/Workplace:
Log monthly wage
Contracted work hours, % of full-time
Annual labor income (1,000 SEK)
Occupational skill content
Job/Workplace in:
Government sector
Municipal sector
Private sector
Number of individuals in full sample at entry

Men
(2)

Observations
(3)

0.111
(0.314)
24.04
(3.818)

0.124
(0.330)
24.57
(4.371)

324,712

0.049
0.354
0.597
1.291
(1.878)

0.069
0.396
0.535
1.620
(2.333)

327,255
327,255
327,255
328,812

10.07
(0.208)
0.867
(0.241)
185.524
(89.283)
2.194
(0.549)

10.12
(0.246)
0.946
(0.161)
209.965
(117.499)
2.247
(0.574)

146,571

0.087
0.397
0.516
146,218

0.115
0.142
0.743
182,594

328,667
328,667
328,667
328,812

328,812

146,571
328,812
141,065

N OTES : The sample consists of individuals born 1957-1986, who entered their first employment in 19962007, and who had their first child after entering the labor market. The summary statistics are measured in
the year of labor market entry for each individual. Wages and labor income are denominated in Swedish
Kronor (SEK) and are deflated using 2013 consumer price index. (Annual labor income is recorded in
1,000 real SEK.) The sample sizes vary due to some variables being drawn from population-wide data and
some variables from the wage structure statistics, which includes the universe of public sector workers
but only around half of all private sector workers. We therefore apply sample weights to the statistics
calculated for variables from the wage register.

47

TABLE 2.
Workplace Attributes for workers’ entry jobs by gender
Women
(1)
Log mean co-worker wages

10.24
(0.225)
0.874
(0.124)
0.043
0.206
0.174
0.484
0.073
0.488
11.84
(10.51)
1.364
(0.294)
1.671
(0.486)
0.395
0.663
0.152

Mean work hours, % of full-time
Share managers
Share professionals
Share technicians
Share medium skilled
Share low skilled
Share with same occupation
Number of occupational titles
Wage dispersion p90/p50
Wage dispersion p90/p10

Share part-time workers
Share female co-workers
Share females with young kids
Share of workers with highest level of education:
Compulsory schooling
0.165
High school
0.444
College
0.369
Share workers foreign born
0.133
Number of employees
726.4
(1,941.0)
Growth rate
0.143
(0.555)
Number of individuals in full sample at entry 146,218

Men
(2)

Observations
(3)

10.32
(0.237)
0.938
(0.092)
0.063
0.207
0.181
0.475
0.052
0.496
12.20
(10.39)
1.396
(0.313)
1.737
(0.529)
0.301
0.361
0.084

146,525

0.186
0.458
0.333
0.126
628.5
(1,685.4)
0.173
(0.556)
182,594

327,803
327,803
327,803
324,712
328,812

205,126
141,064
141,054
141,056
141,044
141,063
141,021
328,812
205,126
205,126
146,525
328,812
328,812

306,563
328,812

N OTES : The sample consists of individuals born 1957-1986, who entered their first employment in 19962007, and who had their first child after entering the labor market. The summary statistics are measured
in the year of labor market entry for each individual. Wages and labor income are deflated using 2013
consumer price index. The sample sizes vary due to some variables being drawn from population-wide
data and some variables from the wage structure statistics, which includes the universe of public sector
workers but only around half of all private sector workers. We therefore apply sample weights to the
statistics calculated for variables from the wage register.

48

TABLE 3.
Gender & Parenthood Differences in Work Career Outcomes
Women
(1)

Men
(2)

Difference
(1) − (2)

10.29
(0.314)
0.881
(0.214)
230.109
(161.178)
2.305
(0.579)

10.42
(0.337)
0.971
(0.118)
371.397
(251.167)
2.354
(0.622)

-0.1301∗∗∗
[0.0006]
-0.0900∗∗∗
[0.0003]
-141.2884∗∗∗
[.2506]
-0.0498∗∗∗
[0.0011]

10.21
(0.252)
0.907
(0.205)
269.549
(145.107)
2.261
(0.563)

10.31
(0.303)
0.968
(0.126)
329.097
(215.781)
2.301
(0.591)

-0.1009∗∗∗
[0.0007]
-0.0609∗∗∗
[0.0004]
-59.5488∗∗∗
[0.3084]
-0.0403∗∗∗
[0.0014]

10.40
(0.260)
0.838
(0.217)
200.158
(174.135)
2.361
(0.594)

10.56
(0.332)
0.973
(0.109)
425.897
(289.617)
2.425
(0.655)

-0.1578∗∗∗
[0.0009]
-0.1356∗∗∗
[0.0005]
-225.7396∗∗∗
[0.4600]
-0.0645∗∗∗
[0.0018]

A. All women & men
Log monthly wage
Contracted work hours, % of full-time
Labor Income (1,000 SEK)
Occupational skill-content index
B. Non-parents
Log monthly wage
Contracted work hours, % of full-time
Labor Income (1,000 SEK)
Occupational skill-content index
C. Parents
Log monthly wage
Contracted work hours, % of full-time
Labor Income (1,000 SEK)
Occupational skill-content index

N OTES : The sample consists of individuals born 1957-1986, who entered their first employment
in 1996-2007, and who had their first child after entering the labor market. 655,480 observations
are used in Panel A, and 467,893 observations are used in Panel B. Wages are deflated using 2013
consumer price index. Standard deviations in parentheses, and standard errors in brackets. ***
p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

49

TABLE 4.
Differences in Workplace Characteristics for Mothers:
Difference-in-differences estimates
Differential
for Mothers
(1)

Dependent variable:
Log mean co-worker wages
Mean contracted work hours, % of full-time
Share managers
Share professionals
Share technicians
Share medium skilled
Share low skilled
Share with same occupation
Number of occupational titles
Wage dispersion p90/p10
Share part-time workers
Share female co-workers
Share females with young kids
Share compulsory schooling
Share high school
Share college
Share foreign born
Number of employees
Firm growth rate
Value added per worker

-0.0101∗∗∗
(0.0008)
-0.0070∗∗∗
(0.0003)
-0.0013∗∗∗
(0.0003)
-0.0054∗∗∗
(0.0010)
-0.0039∗∗∗
(0.0008)
0.0184∗∗∗
(0.0012)
-0.0071∗∗∗
(0.0005)
0.0193∗∗∗
(0.0012)
0.1830∗∗∗
(0.0322)
-0.0156∗∗∗
(0.0017)
0.0291∗∗∗
(0.0009)
0.0132∗∗∗
(0.0006)
0.0065∗∗∗
(0.0002)
0.0023∗∗∗
(0.0003)
-0.0003
(0.0005)
-0.0011
(0.0006)
-0.0006
(0.0004)
25.500∗∗∗
(4.323)
-0.0103∗∗∗
(0.0013)
-48.930∗∗∗
(5.260)

Observations
(2)
1,119,466
1,524,230
1,099,553
1,099,540
1,099,546
1,099,491
1,099,566
1,099,392
1,592,812
1,524,230
1,119,466
2,394,781
2,394,781
2,392,378
2,392,378
2,392,378
2,373,937
2,394,781
2,257,439
822,430

N OTES : The table reports the coefficients on an interaction term between an indicator variable for Female and an indicator variable for being a Parent, in separate regressions using the
variables listed in each row as dependent variables on gender and parenthood status, controlling for calendar year and age. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

50

TABLE 5.
Fixed effects logit estimates of parameters of per period utility function in (4)
by gender and parenthood status
Non-Parents

Log wage
Private sector
Government sector
Share female co-workers w. young kids
Wage dispersion, p90/p10
Firm growth rate
Firm size
Share high school educated co-workers
Share college educated co-workers
Share foreign-born co-workers
Share female co-workers
Observations

Parents

Women
(1)

Men
(2)

Women
(3)

Men
(4)

10.420∗∗∗
(0.286)
0.588∗∗∗
(0.117)
0.488∗∗∗
(0.136)
−1.144∗∗∗
(0.310)
0.475∗∗∗
(0.077)
0.219∗∗∗
(0.040)
−0.016
(0.018)
1.487∗∗∗
(0.323)
2.941∗∗∗
(0.283)
−0.295
(0.258)
0.679∗∗∗
(0.198)
13.660

8.711∗∗∗
(0.300)
0.117
(0.157)
0.079
(0.155)
−1.545∗∗∗
(0.577)
0.311∗∗∗
(0.088)
0.329∗∗∗
(0.047)
−0.021
(0.023)
1.977∗∗∗
(0.430)
2.589∗∗∗
(0.366)
0.134
(0.345)
0.851∗∗∗
(0.256)
8.236

6.815∗∗∗
(0.113)
0.027
(0.044)
0.183∗∗∗
(0.061)
−0.072
(0.142)
0.131∗∗∗
(0.032)
0.384∗∗∗
(0.021)
0.023∗∗
(0.009)
1.019∗∗∗
(0.131)
1.696∗∗∗
(0.116)
0.083
(0.112)
−0.006
(0.077)
49.874

5.491∗∗∗
(0.112)
0.109
(0.070)
0.113
(0.077)
−0.499∗∗
(0.236)
0.009
(0.038)
0.510∗∗∗
(0.023)
0.023∗
(0.012)
0.569∗∗∗
(0.118)
1.163∗∗∗
(0.117)
−0.226∗
(0.126)
−0.482∗∗∗
(0.103)
35.996

p

p

N OTES : Fixed effects logit estimates of the parameters for the MWP of mothers, β 1 and β2 that enter the job change
decision rule in (8) for non-parent women and men and for mothers and fathers, respectively. The estimations also
includes 21 dummy variables that capture industry affiliation. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

51

52

Men
(2)
0.013
0.009
−0.177
0.036
0.038
−0.002
0.227
0.297
0.015
0.098

Men
(4)
0.020
0.021
−0.091
0.002
0.093
0.004
0.104
0.212
−0.041
−0.088

Parents
Women
(3)
0.004
0.027
−0.011
0.019
0.056
0.003
0.150
0.249
0.012
−0.001

θ2 and θb1 , in Table 5.
N OTES : Calculations of MWP use the marginal utility estimates, b

Private sector
Government sector
Share female co-workers w, young kids
Wage dispersion, p90/p10
Firm growth rate
Firm size
Share high school educated co-workers
Share college educated co-workers
Share foreign-born co-workers
Share female co-workers

Women
(1)
0.056
0.046
−0.110
0.046
0.021
−0.002
0.143
0.282
−0.028
0.065

Non-Parents
Fathers
(5)
−0.016
0.006
0.080
0.018
−0.037
−0.001
0.046
0.037
0.053
0.087

Mothers −

Non-Mothers
(6)
−0.052
−0.020
0.099
−0.026
0.035
0.005
0.007
−0.033
0.041
−0.066

Mothers −

Non-Fathers
(7)
0.006
0.011
0.086
−0.034
0.055
0.007
−0.123
−0.085
−0.057
−0.185

Fathers −

TABLE 6.
Marginal Willingness to Pay (MWP) estimates and Differences in MWP by gender & parenthood
Differences in MWP
MWP (θb2k /θb1 ):

TABLE 7.
Workplace Attributes by Quartile of FF
FF Q1
(1)

FF Q2
(2)

FF Q3
(3)

FF Q4
(4)

A. Workplace characteristics used to estimate FF:
Private sector
0.363
Government sector
0.157
Municipality sector
0.480
Share female workers w. young kids
0.141
Proportion females
0.629
Growth rate
0.077
Workplace size
91.450
Share with at most high school
0.293
Share with some college or more
0.614
Share foreign-born
0.121
Wage dispersion p90/p10
1.765

0.693
0.080
0.227
0.120
0.509
0.102
127.700
0.384
0.507
0.115
1.860

0.682
0.052
0.266
0.121
0.511
0.092
104.800
0.522
0.314
0.124
1.692

0.851
0.026
0.123
0.098
0.447
0.095
75.750
0.562
0.170
0.125
1.559

B. Workplace characteristics not used to estimate FF:
Share part-time workers
0.269
Share with same occupation
0.409
Number of 3-digit occupations
9.311
Share professionals
0.409
Share technicians & associate professionals
0.235
Share medium-skilled
0.229
Share low-skilled
0.036
Share with managerial title
0.062

0.212
0.459
7.956
0.310
0.262
0.308
0.023
0.069

0.262
0.514
7.099
0.139
0.212
0.516
0.035
0.071

0.273
0.536
6.587
0.056
0.113
0.663
0.075
0.066

N OTES : The table reports workplace attributes separately for workplaces belonging to different quartiles of the family friendliness index (FF) distribution.

53

TABLE 8.
Estimates for Fixed-Effect Regressions of Gender, Parenthood Status, & Family Friendliness of
Workplace on Career Outcomes

Parent
Female × Parent
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
FF Q2 × Female
FF Q3 × Female
FF Q4 × Female
FF Q2 × Parent
FF Q3 × Parent
FF Q4 × Parent
FF Q2 × Parent × Female
FF Q3 × Parent × Female
FF Q4 × Parent × Female
Observations

Log monthly
wage
(1)

Contracted
Work hours
(2)

Annual labor
income
(3)

Occup. Skill
Content
(4)

0.0014
(0.0010)
-0.0876∗∗∗
(0.0012)
0.0133∗∗∗
(0.0010)
0.0163∗∗∗
(0.0011)
0.0252∗∗∗
(0.0012)
0.0036∗∗∗
(0.0012)
0.0024∗
(0.0013)
0.0024∗
(0.0015)
0.0045∗∗∗
(0.0012)
-0.0156∗∗∗
(0.0012)
-0.0326∗∗∗
(0.0012)
-0.0138∗∗∗
(0.0015)
0.0008
(0.0016)
0.0142∗∗∗
(0.0017)
1,454,527

-0.0270∗∗∗
(0.0010)
-0.0778∗∗∗
(0.0015)
-0.0040∗∗∗
(0.0010)
-0.0099∗∗∗
(0.0011)
-0.0117∗∗∗
(0.0013)
0.0084∗∗∗
(0.0015)
-0.0181∗∗∗
(0.0018)
-0.0254∗∗∗
(0.0021)
0.0068∗∗∗
(0.0012)
0.0171∗∗∗
(0.0012)
0.0205∗∗∗
(0.0012)
-0.0208∗∗∗
(0.0020)
0.0165∗∗∗
(0.0022)
0.0258∗∗∗
(0.0025)
917,008

-28.3020∗∗∗
(1.1016)
-146.7279∗∗∗
(1.2653)
-5.2116∗∗∗
(1.2144)
-4.8659∗∗∗
(1.0559)
-2.8633∗∗
(1.1701)
14.0352∗∗∗
(1.3400)
5.4906∗∗∗
(1.2117)
2.4179∗
(1.3419)
10.2189∗∗∗
(1.3544)
-2.1575∗
(1.2618)
-11.0380∗∗∗
(1.2724)
-20.3428∗∗∗
(1.5694)
4.7326∗∗∗
(1.4911)
19.5299∗∗∗
(1.5163)
1,454,527

-0.0121∗∗∗
(0.0028)
-0.0125∗∗∗
(0.0034)
-0.0309∗∗∗
(0.0034)
-0.0537∗∗∗
(0.0039)
-0.0510∗∗∗
(0.0043)
0.0099∗∗
(0.0041)
0.0262∗∗∗
(0.0047)
0.0187∗∗∗
(0.0053)
0.0257∗∗∗
(0.0039)
0.0221∗∗∗
(0.0045)
0.0095∗∗
(0.0043)
-0.0087∗
(0.0049)
-0.0226∗∗∗
(0.0056)
-0.0178∗∗∗
(0.0059)
896,646

N OTES : Additional controls (not reported) include polynomials in experience. The results are robust to
allowing separate experience profiles by gender and parenthood status. Annual labor income is denominated
in 1,000 real SEK. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level (reported in parentheses). *** p < 0.01,
** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

54

TABLE 9.
Impacts of being (Randomly) Assigned to More Family Friendly Workplaces on Career Outcomes,
Gender Gaps & Parenthood Penalties

A. Log Monthly Wage:
FF Q11
Difference from FF Q12
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
%∆ from FF Q1 to FF Q43

C. Annual Labor Income:
FF Q11
Difference from FF Q12
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
%∆ from FF Q1 to FF Q43

Fatherhood
Penalty
(5)

Fathers
(2)

10.258

10.371

-0.113

-0.068

-0.017

0.018∗∗∗
0.001
-0.007∗∗∗
-0.07%

-0.010∗∗∗
0.003∗∗
0.017∗∗∗
14.7%

-0.009∗∗∗
-0.015∗∗∗
-0.018∗∗∗
-27.1%

0.005∗∗∗
-0.016∗∗∗
-0.033∗∗∗
-191.8%

0.952

-0.112

-0.106

-0.015

0.003∗∗∗
0.007∗∗∗
0.009∗∗∗
0.9%

-0.012∗∗∗
-0.002
0.000
0.4%

-0.014∗∗∗
0.034∗∗∗
0.046∗∗∗
43.7%

0.840
-0.010∗∗∗
0.006∗∗∗
0.009∗∗∗
1.1%

228.227

D. Occupational Skill-Content:
FF Q11
Difference from FF Q12
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
%∆ from FF Q1 to FF Q43

Motherhood
Penalty
(4)

Mothers
(1)

0.008∗∗∗
0.004∗∗∗
0.010∗∗∗
0.09%

B. Contracted Work Hours:
FF Q11
Difference from FF Q12
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
%∆ from FF Q1 to FF Q43

Parental
Gender Gap
(3)

-1.300∗
3.200∗∗∗
8.047∗∗∗
3.5%

2.469
-0.004∗
-0.028∗∗∗
-0.040∗∗∗
-1.6%

370.380
5.007∗∗∗
-7.023∗∗∗
-13.901∗∗∗
-3.8%

2.605
-0.005∗
-0.032∗∗∗
-0.042∗∗∗
-1.6%

-142.153
-6.308∗∗∗
10.223∗∗∗
21.948∗∗∗
15.4%

-0.136
0.001
0.004
0.002
0.7%

-130.000

0.007∗∗∗
0.017∗∗∗
0.021∗∗∗
136.7%

-32.009

-10.124∗∗∗
2.575∗∗
8.492∗∗∗
6.5%

-0.076

10.219∗∗∗
-2.158∗
-11.038∗∗∗
-34.5%

-0.049

0.017∗∗∗
0.000
-0.008∗∗
-10.9%

0.026∗∗∗
0.022∗∗∗
0.010∗∗
19.4%

N OTES : 1 The “FF Q1” row entries for each outcome are as follows: Columns (1) and (2) are the age- and calendar-year
adjusted mean outcomes for mothers and fathers, respectively, who work in FF Q1 workplaces; Column (3) is the
difference in these mean outcomes for mothers and fathers, respectively, who work in FF Q1 workplaces, i.e., the
differences between Columns (1) and (2); Columns (4) and (5) are the age- and calendar-time adjusted motherhoodand fatherhood penalties.
2 The

(1,1)

“Differences from Q1” row entries are as follows: Column (1) is ϕk
(0,·)
µk

(1,·)
µk ,

(0,1)

, Column (2) is ϕk

(·,1)

, Column (3) is λk

,

Column (4) is
and Column (5) is
k = 2, ..., 4. The p-values for tests of whether the differences from FF Q1 are
equal to zero, where *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
3 Positive values for the percentage changes in the move from FF Q1 to FF Q4 workplaces represent improvements in
career outcomes [Columns (1) and (2)] and reductions in parental gender gaps [Column (3)] and parenthood penalties
[Columns (4) and (5)].

55

.05
0
% Diff. from t = -5
-.15
-.1
-.05
-.2
Years since first birth

9

10

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

-1

-2

-3

-4

Males

0

-.25

Females

-5

9

10

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Males

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5

Females

0

-.25

-.2

% Diff. from t = -5
-.15
-.1
-.05

0

.05

F IGURE 1.
Percentage differences in labor market outcomes for women and men before and after first birth
relative to 5 years before first birth

Years since first birth

(B)
Contracted Work hours

Years since first birth

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Males

-1

-2

-3

-4

Females

-5

9

10

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Males

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5

-1

Females

-.15

-.8

% Diff. from t = -5
-.6
-.4
-.2

% Diff. from t = -5
-.1
-.05

0

0

.2

(A)
Log wages

Years since first birth

(C)
Labor income

(D)
Skill level of occupation

N OTES : Each graph plots the estimated coefficients on the 1{t = κ + j} variables (j = −5, ..., 0, ..., 10) from equation (1) in
section 3 divided by predicted values of the four labor market outcomes, where the predicted values adjust for age (t) and year
(s) and where the values for j = −5 are equal to zero for both females and males.

56

-.2

Percentage change
-.1
0
.1

.2

.3

F IGURE 2.
Differences in probability of switching Workplace by years
since first birth, relative to 5 years before first births

10

9

Males

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5

-.3

Females

Years since first birth

N OTES : Changes in the probability of workplace switching by years since first
birth

57

F IGURE 3.
Labor Market Transitions Before & After First Birth (Yr-to-Yr)

.2
.1
0

0

.1

.2

.3

Males

.3

Females

-4

-2

0

2
4
6
8
Time since first birth

10

12

-4

-2

0

All

WP-WP

E-NE

NE-E

2
4
6
8
Time since first birth

10

12

N OTES : “All” denotes all transitions; “WP-WP” denotes Workplace-to-Workplace transitions; “E-NE” denotes Employmentto-Nonemployment transitions; and “NE-E” denotes Nonemployment-to-Employment transitions.

58

F IGURE 4.
Changes in average family friendliness of workers’ workplace (FF) and in probabilities of working at a workplace
from different parts of FF distribution by years since first birth.

.2
% Diff. from t = -1
0
.1
-.1

-5
-4
-3
-2
-1

Years since first birth

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

-.2

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

-5
-4
-3
-2
-1

-.2

-.1

% Diff. from t = -1
0
.1

.2

.3

1[FF > P50]

.3

1[FF > P25]

Years since first birth

Females

Males

N OTES : Each dot pertains to the estimated coefficients on the 1{t = κ + j} indicators in specification (1).

59

F IGURE 5.
Job Flexibility and Job Autonomy by Percentile Rank of FF

.5

.3

.4

.6

Job flexibility
.5

Job autonomy

.7

.6

.8

Job autonomy

.7

Job flexibility

0

20

40
60
80
Percentile rank of FF

100

0

Female

60

20

Male

40
60
80
Percentile rank of FF

100

Parenthood, Family Friendly Workplaces,
and the Gender Gaps in Early Work Careers

V. Joseph Hotz, Per Johansson & Arizo Karimi

Online Appendices

61

Appendix A

Data Construction and Sampling Strategy

Wage Data
We use multiple population-wide Swedish administrative registers to create a linked employer-employee
data set. The analysis is based on individual longitudinal information on demographic and background
characteristics from the LOUISE register, which contains annual labor income for each individual, with
zero-income reported for periods of non-work. We link this information to a matched employer-employee
register (RAMS) that contains all employed and self-employed individuals in Sweden, with plant identifiers. Wages are drawn from the Wage Structure Statistics, which report full-time equivalent monthly
wage rates (measured in November of each year). We match wages to each person-plant-year pair, so
that - in the case of multiple employments in one year - wages correspond to the wages earned at the
main employer as derived from RAMS.
Wages are available for all individuals employed in the public sector, and for a sample of individuals
in the private sector. The sampling is stratified by firm size and industry affiliation and the register includes sample weights that can be used to calculate aggregated statistics that are nationally representative.
However, to get a balanced panel of individual wages, we use an imputed measure for the private sector,
and for workers who due to e.g., temporary illness is absent from the workplace during the measuring
month of the Wage Statistics, but for whom we observe an employment in RAMS.37
We obtain predicted wages from a log wage regression that controls for individual characteristics
(sex, educational attainment, an indicator for public sector employment, age, and age squared). In addition, we include the worker’s approximated monthly wage, which we derive from their annual earnings
from the same employer, adjusted for the approximated number of months worked. The estimated regression equation is the following:


approx 
log wit = α0 + β 1 log wit
+ β02 xit + λt + ξ it

(A.1)
approx

where xit is a vector of personal characteristics, λt are calendar year dummies, and wit

is the ap-

proximated monthly wage. We retrieve ŵit , and let this be the wage observation for workers who are
non-sampled or absent from work during the measuring month of the Wage Statistics in a given year,
and thus were we lack information on (true) monthly wage rates.
The annual earnings data - RAMS - has information about the first and last calendar months of an
37 We

use a strategy for imputation similar to the one used by Hensvik (2012) on the same data sources.

62

employment spell in each year, but the register does not include hours worked. Using the start- and enddates of an employment spell to calculate months worked will not predict monthly wage rates perfectly.
In particular, monthly wage rates are likely to be underestimated for part-time workers with long employment spells. To address this issue, we restrict the sample in (A.1) to workers with an approximated
wage within the 1st and 99th percentile of the true (nationally representative) wage distribution.
Table A.1 compares the true (nationally representative) log wage distribution to the predicted and
imputed log wage distributions. The imputed wages look fairly similar to the true wage distribution.
Nevertheless, we perform sensitivity checks by estimating our main wage regressions using the true
wages with the sample weights.
TABLE A.1.
Comparison between True and Imputed Wages

Mean
St.dev
10th percentile
50th percentile
90th percentile
Observations

(1)
True

(2)
Predicted

(3)
Imputed

10.331
0.304
9.966
10.308
10.736

10.294
0.276
9.925
10.298
10.655

10.273
0.310
9.884
10.263
10.671

1,169,801

2,487,748

2,795,663

N OTE : The table compares the true wage distribution with the distribution of predicted wages retrieved from estimating equation (A.1),
and in column (3) the distribution of the new wage measure which
imputes missing (true) wage observations with the predicted wages.

Occupational Classification
Part of our analysis focuses on the occupational skill upgrading of workers over their careers. The information on occupational skill content is derived from the occupational classification, SSYK. The classification standard divides occupations into one of four levels of skill content, which are defined in terms of
the international educational classification standard ISCD 1976. The educational classification is used as
a guideline for determining the qualification level of each occupation in SSYK, but the qualification and
skill needed to perform the occupation need not be obtained through formal education, but also can be
obtained through experience. The skill content index thus measures the qualifications that the occupation
requires, and not necessarily the level of education that the worker must have. Table A.2 describes in
detail the education level that corresponds to the skills required in level 1- through level 4-occupations.
Table A.3 illustrates the skill level of the major occupation groups in the classification standard. For
example, the most skilled jobs refer to senior officials, managers, and legislators, while the second most

63

skilled jobs refer to specialists and professionals.
TABLE A.2.
Description of occupational skill level
Skill level

Description

1:st

No educational or skill requirements

2:nd

Occupations requiring secondary schooling
or equivalent skills obtained elsewhere

3:rd

Occupations requiring shorter post-secondary schooling
(maximum 3 years) or equivalent skills obtained elsewhere

4:th

Occupations requiring longer post-secondary schooling
(3-4 years or more) and an academic degree

N OTE : The table describes the skill level requirements in terms of the training required.

TABLE A.3.
Required skill level for different occupation groups
Occupation group

Skill level

Legislators, senior officials and managers

4:th

Work requiring theoretical specialist skills

3:rd

Work requiring shorter post-secondary schooling

2:nd

Clerical work

2:nd

Service-, nursing-, and sales occupations

2:nd

Agricultural, gardening, forestry, and fishing occupations

2:nd

Crafts occupations in construction and manufacturing

2:nd

Machine operators and assemblers, transportation services, etc.

2:nd

Elementary occupations

1:st

N OTE : The table describes the skill level requirements for occupation groups in SSYK.

Sampling Strategy
We focus on individuals whom we observe the year of labor market entry, entry wages, and first occupation. We follow Kramarz and Skans (2014) and define labor market entry as the first job after completing
the highest attained level of education that lasted at least four months, and yielded annual earnings
exceeding three times the 10th percentile of the full wage distribution. Because the occupational classification standard in the Wage Statistics is available only from 1996, we restrict attention to individuals
64

F IGURE A.1.
Labor income by time since labor market entry
Women

50

50

150

250

350

Labor income, 1000s SEK
150
250
350

450

450

Men

−5

0

5

10

−5

Years since entry

0

5

10

Years since entry

who entered the labor market in 1996 or later. We further restrict the sample to individuals whose first
child is born after entering the labor market.
To check that our definition of labor market entry is reasonable, Figure A.1 plots the average annual
labor earnings five years before labor market entry to ten years after labor market entry. For both men
and women there is a discontinuous jump in earnings in the year of our defined labor market entry, with
very low earnings before that year. Table A.4 reports cumulative proportions of the sample securing a
first stable job by years since graduation from highest attained education (compulsory schooling, high
school, or college). Individuals with higher levels of education manage to find a first job sooner than
individuals with low education.
TABLE A.4.
Years elapsed between graduation and labor market entry:
cumulative proportions
Years since
graduation:

(1)
Compulsory
School

(2)
High
School

(3)
College

0
1
2
3
4
5

0.0033
0.0305
0.1127
0.3311
0.5709
0.7443

0.2579
0.5455
0.7190
0.8223
0.8876
0.9274

0.5895
0.8002
0.8936
0.9431
0.9699
0.9828

N OTE : The table reports the cumulative proportions of individuals
in our sample who find a first stable job by years since graduation, separately for persons with at most compulsory schooling, high school,
and college education.

65

Appendix B

Distributions of Timing and Age of First Births
F IGURE B.1.
Timing of first birth with respect to labor market entry & age
Timing of first birth with respect to labor market entry

Density
.1
.05
0

0

.05

Density
.1

.15

Men

.15

Women

0

2

4
6
8
Years since labor market entry

10

0

2

4
6
8
Years since labor market entry

10

Age at first birth

.08
Density
.04 .06
.02
0

0

.02

Density
.04 .06

.08

.1

Men

.1

Women

15

20

25

30
35
Age at first birth

40

45

15

20

25

30
35
Age at first birth

40

45

N OTES : The figure shows men’s and women’s timing of first birth with respect to years since labor market entry
(upper panel), and their age at first birth (lower panel).

66

Appendix C

Decision Rule for Entering Parenthood

Now consider the decision-rule for choosing to enter the state of parenthood at age t, where pi,k = 0 for
k = t0 , ..., t − 1. Following notation in Hotz and Miller (1993) and Arcidiacono and Miller (2011), let
dikt denote indicator variables for each of the four possible outcomes for the choices of ( pit , ∆Jit ), i.e.,
di1t = 1 if ( pit = 0, ∆Jit = 0) and 0 otherwise; di2t = 1 if ( pit = 0, ∆Jit = 1) and 0 otherwise; di3t = 1 if

( pit = 1, ∆Jit = 0) and 0 otherwise, and di4t = 1 if ( pit = 1, ∆Jit = 1) and 0 otherwise. And let Vit denote
the (unconditional) valuation of individual i at the beginning of age t, which is defined to be:
 T
pi,t−1 
t0
t0
,
p
,
φ
,
ζ
≡
E
,
z
Vit wi,t
t ∑
−1 i,t−1 i,t−1 i i,t−1

4

∑

o
δ j−t dikj
U

o
pikj

po 
(wij , zij , φi , ζ ijikj ) ,

(C.1)

j = t k =1

t0
t0
where wi,t
−1 and zi,t−1 are individual i’s vectors of wage and non-wage attribute histories, respectively,
p

from t0 to t − 1; ζ i,ti,t−−11 is i’s idiosyncratic preference shock at age t − 1 which depends on the value of
o denotes the optimal choices of d
pi,t−1 , dikj
ikj in all future periods, conditional on i’s information set at t,
po

ikj
t0
t0
(wi,t
−1 , zi,t−1 , φi ); the ζ ij s differ with the optimally chosen future parenthood status; δ is the discount

factor; and the expectation in (C.2) is taken over the future draws of ζs, the birth process, and the future
draws on the jobs, (wi f j , zi f j ), that parents realize in (future) periods when they choose to enter the job
lottery.
Let Vit1 denote individual i’s valuation, conditional on entering parenthood at age t, which is given by:
t0
t0
, zi,t
, φi ) ≡
Vit1 (wi,t

T

4



o
U 1 (wit , zit , φi , ζ it1 )
∑ dikt

 
Et

4

o
U 1 (wij , zij , φi , ζ ij1 )
∑ ∑ δ j−t+1 dikj



,

(C.2)

j = t +1 k =3

k =3

where the first term in the product on the righthand side of (C.2) characterizes the utility payoff in age
t from the job/workplace choice at that age. The second term in this product characterizes the expected
payoff over the remaining periods of one’s life, conditional on individual i’s age-t information set.
Let Vit0 denote individual i’s valuation, conditional on not having entered parenthood prior to age t, which
is given by:
t0
t0
Vit0 (wi,t
, zi,t
, φi ) ≡

T

2



o
U 0 (wit , zit , φi , ζ it0 )
∑ dikt

 
Et

4

o
U
∑ ∑ δ j−t+1 dikj

o
pikj

po 
(wij , zij , φi , ζ ijikj ) ,

(C.3)

j = t +1 k =1

k =1

It follows that the decision rule for individual i to enter into parenthood at age t if and only if:
t0
t0
t0
t0
Vit1 (wi,t
, zi,t
, φi ) > Vit0 (wi,t
, zi,t
, φi0 ).

67

(C.4)

p

Even under the assumption that the per-period payoff functions, U p (wit , zit , φi , ζ it ) are, themselves, linear in its arguments (see (4)), the conditional valuation functions, Vit1 and Vit0 , are not. This feature of
the decision rule for parenthood in (C.4) has several implications for estimation.
First, the decision rule for entering parenthood at age t is not linear in the parameters. In particular,
it is not linear in the φi s. As a result, Vit1 − Vit0 , i.e., the difference of the conditional valuation functions in
(C.3) and (C.2), does eliminate φi s from the decision rule in (C.4).
Second, the decision rules for the onset of parenthood require one to evaluate the expectations taken
over the future payoffs imply that one must take account of the conditional expectation of the future
o ), j = t + 1, ..., T,
idiosyncratic shocks, condition on making optimal decisions in the future i.e., E(ζ it | dikj

which, in general are not equal to 0. These conditional expectations also do not difference out of Vit1
and Vit0 , they require one to take a stand on the distribution of ζ it s, and are the resulting conditional
expectation functions will, in general, depend on the parameters of U p in (4) in a non-linear way.
In contrast, as we show in section 4.2, none of these issues arise when one uses the variation of
workplace changes within parenthood to estimate (identify) the parameters of U p using the decision
rule in (8).

68

Appendix D

Additional Results on Workplace & Job Characteristics across Distribution of
FF

TABLE D.1.
Occupational major group distribution in the lower and upper part of the FF distribution

Occupational distribution (major groups), percent
Legislators, senior officials and managers
Professionals
Technicians and associate professionals
Clerks
Service workers and shop and market sales
Skilled agricultural and fishery workers
Craft and related trades workers
Plant and machine operators and assemblers
Elementary occupations
Total

(1)
FF Q1

(2)
FF Q4

3.402
62.161
23.190
2.900
6.093
0.102
0.608
0.444
1.100
100.000

2.855
8.664
13.071
10.914
23.426
0.162
7.793
25.601
7.514
100.000

N OTES : The table shows the distribution of occupational (major) groups for workplaces
in FF quartile 1 and 4, respectively.

69

Appendix E

Results on Robustness of Findings on Impacts of Family Friendliness on Career Outcomes

In this Appendix we present coefficient estimates for specifications of equation (17) that includes
controls for the industry and sector of their workplaces (Table E.1). We include estimates of the impacts
of moving to more family friendly firms on the various labor market outcomes for each of these two
specifications in and E.2. We also present results of assessments of the exogeneity of workplace and job
mobility for non-parents and parents in Figures E.1 and E.2, respectively.

70

TABLE E.1.
Estimates for Fixed-Effect Regressions of Gender, Parenthood Status, & Family Friendliness of
Workplace on Career Outcomes, Controlling for Workplace Industries and Sectors

Parent
Female × Parent
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
FF Q2 × Female
FF Q3 × Female
FF Q4 × Female
FF Q2 × Parent
FF Q3 × Parent
FF Q4 × Parent
FF Q2 × Parent × Female
FF Q3 × Parent × Female
FF Q4 × Parent × Female
Observations

Log monthly
wage
(1)

Annual
Work hours
(2)

Annual labor
income
(3)

Occup. Skill
Content
(4)

-0.0016
(0.0010)
-0.0850***
(0.0012)
-0.0025**
(0.0010)
-0.0035***
(0.0010)
0.0016
(0.0011)
0.0119***
(0.0012)
0.0115***
(0.0013)
0.0056***
(0.0014)
0.0064***
(0.0012)
-0.0128***
(0.0012)
-0.0297***
(0.0012)
-0.0184***
(0.0015)
-0.0009
(0.0016)
0.0153***
(0.0017)
1,363,338

-0.0202***
(0.0010)
-0.0792***
(0.0015)
-0.0021**
(0.0009)
-0.0085***
(0.0011)
-0.0129***
(0.0012)
0.0136***
(0.0014)
-0.0057***
(0.0017)
-0.0164***
(0.0021)
0.0045***
(0.0012)
0.0148***
(0.0012)
0.0195***
(0.0012)
-0.0210***
(0.0020)
0.0164***
(0.0022)
0.0270***
(0.0025)
865,684

-30.4065***
(1.1238)
-146.7612***
(1.2878)
-11.6317***
(1.2939)
-12.0519***
(1.1313)
-11.9562***
(1.2570)
18.0889***
(1.3978)
10.2559***
(1.2780)
4.6314***
(1.4156)
11.3597***
(1.3932)
-0.9343
(1.2967)
-9.7767***
(1.2987)
-22.9365***
(1.6176)
2.2699
(1.5494)
19.9975***
(1.5594)
1,363,338

-0.0097***
(0.0028)
-0.0182***
(0.0034)
-0.0233***
(0.0033)
-0.0317***
(0.0039)
-0.0262***
(0.0043)
0.0135***
(0.0041)
0.0252***
(0.0048)
0.0194***
(0.0054)
0.0253***
(0.0039)
0.0232***
(0.0045)
0.0052
(0.0043)
-0.0059
(0.0049)
-0.0233***
(0.0058)
-0.0143**
(0.0060)
846,167

N OTES : Additional controls (not reported) include polynomials in experience, and 20 dummy variables
indicating 2-digit industry classification and three dummy variables for sector (government, public, private).
The results are robust to allowing separate experience profiles by gender and parenthood status. Annual
labor income is denominated in 1,000 real SEK. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level (reported
in parentheses). *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

71

TABLE E.2.
Impacts of being (Randomly) Assigned to More Family Friendly Workplaces on Career Outcomes,
Gender Gaps & Parenthood Penalties, Controlling for Workplace Industries and Sectors

A. Log Monthly Wage:
FF Q11
Difference from FF Q12
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
%∆ from FF Q1 to FF Q43
B. Contracted Work Hours:
FF Q11
Difference from FF Q12
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
%∆ from FF Q1 to FF Q43
C. Annual Labor Income:
FF Q11
Difference from FF Q12
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
%∆ from FF Q1 to FF Q43

Motherhood
Penalty
(4)

Fatherhood
Penalty
(5)

Mothers
(1)

Fathers
(2)

10.258

10.371

-0.113

-0.068

-0.017

-0.003∗∗∗
-0.006∗∗∗
-0.007∗∗∗
-0.07%

0.004∗∗∗
-0.016∗∗∗
-0.028∗∗∗
-0.3%

-0.007∗∗∗
0.011∗∗∗
0.021∗∗∗
18.5%

-0.012∗∗∗
-0.014∗∗∗
-0.014∗∗∗
-21.2%

0.006∗∗∗
-0.013∗∗∗
-0.030∗∗∗
-174.7%

0.952

-0.112

-0.106

-0.015

0.002∗∗∗
0.006∗∗∗
0.007∗∗∗
0.7%

-0.007∗∗∗
0.011∗∗∗
0.011∗∗∗
9.5%

-0.017∗∗∗
0.031∗∗∗
0.047∗∗∗
43.9%

0.840
-0.005∗∗∗
0.017∗∗∗
0.017∗∗∗
2.0%

228.227

D. Occupational Skill-Content:
FF Q11
Difference from FF Q12
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
%∆ from FF Q1 to FF Q43

Parental
Gender Gap
(3)

-5.120∗∗∗
-0.460
2.896∗∗∗
1.3%

2.469
0.010∗∗∗
-0.007∗∗
-0.016∗∗∗
-0.6%

370.38
-0.272
-12.986∗∗∗
-21.733∗∗∗
-5.9%

2.605
0.002
-0.009∗∗
-0.021∗∗∗
-0.8%

-142.153
-4.848∗∗∗
12.526∗∗∗
24.629∗∗∗
17.3%

-0.136
0.008∗
0.002
0.005
3.8%

-130.000

0.005∗∗∗
0.015∗∗∗
0.020∗∗∗
130.0%

-32.009

-11.577∗∗∗
1.336
10.221∗∗∗
7.9%

-0.076

11.360∗∗∗
-0.934
-9.777∗∗∗
-30.5%

-0.049

0.019∗∗∗
0.000
-0.009∗∗
-12.0%

0.025∗∗∗
0.023∗∗∗
0.005
10.6%

N OTES : 1 The “FF Q1” row entries for each outcome are as follows: Columns (1) and (2) are the age- and calendar-year
adjusted mean outcomes for mothers and fathers, respectively, who work in FF Q1 workplaces; Column (3) is the
difference in these mean outcomes for mothers and fathers, respectively, who work in FF Q1 workplaces, i.e., the
differences between Columns (1) and (2); Columns (4) and (5) are the age- and calendar-time adjusted motherhoodand fatherhood penalties.
2 The

(1,1)

“Differences from Q1” row entries are as follows: Column (1) is ϕk
(0,·)
µk

(1,·)
µk ,

(0,1)

, Column (2) is ϕk

(·,1)

, Column (3) is λk

,

Column (4) is
and Column (5) is
k = 2, ..., 4. The p-values for tests of whether the differences from FF Q1
are equal to zero, where *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
3 Positive values for the percentage changes in the move from FF Q1 to FF Q4 workplaces represent improvements in
career outcomes [Columns (1) and (2)] and reductions in parental gender gaps [Column (3)] and parenthood penalties
[Columns (4) and (5)].

72

TABLE E.3.
Estimates for Fixed-Effect Regressions of Gender, Parenthood Status, & Family Friendliness of
Workplace on Career Outcomes, Controlling for Worker Occupations

Parent
Female × Parent
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
FF Q2 × Female
FF Q3 × Female
FF Q4 × Female
FF Q2 × Parent
FF Q3 × Parent
FF Q4 × Parent
FF Q2 × Parent × Female
FF Q3 × Parent × Female
FF Q4 × Parent × Female
Observations

Log monthly
wage
(1)

Annual
Work hours
(2)

Annual labor
income
(3)

0.0193∗∗∗
(0.0011)
-0.0535∗∗∗
(0.0013)
-0.0016
(0.0013)
0.0035∗∗
(0.0014)
0.0161∗∗∗
(0.0016)
0.0115∗∗∗
(0.0015)
0.0123∗∗∗
(0.0017)
0.0092∗∗∗
(0.0019)
0.0162∗∗∗
(0.0015)
-0.0110∗∗∗
(0.0015)
-0.0383∗∗∗
(0.0016)
-0.0187∗∗∗
(0.0018)
-0.0027
(0.0019)
0.0133∗∗∗
(0.0021)
847,683

-0.0268∗∗∗
(0.0010)
-0.0780∗∗∗
(0.0015)
-0.0033∗∗∗
(0.0010)
-0.0089∗∗∗
(0.0011)
-0.0113∗∗∗
(0.0013)
0.0097∗∗∗
(0.0015)
-0.0140∗∗∗
(0.0018)
-0.0230∗∗∗
(0.0021)
0.0067∗∗∗
(0.0012)
0.0175∗∗∗
(0.0012)
0.0209∗∗∗
(0.0013)
-0.0220∗∗∗
(0.0020)
0.0152∗∗∗
(0.0022)
0.0249∗∗∗
(0.0025)
847,683

-33.8282∗∗∗
(1.438)
-15.0174∗∗∗
(1.6155)
-14.7920∗∗∗
(1.9081)
-7.1856∗∗
(1.5921)
-3.1381
(1.9483)
22.2998∗∗∗
(2.0349)
8.1380∗∗∗
(1.7634)
5.1373∗∗
(2.1273)
17.5070∗∗∗
(1.840)
-2.2808
(1.6709)
-11.3979∗∗∗
(1.7392)
-30.6629∗∗∗
(2.1162)
-2.2496
(1.9825)
10.5843∗∗∗
(2.0992)
847,683

N OTES : Additional controls (not reported) include polynomials in experience, and 29
dummy variables indicating 2-digit occupational group. The results are robust to allowing
separate experience profiles by gender and parenthood status. Annual labor income is denominated in 1,000 real SEK. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level (reported
in parentheses). *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

73

TABLE E.4.
Impacts of being (Randomly) Assigned to More Family Friendly Workplaces on Career Outcomes,
Gender Gaps & Parenthood Penalties, Controlling for Worker Occupations

A. Log Monthly Wage:
FF Q11
Difference from FF Q12
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
%∆ from FF Q1 to FF Q43
B. Contracted Work Hours:
FF Q11
Difference from FF Q12
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
%∆ from FF Q1 to FF Q43
C. Annual Labor Income:
FF Q11
Difference from FF Q12
FF Q2
FF Q3
FF Q4
%∆ from FF Q1 to FF Q43

Parental
Gender Gap
(3)

Motherhood
Penalty
(4)

Fatherhood
Penalty
(5)

Mothers
(1)

Fathers
(2)

10.258

10.371

-0.113

-0.068

-0.017

0.015∗∗∗
-0.008∗∗∗
-0.022∗∗∗
-0.2%

-0.007∗∗∗
0.010∗∗∗
0.023∗∗∗
19.9%

-0.003∗∗∗
-0.014∗∗∗
-0.025∗∗∗
-36.8%

0.016∗∗∗
-0.011∗∗∗
-0.038∗∗∗
-225.3%

0.952

-0.112

-0.106

-0.015

0.003∗∗∗
0.009∗∗∗
0.010∗∗∗
1.0%

-0.012∗∗∗
0.001
0.002
1.7%

-0.015∗∗∗
0.033∗∗∗
0.046∗∗∗
43.2%

0.007∗∗∗
0.002∗∗
0.000
0.00%

0.84
-0.009∗∗∗
0.010∗∗∗
0.012∗∗∗
1.4%

228.227
-5.648∗∗∗
-3.578∗∗∗
1.186
0.5%

370.38
2.715∗
-9.466∗∗∗
-14.536∗∗∗
-3.9%

-142.153
-8.363∗∗∗
5.888∗∗∗
15.722∗∗∗
11.1%

-130.000

0.007∗∗∗
0.018∗∗∗
0.021∗∗∗
139.3%

-32.009

-13.156∗∗∗
-4.530∗∗∗
-0.814
-0.6%

17.507∗∗∗
-2.281
-11.398∗∗∗
-35.6%

N OTES : 1 The “FF Q1” row entries for each outcome are as follows: Columns (1) and (2) are the age- and calendar-year
adjusted mean outcomes for mothers and fathers, respectively, who work in FF Q1 workplaces; Column (3) is the
difference in these mean outcomes for mothers and fathers, respectively, who work in FF Q1 workplaces, i.e., the
differences between Columns (1) and (2); Columns (4) and (5) are the age- and calendar-time adjusted motherhoodand fatherhood penalties.
2 The

(1,1)

“Differences from Q1” row entries are as follows: Column (1) is ϕk
(0,·)

(1,·)

(0,1)

, Column (2) is ϕk

(·,1)

, Column (3) is λk

,

Column (4) is µk and Column (5) is µk , k = 2, ..., 4. The p-values for tests of whether the differences from FF Q1
are equal to zero, where *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
3 Positive values for the percentage changes in the move from FF Q1 to FF Q4 workplaces represent improvements in
career outcomes [Columns (1) and (2)] and reductions in parental gender gaps [Column (3)] and parenthood penalties
[Columns (4) and (5)].

74

10.5

-3

-3

Q1-Q1
Q1-Q3

Q1-Q1
Q1-Q3

-2

-2

Q1-Q2
Q1-Q4

Q1-Q2
Q1-Q4

-1
Year since switch

Q1-switchers

F IGURE E.1.

0

1

-1
Year since switch

Q1-switchers

0

1

Q4-Q1
Q4-Q3

Q4-Q1
Q4-Q3

-2

-2

Q4-Q2
Q4-Q4

Q4-Q2
Q4-Q4

-1
Year since switch

Q4-switchers

-1
Year since switch

Q4-switchers

0

0

1

1

N OTES : The figures show the wage trends 3 years before and 1 year after a job change, defined as changing employer, for women who are not yet mothers (upper panel), and men who are not
yet fathers (lower panel). We pool all job-switches that we observe for any one worker over the early careers (before they become parents). The left-hand graphs depict the wage trends before
and after job switches in which workers move from a workplace in the lowest quartile of the FF distribution to a workplace in the upper quartiles of the distribution, and the right-hand graphs
depict job switches from the uppermost quartile of the FF distribution to a workplace in the lower parts of the FF distribution.

-3

Men, non-fathers

-3

Women, non-mothers

Wage-trends Before Job Changes: Non-parents

Log wage
10.3
10.4

10.2

10.3

10.2

Log wage
10.4
10.5

10.6

10.1

10.5
Log wage
10.3
10.4
10.2
10.1
10.6
Log wage
10.4
10.5
10.3
10.2

75

10.6

-3

Q1-Q1
Q1-Q3

Q1-Q1
Q1-Q3

-2

Q1-Q2
Q1-Q4

Q1-Q2
Q1-Q4

-1
Year since switch

Q1-switchers

0

1

Mothers

-3

-2

-1
Year since switch

Q1-switchers

0

1

Fathers

Q4-Q1
Q4-Q3

-2

-2

Q4-Q2
Q4-Q4

Q4-Q2
Q4-Q4

-1
Year since switch

Q4-switchers

-1
Year since switch

Q4-switchers

0

0

1

1

N OTES : The figures show the wage trends 3 years before and 1 year after a job change, defined as changing employer, for mothers (upper panel), and fathers (lower panel). We use the first
job-change that an individual engages in after first becoming a parent, provided that the job-change occurs within three years after first birth. The left-hand graphs depict the wage trends before
and after job switches in which workers move from a workplace in the lowest quartile of the FF distribution to a workplace in the upper quartiles of the distribution, and the right-hand graphs
depict job switches from the uppermost quartile of the FF distribution to a workplace in the lower parts of the FF distribution.

-3

-3

Q4-Q1
Q4-Q3

Wage-trends Before Job Changes: Parents

F IGURE E.2.

10.3

10.4

10.3

Log wage
10.5 10.6

10.7

10.2

Log wage
10.4
10.5

10.6
10.5
10.4
10.3
10.2
10.7
10.6
10.5
10.4
10.3

76

Appendix F

Further Tabulations on Job Flexibility and Substitutability from ULF/SILC
Survey
TABLE F.1.
Job characteristics from ULF/SILC by FF quartile
FF Quartile

Freedom to decide
Start- and end-time of workday
Location of work
When to take breaks
When to take vacation
How to plan your work tasks
How to structure one’s work
How to allocate your time across tasks
The general direction of work
Working hours and time pressure of job
Stressful job
Fulltime
Part-time
Mostly daytime work
Evenings/nights
Shifts/irregular working hours
N OTES : Means and (standard deviations).

77

(1)
Q1

(2)
Q2

(3)
Q3

(3)
Q4

4.913
(1.319)
0.399
(0.076)
0.696
(0.148)
0.637
(0.236)
0.950
(0.036)
7.477
(0.509)
0.683
(0.129)
5.456
(0.512)

5.683
(1.178)
0.353
(0.097)
0.803
(0.127)
0.820
(0.169)
0.929
(0.052)
7.273
(0.720)
0.660
(0.223)
5.470
(0.746)

5.493
(1.242)
0.314
(0.116)
0.801
(0.136)
0.839
(0.151)
0.922
(0.063)
7.068
(0.925)
0.629
(0.253)
5.331
(0.940)

5.026
(1.205)
0.230
(0.132)
0.764
(0.158)
0.833
(0.135)
0.905
(0.076)
6.669
(1.024)
0.673
(0.213)
5.003
(0.915)

0.721
(0.130)
0.670
(0.237)
0.239
(0.427)
0.919
(0.098)
0.0149
(0.026)
0.0660
(0.081)

0.744
(0.195)
0.582
(0.329)
0.205
(0.404)
0.868
(0.122)
0.0271
(0.036)
0.105
(0.099)

0.745
(0.242)
0.526
(0.359)
0.321
(0.467)
0.830
(0.148)
0.0349
(0.044)
0.135
(0.123)

0.624
(0.303)
0.529
(0.336)
0.324
(0.468)
0.752
(0.185)
0.0576
(0.070)
0.190
(0.139)

TABLE F.2.
Principal components analysis for job flexibility index
Factor Loadings

Start & end workday
Work location
When to take breaks
When to take vacation
Eigenvalues
Percent of variance

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.5489
0.1869
0.6109
0.5390

0.1050
0.8887
0.0267
-0.4454

-0.8285
0.2505
0.3791
0.3273

0.0347
0.3353
-0.6945
0.6356

2.467
0.617

1.121
0.280

0.356
0.090

0.055
0.014

TABLE F.3.
Principal components analysis for job autonomy index
Factor Loadings

How to plan one’s tasks
How to structure one’s work and tasks
How to allocate working time across tasks
Affect the general direction of one’s work
Eigenvalues
Percent of variance

78

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.4784
0.5707
0.4618
0.4819

0.4657
-0.2327
0.5155
-0.6806

-0.6886
-0.0827
0.7137
0.0976

0.2830
-0.7831
0.1079
0.5431

2.808
0.702

0.696
0.174

0.423
0.106

0.073
0.018

TABLE F.4.
Degree of job flexibility and job autonomy by occupational category

Occupational group:
Legislators, senior officials and manager
Professionals
Associate professionals and technicians
Clerks
Service workers and shop and market sales workers
Skilled agricultural workers
Craft and related trades workers
Plant and machine operators and assemblers
Elementary occupations
Overall mean
N OTES : Means and (standard deviations).

79

(1)
Job
Autonomy

(2)
Job
Flexibility

0.881
(0.092)
0.836
(0.103)
0.783
(0.130)
0.692
(0.119)
0.583
(0.180)
0.638
(0.176)
0.661
(0.103)
0.558
(0.149)
0.590
(0.170)

0.820
(0.116)
0.748
(0.179)
0.648
(0.124)
0.545
(0.123)
0.411
(0.163)
0.351
(0.268)
0.523
(0.124)
0.418
(0.135)
0.444
(0.186)

0.705
(0.169)

0.574
(0.197)

