NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHOULD RETAIL INVESTORS' LEVERAGE BE LIMITED?
Rawley Z. Heimer
Alp Simsek
Working Paper 24176
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24176

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017, Revised June 2019

We thank the operators of the social network for providing us the data, Alex Dusenbery for
helping with the database, Jonathon Hazell for providing outstanding research assistance, and
Adrien Verdelhan for giving us data from Brusa et al., 2014. We acknowledge the financial
support of NSF Early Career Grant under Grant Number SES-1455319. Any remaining errors or
omissions are the authors’ responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Rawley Z. Heimer and Alp Simsek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Should Retail Investors' Leverage Be Limited?
Rawley Z. Heimer and Alp Simsek
NBER Working Paper No. 24176
December 2017, Revised June 2019
JEL No. G02,G11,G12,G18,G2
ABSTRACT
Does the provision of leverage to retail traders improve market quality or facilitate socially
inefficient speculation that enriches financial intermediaries? We evaluate the effects of 2010
regulations that cap leverage in the U.S. retail foreign exchange market. Using three unique data
sets and a difference-in-differences approach, we document that the leverage-constraint reduces
trading volume by 23%, alleviates high-leverage traders’ losses by 40%, and reduces brokerages’
operating capital by 25%. Yet, the policy does not affect the relative bid-ask prices charged by
the brokerages. These results suggest the policy improves belief-neutral social welfare without
reducing market liquidity.

Rawley Z. Heimer
Boston College,
Carroll School of Management
heimer@bc.edu
Alp Simsek
Department of Economics, E52-552
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
asimsek@mit.edu

Should Retail Investors’ Leverage Be Limited??
Rawley Heimera,∗, Alp Simsekb,c
a Boston College, Carroll School of Management, 140 Commonwealth Avenue, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467, United States
b Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States
c NBER, United States

Abstract
Does the provision of leverage to retail traders improve market quality or facilitate socially inefficient speculation
that enriches financial intermediaries? We evaluate the effects of 2010 regulations that cap leverage in the U.S. retail foreign exchange market. Using three unique data sets and a difference-in-differences approach, we document
that the leverage-constraint reduces trading volume by 23%, alleviates high-leverage traders’ losses by 40%, and
reduces brokerages’ operating capital by 25%. Yet, the policy does not affect the relative bid-ask prices charged by
the brokerages. These results suggest the policy improves belief-neutral social welfare without reducing market
liquidity.
Keywords: Leverage restriction policy, foreign exchange market, retail trading, speculation, consumer financial
protection
JEL classification: G18, G11, G12, G24, D84

1. Introduction
In recent decades, the financial services sector in the U.S. has grown rapidly, with its contribution to gross
domestic product (GDP) increasing from 2.8% in 1950 to 8.3% in 2006 (Greenwood and Scharfstein, 2013). Policymakers and economists raise concern that the rapid growth of finance might in part reflect rent-seeking activities,
which do not necessarily benefit society (Zingales, 2015).
A specific concern is that the financial sector features excessive trading volume that does not necessarily benefit
market participants, but that enriches the institutions that intermediate those trades. Established theories show
that behavioral distortions (such as overconfidence) naturally induce investors to undertake speculative trades
that lower their own risk-adjusted returns as well as their (appropriately defined) welfare (e.g., Odean, 1998; Gervais and Odean, 2001). In practice, however, there are other motives for trade, and the net effect on investors’
welfare depends on the quantitative strength of the speculative motive. Moreover, even purely speculative “noise”
trading can mitigate adverse selection and improve market liquidity (see, for instance, Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980;
Kyle, 1985; Black, 1986). Therefore, the effect of speculation on social welfare and market quality remains an empirical question. Addressing this question is important, because in the aftermath of the recent financial crisis, policies
that restrict trading activity (such as financial transaction taxes or leverage restrictions) are seriously considered,
and sometimes adopted, by policymakers around the world.
? We thank the operators of the social network for providing us the data, Alex Dusenbery for helping with the database, Jonathon Hazell

for providing outstanding research assistance, and Adrien Verdelhan for giving us data from Brusa et al., 2014. We acknowledge the financial
support of NSF Early Career Grant under Grant Number SES-1455319. Any remaining errors or omissions are the authors’ responsibility.
∗ Corresponding author at Boston College, Carroll School of Management, 140 Commonwealth Avenue, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467, USA.
Phone: +1 (216) 774-2623. Fax: +1 (617) 552-0431.
Email addresses: heimer@bc.edu (Rawley Heimer), asimsek@mit.edu (Alp Simsek)

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

13th September 2018

In this paper, we systematically evaluate the effects of a policy that restricts leverage in the retail foreign exchange market. Leverage is a major catalyst of speculative trading, because it increases the scope for extreme
returns, and enables investors to take larger positions than what they can afford with their own money. The retail foreign exchange market is an ideal venue, because unlike mature markets that have longstanding restrictive
leverage policies (e.g., the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) permits just 2:1 leverage on long positions
in U.S. stocks, a policy that dates back to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934), the provision of leverage by retail
forex brokerages has only recently been regulated. In October 2010, under the authority of the Dodd-Frank Act,
the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) capped the amount of leverage brokers can provide to U.S.
traders at 50:1 on all major currency pairs and 20:1 on others. Meanwhile, European regulatory authorities continued to allow retail forex brokerages full discretion over the provision of leverage to traders, and the maximum
available almost always exceeded 50:1. These features of the market—time-series variation in available leverage
and a suitable control group of unregulated traders—allow us to use a difference-in-differences design to evaluate
the costs and benefits of the leverage-constraint policy.
To characterize the welfare effects of the policy, we guide our empirical analysis with a stylized model that captures key features of the retail market for foreign exchange. The model features traders with heterogeneous and
dogmatic beliefs that reflect behavioral distortions (such as overconfidence) but that can also contain some information about asset returns. Specifically, some beliefs might generate better-than-average return (before transaction costs), which we refer to as “information,” whereas others generate neutral or lower return, which we refer to
as “noise.” Traders take positions based on their beliefs, and a competitive retail broker intermediates these positions. The broker incurs technological intermediation costs, which can be thought of as the infrastructure and the
labor it employs, as well as informational costs. In particular, similar to Glosten and Milgrom (1985), the broker
sets bid and ask prices after taking into account the information content of traders’ orders.
The model predicts that the leverage-constraint policy reduces trading volume, because the leveraged positions are downscaled to satisfy the constraint. The decline in volume improves traders’ expected return by reducing the intermediation costs that they ultimately pay (via bid-ask spreads). This also shrinks the intermediation
revenues, as well as the size of the brokerage sector. Moreover, as in Brunnermeier et al. (2014), these effects represent belief-neutral improvements in social welfare. In particular, a planner that uses a fixed belief to evaluate
traders’ utilities can conclude that the policy improves social welfare without taking a stand on whose belief is
correct. Intuitively, speculation transfers wealth among traders while lowering aggregate wealth due to intermediation costs. The policy improves welfare by reducing these costs, and by enabling the productive resources utilized
by the brokerage sector to be employed elsewhere. On the other hand, to the extent that the policy improves the information in the average trade (which happens if the highly leveraged trades are “noisier” than other trades), then
it also increases the bid-ask spreads. Hence, from the lens of this model, the leverage-constraint policy represents
a trade off: It mitigates socially inefficient intermediation costs, but it can also worsen market liquidity—which the
planner might independently care about.
To empirically study the effects of the leverage-constraint policy, we bring together three novel data sets that
speak to different aspects of the market. First, we employ a transaction-level database compiled by a website
that directly extracts individuals’ trading records from close to 50 different retail-specific brokerages. The data
include many investor characteristics and details for each trade. The data also contain nearly the same number of
U.S. and European traders. The European traders are an ideal control group for studying the leverage-constraint,
because their personal characteristics and trading activities prior to the CFTC regulation are similar to the U.S.
traders’. Second, we compile a panel data set of brokerages’ operating capital and retail forex obligations from

2

filings at the CFTC. Third, we use proprietary data from a company that records intra-second forex pricing quotes
by approximately 80 banks that are active in wholesale FX markets.
Motivated by how our model characterizes welfare in this market, our empirical analysis comes in three parts.
First, we investigate the effect of the policy on trader-level outcomes: their trading volume and portfolio returns.
Second, we investigate the policy’s effect on the brokerage sector by examining their excess capital. Third, we examine market liquidity, by testing the execution prices paid by traders in this market, relative to bid and ask prices
in the interbank market. To summarize our findings, the announcement of regulation has no effect on traders’
activity. However, the actual leverage-constraint lowers trading volume and it significantly reduces traders’ underperformance. The constraint also lowers the excess capital of the brokerage sector, but it does not significantly
affect (relative) bid-ask spreads. Consistent with theory, these results suggest that the leverage-constraint policy
improves social welfare by mitigating socially excessive intermediation, while having no adverse consequences for
market liquidity.
More specifically, our analysis identifies the effect of the regulation on trading volume and returns by comparing U.S. to European traders’ activities before and after the leverage-constraint. Using this empirical approach,
we find that the leverage-constraint policy leads to a 23% reduction in monthly trading volume. The policy also
improves traders’ average monthly returns, with stronger effects for traders that use more leverage. Before the
leverage-constraint policy, traders in the highest quintile of the leverage-use distribution have 30 to 40 percentage points worse net monthly return than traders in the lowest quintile. The policy substantially improves highleverage traders’ monthly return without having a significant impact on low-leverage traders’ return. Specifically,
high-leverage traders increase their relative performance by 18 percentage points per month, which we interpret
as the treatment-on-treated effect of the regulation. Seeing as, prior to the policy, the average high-leverage U.S.
trader loses 44% per month (in absolute terms), the leverage-constraint policy mitigates these traders’ losses by
about 40%.
To the extent that our tests can accommodate, we show that our results on trading activity are robust to trader
and time fixed effects, and to fixed effects for the trader’s brokerage and their choices of which currency pairs to
trade. The results further satisfy tests for parallel trends, placebo tests for false dates of regulation, and are similar
when we use alternative control and treatment groups—traders that use more leverage prior to the constraint
versus traders that use less leverage.
Our model predicts that, by reducing trading volume, the regulation reduces the intermediation revenues and
the size of the brokerage sector. We test these effects by comparing the excess capital (capital in excess of the
regulatory requirement) of brokerages that have retail forex obligations to a control group of brokerages that are
regulated by the CFTC, but do not offer retail forex accounts. The excess capital of the affected brokerages falls by
about 25% relative to brokerages without forex obligations. The reduction in excess capital is most pronounced
for brokerages that offered traders more leverage prior to the CFTC regulation, precisely the brokerages we expect
to be more sensitive to leverage restrictions. We also conjecture that the reduction of intermediation revenues
precipitated significant concentration of brokerages in the retail forex market. At the time of the CFTC regulations,
close to 25 brokerages were registered with the CFTC and had retail forex obligations. Only four brokerages have
survived until today, with the smaller brokerages being the quickest to go out of business or be acquired by larger
entities.
Our model also predicts that, by changing the information content of traders’ orders, the regulation might
increase bid-ask spreads and reduce market liquidity. To the extent that the brokers are constrained and need some
of their own capital to intermediate positions, a reduction of their excess capital can further reduce market liquidity
(as in Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2008). To test these predictions, we merge our proprietary intra-second quote

3

data with actual trades in the account-level data to estimate the execution prices charged by brokerages relative to
price quotes in the interbank market. We find no evidence that brokerages charged higher spreads as a result of
the CFTC regulation. This observation can be reconciled with our model if the leverage-constraint policy does not
substantially change the information content of the average trade. Indeed, our back-of-the-envelope calculations
suggest that the policy has little effect on traders’ gross returns (gross of trading costs) that provide a measure of
their information. Put differently, our results on portfolio returns seem to be largely driven by the reduction in
trading volume and associated trading costs as opposed to changes in information.
A plausible alternative mechanism for regulators to curtail speculation is to issue warnings about the use of
leverage. Some argue that, in lieu of heavy-handed regulations, guidance in financial decision-making can improve
social welfare (e.g., Thaler and Benartzi, 2004). In our setting, warnings could make traders aware of levered trading risks and brokerages, threatened with regulations, adopt alternative practices to stimulate traders’ demand. In
January 2010, several months prior to imposing the leverage-constraint regulation, the CFTC announced that it
wished to restrict the provision of leverage with the intent of protecting traders’ welfare. Though the announcement attracted market participants’ attention, it did not significantly affect trading volume, traders’ demand for
leverage or their returns, nor did it affect brokerages’ capital or bid-ask spreads. These results suggest that the
physical leverage-constraint is the most effective policy.1
Our paper is part of a large literature that analyzes the role of retail trading in financial markets: specifically,
we focus on whether retail trading can be socially excessive. A longstanding view is that retail trading is driven by
behavioral distortions (“noise”). Indeed, several empirical papers provide evidence that they trade for purely speculative reasons, such as overconfidence (Barber and Odean, 2001), sensation-seeking (Grinblatt and Keloharju,
2009), or skewed preferences (Kumar, 2009). Our results highlight the role of leverage in enhancing speculation
and financial intermediation in foreign exchange markets. We show that highly leveraged trades generate low
after-fee returns, consistent with their driving force being speculation, and that the leverage-constraint policy mitigates trading volume and improves traders’ returns. More originally, we also show that the leverage-constraint
policy reduces the excess capital of financial intermediaries.
The literature also focuses on the impact of retail traders on aggregate outcomes, such as prices and liquidity.
The older view is that retail traders are subject to correlated distortions (“aggregate noise” or “sentiment”) that
might increase price volatility (see, for instance, Shleifer and Summers, 1990). Recent literature emphasizes that
retail traders can also reduce price volatility by providing liquidity to other market participants (e.g., Barber et al.,
2008; Dorn et al., 2008; Kaniel et al., 2008; Barrot et al., 2016), or that retail trades are informed on average (e.g.,
Berkman et al., 2014; Ben-David, Birru, and Rossi, 2017; Kelley and Tetlock, 2013; Kaniel et al., 2012). We connect this literature to increasingly important research on the market-wide effects of providing leverage to market
participants or changes in margin requirements (Kupiec, 1989; Schwert, 1989; Hardouvelis and Peristiani, 1992;
Seguin and Jarrell, 1993; Foucault et al., 2011; Kahraman and Tookes, 2017). Our paper is different from these
works in that we study a market in which we would not expect changes in retail traders’ leverage to globally affect
asset prices (in our setting, retail traders do not have enough market-share to affect exchange rates).2,3 This lets

1 Seeing as the announcement comes several months before the actual leverage-constraint, it can also be thought of as a placebo test that
checks for common trends between treatment and control groups prior to the leverage-constraint. This test adds confidence in our differencein-difference identifying assumptions, because the announcement does not significantly affect any of our main outcome measures.
2 On the other hand, as our model illustrates, retail traders’ leverage can still affect local market liquidity: specifically, the bid-ask spreads
charged by the brokerages. Our analysis of bid-ask spreads builds upon Glosten and Milgrom (1985) with some differences that we clarify in
Section 2.2.
3 There is a notable literature on the microstructure of and liquidity in the foreign exchange market that mainly focuses on interdealer
trading (e.g., King et al., 2013; Mancini et al., 2013). Because of the decentralized nature of FX markets, it is most appropriate to view retail
foreign exchange traders and retail brokers as price-takers.

4

us test the leverage-constraints’ effect on other outcomes—such as trading volume and traders’ returns, the brokerage sector’s revenues, and the execution prices charged by brokerages—without concern about disentangling
the effects due to leverage-constraints from the effects due to concurrent changes in asset prices. And indeed, to
our knowledge, ours is the first paper to study how leverage-constraints affect account-level trading outcomes,
the understanding of which can help clarify relationships between leverage and aggregate prices that have been
proposed in the theoretical literature (e.g., Geanakoplos, 2003, 2010; Fostel and Geanakoplos, 2008; Simsek, 2013a;
Adrian and Shin, 2010; Garleanu and Pedersen, 2011; Wang, 2015; Cao, 2017 ).4
Relatedly, our paper is part of a recent surge of research on the regulation of consumer financial products
(Campbell et al., 2011). This literature argues for paternalistic regulations when sophisticated intermediaries take
advantage of individuals’ cognitive limitations—such as shrouded information or limits to attention (e.g., Gabaix
and Laibson, 2006; Carlin, 2009)—to “dupe” consumers (e.g., Bertrand and Morse, 2011; Gurun et al., 2016), or
when correlated financial mistakes by individuals have negative externalities, such as the 2000s housing boom
and bust. However, it is less clear how to analyze welfare when individuals have full information sets, but their
idiosyncratic beliefs cause them to behave differently than a “rational” model would suggest. Our paper tackles
this conceptual challenge by joining a growing literature arguing that the standard Pareto criterion (that respects
individuals’ own beliefs) is not appropriate and recommends more paternalistic welfare criteria (e.g., Stiglitz, 1989;
Summers and Summers, 1989; Posner and Weyl, 2013; Brunnermeier et al., 2014; Gilboa et al., 2014). We provide
an empirical application of the belief-neutral criterion developed by Brunnermeier et al. (2014), which enables
the planner to do welfare analysis according to the objective belief without knowing exactly what it is. According
to our findings, even though traders appear to only harm themselves when they act on their misguided beliefs,
their excessive trading reduces social welfare by utilizing productive resources to intermediate speculation. In this
sense, we provide compelling evidence that supports Zingales’s (2015) conjecture that some parts of the financial
sector do not necessarily benefit society.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the retail foreign exchange market as well as the CFTC
regulation. This section also summarizes our stylized model of this market, and describes how the leverageconstraint policy affects the equilibrium outcomes and welfare in the model. Section 3 describes the data. Section
4 explores the regulation’s effect on trader outcomes. Section 5 analyzes the effect of the regulation on broker
outcomes. Section 6 studies the impact of the regulation on relative bid-ask spreads. Section 7 concludes. The
Internet Appendix contains the details of the theoretical model as well as the empirical results omitted from the
main text.

2. Retail forex market and the CFTC regulation
The retail forex market barely existed in the early 2000s, but has experienced unprecedented growth for more
than a decade. According to King and Rime (2010), its volume in 2010 was estimated to be between 125 and 150
billion USD per day, roughly the same as daily turnover on the entire NYSE family of stock exchanges.
Retail forex brokerages are market-making specialists. Each brokerage continuously offers bid and ask quotes
to its clients. The brokerage is the counterparty on all transactions, that is, it actually trades with clients as opposed
to simply matching trades (though over time it can offload these positions to other clients or to the interbank
market). Each brokerage maintains a proprietary algorithm for generating bid and ask quotes that are based on

4 Though we analyze the foreign exchange market, our results are consistent with a growing empirical literature that illustrates leverage might
have also facilitated speculation in the housing market in the run-up to the recent subprime crisis (Ben-David, 2018; Haughwout et al., 2011;
Favara and Imbs, 2015; Bailey et al., 2018).

5

its own inventory and a data feed from the interbank market. These quotes typically represent a spread over the
interbank (mid) price. Therefore, clients’ trading costs are in proportion to the size of the trade, and depend on
the bid-ask spreads charged brokers. Brokerages do not charge any additional fees per transaction. Moreover,
they also give clients the option to use leverage on their trades at no additional upfront cost. For example, a U.S.
or European trader could decide to take a 100,000 EUR position in the EUR/USD using 20,000 EUR (or the USD
equivalent) of their own capital, while borrowing the difference from the brokerage. The trader uses 5:1 leverage
in this example.
All clients use a domestic bank account to deposit initial funds into their forex brokerage account. Regardless
of their domestic location, clients receive spot quotes in terms of the currency pair (e.g., EUR/USD) using the
nomenclature designated by standard ISO 4217 from the International Standards Organization (ISO). Each pair
includes a “base” and “quote” currency (in the EUR/USD example, EUR is the base and USD is the quote). Clients
do not take receipt of the foreign currency when they trade, and withdrawals are made in the client’s domestic
currency.
2.1. Regulation in the forex market
The retail forex market in the U.S. was mostly unregulated prior to the passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act on July 21, 2010. Concerned with consumer welfare, the Act strengthened
the CFTC’s authority over the retail forex market. The CFTC began considering methods to protect consumer
welfare in the forex market in anticipation of the passage of Dodd-Frank. On January 20, 2010, the CFTC expressed
concern over the use of leverage and released in the Federal Register a proposal to restrict the leverage available to
retail customers to 10:1 per trade on all pairs.5
Shortly after Dodd-Frank was written into law, the CFTC released on September 10, 2010, a finalized set of
rules which required retail brokerages that had U.S. accounts to register with the CFTC. The rule also capped the
amount of leverage available to U.S. customers to 50:1 on all major pairs and 20:1 on all others (Table A.1 in the
Internet Appendix provides a complete list of currency pairs).6 The brokerages were required to comply with the
new rules by October 18, 2010. Some brokerages appear to have imposed the leverage restriction before October
18, 2010, while at least one high volume brokerage did not comply with the regulation until several months later
and subsequently received heavy fines for doing so. Meanwhile, European regulatory authorities during this period
continued to allow retail forex brokerages full discretion over the provision of leverage to traders, and the maximum
available almost always exceeds 50:1.
A distinguishing feature of the forex market is that a significant number of brokerages have clients from around
the world. However, there is no centralized, worldwide regulatory authority. Brokerages must comply with domestic regulations in each country that they operate. This requires brokerages to segment their clientele according to
country of origin. Verification of a client’s home country is done using government-issued documentation, such
as a passport, and a link to a domestic bank account from which to withdraw and deposit funds. Consequently, it
would be challenging and costly for a retail client to search for a preferred regulatory regime. Therefore, the structure of the market is beneficial to this research, because it is possible to compare regulated U.S. traders to their
lightly regulated European counterparts while accounting for brokerage features that may otherwise vary across
countries.
5 www.cftc.gov/LawRegulation/FederalRegister/ProposedRules/2010-456a
6 Prior to the passage of Dodd-Frank, the CFTC lacked the authority to regulate retail forex leverage, and the brokerages determined their

own capital requirements.

6

2.2. A stylized theoretical model of the retail forex market
To guide our empirical analysis, we construct a stylized model motivated by the key features of the retail forex
market. We relegate the details to the Internet Appendix and present here a summary. The model features a single asset (the currency), and traders with heterogeneous beliefs about the return of this asset. Traders’ beliefs are
dogmatic in the sense that a trader believes his/her belief is correct (and thus, she does not learn from prices or
other traders’ beliefs). Driven by their beliefs, traders take speculative positions on the asset in pursuit of high
expected returns. Because the objective return distribution is unique, belief heterogeneity captures various behavioral distortions, such as overconfidence (which we leave unmodeled for simplicity). On the other hand, we
also allow traders’ beliefs to contain some information about the objective distribution. Specifically, some beliefs
might generate better-than-average return (before transaction costs) according to the objective belief, which we
refer to as “information,” whereas others generate neutral or lower return, which we refer to as “noise.” Traders
have their own capital but they can also use leverage. Leverage is initially unrestricted (for simplicity) and it becomes constrained after the implementation of the policy.
A competitive brokerage sector intermediates traders’ positions (while also providing them with leverage free
of additional charge). The representative broker incurs technological intermediation costs, which can be thought
of as capturing the infrastructure and labor it employs. For simplicity, we take these costs to be linear in the size
of the intermediated positions. The broker might also incur informational costs, because traders might have some
information on average. Similar to Glosten and Milgrom (1985), the broker quotes bid and ask prices that take
into account the information content of traders’ orders. In a competitive equilibrium, the ask spread is equal to
the sum of the technological cost and the expected return according to the objective distribution conditional on
traders submitting a buy order (and a similar expression applies for the bid spread).7
We first use the model to analyze the determinants of traders’ expected profit, which is a key outcome variable in our empirical analysis. The model reveals that traders’ expected profit is decreasing in trading volume.
Intuitively, technological intermediation costs are passed to traders via bid-ask spreads. The more traders trade,
the more they incur these costs, and the lower is their expected return. Perhaps surprisingly, traders’ average information does not affect their expected return (over the longer run). If traders’ information increases, meaning
that they generate higher return before transaction costs, this tends to increase their expected return. However, it
also induces the broker to face more adversely selected orders. The broker eventually raises the bid-ask spreads
(otherwise, it would consistently make losses), which neutralizes the impact of improved information on traders’
expected return. The flip side of these results is that the broker’s expected revenue (its compensation for technological intermediation costs) as well as its size are decreasing in trading volume.
We then analyze the determinants of social welfare. Normative analysis is challenging in this environment,
because investors have heterogeneous beliefs that reflect behavioral distortions. Moreover, the planner might not
know which trader (if any) has the objective belief. Following Brunnermeier et al. (2014), we assume the planner
evaluates traders’ utility according to a single belief, but she also makes the welfare comparisons robust to the
choice of the belief (specifically, she considers any convex combination of traders’ beliefs). We find that the social
welfare in this setting is actually independent of (and therefore robust to) the choice of the single belief. This is
because, under any fixed belief, the expected gain of a trader is the expected loss of another trader (or the bro-

7 The market-maker in Glosten and Milgrom (1985) trades with a mix of informed and liquidity traders, whereas in our model it trades with
speculators with heterogeneous and dogmatic beliefs. This modeling difference leads to two main differences in results. First, the traders in our
model can also have negative information on average, in which case the market-maker would actually face advantageous selection that would
lower bid-ask spreads. Second, our model generates considerable trading volume (driven by speculation) even though we do not introduce any
liquidity traders.

7

ker). This formally captures the idea that speculation transfers wealth among agents without creating social value.
Once properly accounted for, these transfers do not affect social welfare regardless of whose belief we use for welfare calculations. We refer to the resulting expression as belief-neutral welfare, and show that it is decreasing in
trading volume and traders’ portfolio risks. Intuitively, speculation generates technological intermediation costs,
which are increasing in volume, and which reduce social welfare (because the resources or people used to intermediate speculative trades could also be used elsewhere). In addition, speculation also induces investors to hold
risky portfolios despite their risk aversion (in pursuit of perceived expected returns), which further reduces social
welfare.
We next characterize how the introduction of the leverage-constraint policy affects the equilibrium variables
and social welfare. The policy reduces trading volume, as well as traders’ portfolio risks, because highly leveraged
trades are downscaled to satisfy the constraint. By reducing volume, the policy increases traders’ expected profit
while reducing the broker’s expected revenue and size. By reducing volume and portfolio risks, the policy also
improves belief-neutral social welfare.
The effect of the policy on the bid-ask spreads depends on how it influences traders’ average information—measured
as the objective expected return (before transaction costs) of an average buy or sell order. For instance, if leveraged trades are “noisier” than average, restricting those trades will improve the average information, which will
eventually translate into higher spreads as we described earlier. While the rise in spreads would not affect the social welfare in our model (because the spreads represent transfers among agents), it would reduce market liquidity,
which a regulator might independently care about. It could also reduce social welfare in alternative formulations of
our model, for example, if some traders take positions for non-speculative reasons (e.g., to hedge their background
risks) and if the planner overweights these traders’ utility relative to the speculative traders.
To summarize, the model makes both positive (testable) and normative predictions regarding the effect of the
leverage-constraint policy. On the positive side, the model predicts that the policy will reduce trading volume, increase traders’ expected profit, reduce the brokerages’ expected revenue and size, and increase bid-ask spreads if
and only if it improves traders’ average information. On the normative side, the model predicts that the policy lowers the belief-neutral social welfare by economizing on the productive resources used to intermediate speculation,
but it can also have an adverse effect on market liquidity (bid-ask spreads).

3. Three unique data sets
Our model predicts that the leverage-constraint policy can affect trader-level outcomes, broker-level outcomes,
and market-level outcomes (e.g., bid-ask spreads). To test these predictions, we rely on three unique data sets that
we describe in this section.
3.1. Transaction-level data from a sample of retail forex accounts
A potential challenge to studying trading activity in the retail forex market is that there is no centralized data
repository in the retail segment of the forex market. Related to this challenge, the few data sets that have been used
by academics come from just a single brokerage (e.g., Ben-David, Birru, and Prokopenya, 2018).
To overcome this data limitation, the trade- and portfolio-level data used in this paper’s analysis were compiled by a social networking website that, for privacy purposes, we call myForexBook. Registering with myForexBook—which is free—requires a trader to have an open account on one of 70 retail-specific forex brokerages (by
the time of the CFTC regulation, around 45 brokerages had partnered with myForexBook and allowed traders to
use the service). After registering, myForexBook can access the trader’s complete trading records at these brokerages, even some trades made before joining the social network. New trades are executed on a trader’s brokerage,
8

but they are simultaneously recorded by the myForexBook database and are time-stamped to the second. Hence,
an advantage of the data is that there are no concerns about reporting bias. There are 8,735 traders in the database
and approximately 5.5 million trades that execute between early 2009 and April 2012.
The account level-data identify traders’ location. They provide the domestic currency—as revealed by a link
to a domestic bank account—for 68% of traders in the sample. Also, upon joining the social network, traders are
surveyed and asked to identify whether they are from one of the following locations: United States, Europe, or AsiaPacific.8 Ninety-eight percent of traders responded to the survey. Traders provide honest answers to the survey.
Ninety-seven percent of respondents that say they are from the U.S. have USD-denominated accounts and the
matching rate is similar for European respondents.9
The transaction data include many details per-trade. They include the currency pair, direction, size of the trade,
open and close execution prices, and the second that trades execute. They also include daily account balances and
deposits/withdraws, which allow us to calculate traders’ portfolio returns.
3.1.1. Representativeness of the transaction-level data
Traders that use myForexBook are plausibly representative of traders in this market (see Appendix Section A.3
for a detailed discussion). First, we compare myForexBook traders to a second account-level data set—a year’s
worth of transactions on one of the world’s largest forex brokerages (Appendix Table A.2). Both myForexBook
traders and traders from this comparison data set have worse returns when they trade with leverage, which suggests that the relationship of interest between leverage and traders’ returns is unlikely to be biased by sample selection. Second, trading volume in the myForexBook data set strongly covaries (a Pearson’s correlation coefficient
equal to 41%) with reductions in brokerages’ aggregate retail forex obligations, using data from CFTC reports that
we describe later in this section (Appendix Figure A.1). This provides evidence that, though myForexBook traders
self-select into a social networking environment, these traders are a fair representation of the typical retail forex
trader.
We are also confident that lessons from our tests on the leverage of retail forex traders extend to retail traders
more broadly. Not only is the worldwide market for retail forex large, but the structure of the market is increasingly
similar to modern-day active retail trading in equities markets. Both markets are primarily served by online brokerages, and are increasingly accessible to clients that do not have much initial capital and are seeking low, or even
zero-commissions (e.g., Robinhood Markets, Inc.). More concretely, Heimer (2016) provides evidence that the behaviors of myForexBook traders are similar to the behaviors of retail stock traders on a large discount brokerage
that has been extensively studied by the finance literature (Barber and Odean, 2000).
3.1.2. Data trimming
We estimate the effect of the leverage restriction policy (as well as its announcement) on trader-level outcomes
using standard difference-in-difference regressions that compare a treatment group of trades affected by the regulations to a control group of unaffected trades, before and after the CFTC regulations. There are a few potential
shortcomings of any difference-in-difference design, and these shortcomings guide how we conduct the following
data trimming.
First, we restrict the sample to traders who reside in the United States or Europe according to the survey, because European traders are presumably the closest available control group of unregulated traders. European and

8 The trader’s brokerage provides the base currency for five of the traders that did not respond to the survey. These five traders are included
in the analysis.
9 We exclude traders who report a U.S. or European residence, but have an account denominated in a different currency.

9

U.S. traders tend to trade the same assets (most frequently the EUR/USD). They face similar market conditions,
because the European and U.S. markets overlap within a given day. Second, we limit the sample window to the 12
months that surround the leverage regulations. And, in robustness tests (reported in the Appendix), we confine the
tests’ sample to the narrow 3-month window around the regulations. We do this, because a longer sample window
also risks exposing the difference-in-difference estimates to shocks that are unrelated to the leverage regulations,
as well as to changes over time in traders’ behavior, e.g., existing studies document that some learn to become
better traders, see Seru et al. (2010), Linnainmaa (2011).
These data trimmings make the sample window around the October 2010 leverage-constraint run from May
2010 to April 2011. This sample has 15,125 trader-month observations made by 2,672 traders, and 1,193 of these
traders come from the U.S. and 1,479 are from Europe. To estimate the impact of the CFTC’s announcement in
January 2010 of its intent to regulate forex leverage, we create a second sample that goes from August 2009 to July
2010, and includes 13,833 trader-month observations. A few factors contribute to the imbalance of the panel. The
median trader in our data set has four months of trading data. The attrition rate is due partly to natural trader
attrition rates, such as trading losses, and partly to the growth and decline of the myForexBook social network
during this period (for about half of the traders in our data, we only have their trading records that come from after
the trader joins the social network).
3.1.3. Are U.S. and European traders comparable?
European traders are a suitable control group to estimate the effect of the leverage-constraint on U.S. traders.
Not only do they tend to trade similar assets and their trading hours overlap, but we find evidence that they have
similar personal characteristics and trading behaviors.
Table 1, Panel A presents difference-in-means tests for personal characteristics of the traders. When setting
up a profile at myForexBook, traders are asked to provide their years of trading experience, trading style, and
age. Traders from the U.S. and Europe are similarly experienced with most having 0–1 or 1–3 years of experience,
with 20% having 3–5 or greater than five years of experience. U.S. and European traders use the same trading
styles—around 65% use technical trading strategies. U.S. traders are about as old as Europeans—they average 37years-old. Panel A further shows that U.S. and European traders have similar trading habits. Using observations
from the pre-leverage-constraint sample period (May 1 to October 17, 2010), treatment and control traders have
executed over 300 trades on average, six to seven trades per day on days that they trade, trade over eight distinct
currency pairs, and use more than 50:1 leverage on an average of between 15% to 20% of trades. We also use
a probit model to test whether these characteristics predict the propensity to be a U.S. trader. The regression’s
pseudo-R 2 is small (0.006). This suggests that whether a trader is in the control or treatment group is as good as
random with respect to trader characteristics—characteristics that could be relevant to the relationship between
leverage and trading outcomes.
Finally, we find that U.S. and European traders’ activities move in concert prior to the regulation. We calculate
daily changes in average trading activities for the U.S. and European samples by taking log-first differences. The
correlation coefficient of daily changes in average trading volume in returns is 59%, the number of trades is 62%,
and daily returns is 44% (Table 1, Panel B). The tight time-series correlation in trading outcomes prior to the regulation provides initial evidence that there are common trends between treatment and control groups, which is a
crucial identifying assumption for our difference-in-difference tests that follow.
3.2. Data on the characteristics of forex brokerage firms
To estimate the effect of the leverage restriction policy on broker-level outcomes, we develop a panel data
set of the characteristics of brokerage firms that are regulated by the CFTC. Since 2002, the CFTC has collected
10

on a monthly basis select financial information from futures commissions merchants (FCMs). The 2010 CFTC
regulations created a new category of CFTC registrant called retail foreign exchange dealers (RFEDs). RFEDs are
brokerages that “exercise discretionary trading authority or operate pools with respect to retail forex,” and they
were “required to register, either as introducing brokers, commodity trading advisers, commodity pool operators
... or as associated persons of such entities.”10 FCMs and RFEDs are required to maintain net capital of $20 million
plus 5% of the amount of liabilities to retail forex customers in excess of $10 million.
Our panel data set includes a large selection of brokerages that were required to report their net operating
capital. The data go back to 2002. They include 124 brokerages at the time of the October 2010 leverage restriction. Owing to the new reporting requirements established in 2010, we can also classify many of these brokerages
as serving the retail forex market. The data begin including brokerages’ total retail forex obligations starting in
November 2010, the month after the CFTC regulations. We classify 24 brokerages as being a retail forex brokerage, because they have nonzero obligations in the year following the start of the reporting requirement. Notably,
our brokerage panel data are unbalanced, because new brokerages can enter the market, brokerages can exit, or
merge with other entities. But, we have a sufficiently large enough sample to estimate panel regressions on brokerage outcomes.
3.3. Forex price quotes from the interbank market
Our final set of predictions concerns the effect of the policy on market-level outcomes, in particular, the bid-ask
spreads. The myForexBook data set does not contain data on spreads, just the trade’s execution prices. To analyze
bid-ask spreads, we incorporate data on market prices in the interbank market, presumably the market’s national
best bid and offer (NBBO).
We use a proprietary database provided by Tick Data, which records intra-second forex quotes by approximately 80 banks that are active in wholesale forex markets. Tick Data offers their data product to investors that
want to test trading strategies. The Tick Data data set contains roughly one-third of the banks typically used by
retail brokers. However, the data set also contains banks quoting less competitive prices. We match each myForexBook transaction to the most competitive price—i.e., the highest bid or lowest ask price—in that second from the
Tick Data data set. We can match roughly two-thirds of trades to the exact second, but our analysis also considers
the sensitivity to the nearest match.
We use the Tick Data pricing series to formally construct a measure of the spread charged by a retail broker
relative to the spreads observed in the interbank market. We focus on this relative measure, because it enables us
to control for many factors (such as time-varying uncertainty) that might affect the bid-ask spreads in practice for
reasons outside our model. Because the retail market is a small fraction of the forex market, local changes in the
retail market would arguably affect the local spreads without impacting the interbank spreads. Our measure of
relative spreads is designed to pick up these local effects.
Specifically, for a transaction that was opened at time t and closed at a later time t 0 , we define the broker’s
relative bid-ask spread as,
Ã
St =

P tbroker − P tinterbank ask
P tinterbank ask

10 CFTC Release: pr5883-10. August 30, 2010.

11

+

bid
P tinterbank
− P tbroker
0
0
bid
P tinterbank
0

!

if the transaction is long, and,
Ã
St =

P tinterbank bid − P tbroker
P tinterbank bid

+

ask
P tbroker
− P tinterbank
0
0

!

ask
P tinterbank
0

if the transaction is short. The measure, S t , can be thought of as the additional spread the customer pays, as a
fraction of the price, compared to trading directly in the interbank market. Notably, the average value of S t is
slightly negative. Although this might sound surprising, it can be understood by the fact that, as in our theoretical
model, retail forex brokerages tend to use their own inventory (rather than the interbank market) to fill traders’
orders. Hence, there is no strong reason for the spread in the retail market to be greater than in the interbank
market—the spread in each market depends on its own characteristics (such as the degree of adverse selection).

4. The leverage-constraint policy, trading volume, and returns
4.1. Trading volume
We estimate the effect of the constraint on trading volume using difference-in-difference regressions of the
form:
log(trading volume)i t = γi + γt + β1 US traderi × post constraintt + εi t .

(1)

Trading volume is the dollar value of positions taken by trader i in month t. US trader equals one if the trader is from
the U.S., and zero if they are from Europe. Post constraint equals one in the months following October 2010 (the
month at which the policy was implemented), zero otherwise. All of our specifications include trader and calendar
month fixed effects, γi and γt , respectively. Trader fixed effects account for idiosyncratic differences across traders
that could affect trading volume, such as the amount of capital in a traders’ brokerage account. The interaction of
US trader and post constraint, β1 , estimates the average treatment effect of the CFTC regulation on the outcome
variable. We calculate double-clustered standard errors that account for correlated residuals by month and trader.
We find that the leverage-constraint lowers average trading volume by around 23% (regression summary statistics are in Table 2 and regression results are in Table 3). The estimate of β1 equals -0.27 in Table 3 and the estimate
is statistically significant at the 1% level when we use trader and month fixed effects (FE) (Column 1). This estimate
translates to about a 23% reduction in trading volume.11 The coefficient estimate is -0.20 and statistically significant at the 5% level when the regression uses brokerage-month fixed effects (Column 2). Brokerage-month fixed
effects flexibly control for differences in aggregate trading volume across brokerages over time. This accounts for
possible differences in the growth of trading records in the myForexBook database that are the result of the social
network’s partnering with these brokerages at different times during the sample period. Though we expect the
leverage-constraint to primarily affect the extensive margin of trading volume, because the constraint caps the
size of traders’ positions, we also test the constraint’s effect on the log number of trades per month (Columns 3
and 4). We estimate that the constraint lowers the amount of trading by approximately 10% (β1 equals -0.11 and
is statistically significant at the 1% level). In Column 4, when we use brokerage-month fixed effects, the estimate
of the constraint on trading frequency equals approximately -0.07, but the effect is not statistically different from
zero.
Though a 23% reduction in trading volume is large by most standards, we also communicate the economic
magnitudes of the leverage-constraint’s effect by examining simple trading statistics before and after the regula11 The estimate of β comes from a log-level regression, and so a percentage change in the dependent variable equals 100 · (e β − 1).
1

12

tion. Prior to the leverage-constraint, the median volume of trading per trader-month is 138,474 USD for our sample of U.S. traders. Median trading volume falls to 104,000 USD per trader-month after the constraint, a decline of
25%.
4.1.1. Testing for common trends
We provide evidence that supports the assumption of parallel trends for the difference-in-differences tests.
Fig. 1 presents an event study plot of the effect of the CFTC regulation on trading volume. It uses the following
regression
log(trading volume)i t = γi + γt +

TX
+l

β1k US traderi × I T +k=t + εi t

(2)

k=T −l

where I is a set of indicator variables for k weeks surrounding the regulation that occurred in period T . Therefore,
βk for k = {−T, ..., T } is the sequence of treatment effects, and hence maps out the impulse response. For the
months prior to the regulation, β1k tends to be close to zero, indicating that there are common trends between
U.S. and European traders’ trading volume. The coefficient estimate drops sharply to less than -0.25 immediately
after the regulation. The difference stays large and negative until February 2011, at which point the effect stays
negative, but is relatively small.
4.1.2. Robustness to alternative treatment and control groups
Because not all traders apply much leverage to their trades, the CFTC regulation could affect U.S. trading outcomes for reasons other than their use of leverage. If enhanced leverage is the cause of the reduction in trading
volume, then the regulation would have the strongest effect on traders that use a lot of leverage, because they
would be more sensitive to the intended effect of the regulation.
Panel B of Table 3 uses the following regression to test the leverage-constraint’s effect on high-leverage traders:
log(trading volume)i t = γi + γt + β1 high leverage traderi × post constraintt + β2 controlsi t + εi t .

(3)

We calculate the average amount of leverage traders use on their trades prior to the regulation. We then set high
leverage trader equal to one for traders that are above the median in average leverage-use, zero otherwise. The
coefficient β1 estimates how the reduced availability of leverage affects the performance of traders predisposed to
using leverage.
Indeed, we find that the leverage-constraint reduces the trading volume of traders that use more leverage. Using the same four regression specifications as Panel A, the estimate of β1 approximately equals -0.35 when the
dependent variable is log trading volume (statistically significant at the 1% level) and -0.16 when it is the log number of trades per month (statistically significant at the 5% level). These estimates suggest the leverage-constraint
reduces trading volume by 30% and the number of trades by 15%.
4.1.3. The effect of the announcement of leverage regulation
While the leverage-constraint significantly reduced trading volume, warnings of the risks of trading with leverage could also be an effective way to discourage unprofitable speculation. On January 20, 2010, the CFTC announced its intent to restrict leverage to 10:1. The following regressions test whether warnings such as these can
affect traders’ demand:
log(trading volume)i t = γi + γt + β1 US traderi × post announcementt + εi t .

13

(4)

This difference-in-differences regression is analogous to Eq. (1), and includes similar data trimming to restrict
the sample to the one-year window around the announcement (August 2009 to July 2010). In this regression, the
variable post announcement equals one if the month is after January 2010.
We do not find evidence that the announcement affects trading volume. Using the same fixed effects and
controls as Panels A and B, the estimate of β1 in Panel C equals 0.15 when the dependent variable is the logarithm
of trading volume and between 0.04 to 0.10 for the logarithm of the number of trades. These coefficients are
not statistically different from zero, and they are also roughly half as large in absolute value as the corresponding
coefficients that estimate the effect of the actual leverage-constraint.
One plausible alternative reason why the CFTC announcement would not have affected trading volume would
be that traders were unaware of it. Contrary to this explanation, the CFTC’s announcement received considerable attention. Google search volume for the term “forex leverage” spiked in the week of the announcement and
reached a two-year peak (Appendix Fig. A.2). Therefore, though traders knew that they were likely to have less
access to leverage, the announcement did not significantly affect traders’ demand.
4.2. Traders’ portfolio returns
We further test the leverage regulation’s effect on traders’ returns. We use traders’ account balances to calculate
monthly returns, excluding account deposits. We then form five portfolios by sorting traders by their average
leverage use in the prior month.12
First, we find that the use of leverage is negatively correlated with traders’ returns. Fig. 2 presents a bar graph
that separates the portfolio sorts by pre- and post-legislation, and by U.S. and European traders. Across all combinations of period and trader location, the highest-quintile-of-leverage portfolio has worse returns than the lowestquintile-of-leverage portfolio. For example, prior to the leverage-constraint, the U.S. traders’ high-leverage portfolio loses 44%, while the low-leverage portfolio loses 3%.13 Therefore, the return difference between the high- and
low-leverage portfolios, which we refer to as the high-minus-low return, is 41 percentage points per month.
Second, and more importantly, the leverage-constraint curtails traders’ losses (see Table 4, Panel A). Before
the leverage-constraint, the average U.S. portfolio loses 17%, whereas after the constraint it loses only 10%. To
estimate the treatment effect on the average return, we also control for changes in European traders’ portfolio
return. The European traders’ average portfolio loses 15% before the constraint and 12% after the constraint.
Comparing the gains in performance for U.S. traders to that of European traders, our findings imply that the
leverage-constraint increases the average portfolio return by five percentage points (i.e., (R̄U S,post − R̄U S,pr e ) minus
(R̄ EU R,post − R̄ EU R,pr e ) equals 0.05, where R̄ is the average portfolio return).
Third, as one would expect from a causal mechanism, the effect of the leverage-constraint is considerably
stronger for traders that use high leverage. In particular, the policy substantially improves the return of the highleverage portfolio without having a significant effect on the return of the low-leverage portfolio. Therefore, it also
mitigates the relative underperformance of the high-leverage portfolio. After the leverage-constraint, the U.S.
traders’ high-minus-low return is 18%, compared to 41% before the constraint. So, the constraint improves the

12 Traders’ returns are equal-weighted in these portfolios. When we value-weight the portfolios based on the size of traders’ accounts, the
portfolio sorts become considerably noisy. This is because there are several traders with substantially larger account balances than the rest of
the sample and their returns constitute almost all of the weight within a given quintile.
13 Though these are large monthly losses, the size of these losses is not unusual relative to findings in existing studies of active retail traders.
For example, Barber et al. (2014) study 15 years of retail investing in Taiwan. They find that some traders lose 29 basis points (bps) per day (after
fees), which translates to monthly losses equal to approximately 9%. Hence, it would take just 5:1 leverage—which is significantly less than
the amount used by our traders (e.g., close to 20% of positions use at least 50:1 leverage prior to the leverage-constraint)—for these Taiwanese
traders to match the worst monthly performance in our data.

14

relative return of the high-leverage portfolio by 23 percentage points. As before, we also control for changes in European traders’ portfolio returns. The European traders’ high-leverage portfolio performs higher by 6 percentage
points after the constraint compared to before. This implies that the leverage-constraint increases the high-minuslow return by 18 percentage points (i.e., (R̄U S,post −R̄U S,pr e ) minus (R̄ EU R,post −R̄ EU R,pr e ) equals 0.18, where R̄ is the
high-minus-low return). We interpret this as the main treatment effect of the regulation. Because, prior to the policy, the average high-leverage U.S. trader loses 44% per month, our estimate suggests that the leverage-constraint
policy mitigates these traders’ losses by about 40%.
One concern is that changes in traders’ expected return might reflect changes in their loading on well-known
pricing factors that generate a risk premium. To address this concern, we construct portfolio alphas after regressing the portfolio returns on a carry-trade factor—the pricing factor that is presumably most relevant to the traders
we study.14 We then repeat our analysis using portfolio alphas as opposed to raw returns and find that the results are largely unchanged.15 For instance, the effect of the policy on the difference between the alphas of the
high- and low-leverage portfolio, high-minus-low alpha, is 19 percentage points—similar to the effect we find on
high-minus-low return. This difference is statistically significant. Using a χ2 test from a seemingly unrelated regressions estimation to compare the differences in high-minus-low alphas, the p-value for the null hypothesis that
(αU S,post − αU S,pr e ) minus (αEU R,post − αEU R,pr e ) equals zero is approximately 1%.16
Consistent with our previous findings that the announcement of regulation does not significantly affect trading
volume, we do not find strong evidence that the announcement affects traders’ returns. Table 4, Panel B, presents
portfolio returns for U.S. and European traders before and after the leverage announcement. Similar to our findings in Panel A, the average portfolio underperforms between 15 and 20 percentage points, and the high-leverage
portfolio underperforms between 30 and 40 percentage points worse than the low-leverage portfolio. However,
the portfolio returns do not significantly change after the announcement date (for the high-minus-low portfolio,
(R̄U S,post − R̄U S,pr e ) minus (R̄ EU R,post − R̄ EU R,pr e ) equals -0.02 and is statistically insignificant).
4.2.1. Back-of-the-envelope calculations for gross (pre-fee) portfolio returns
We provide evidence that most of the improvement in U.S. traders’ net performance is due to the trading costs
associated with more trading volume prior to the constraint (see Appendix A.5). Because trading costs come from
paying the spread on each transaction, our data do not directly provide us with the costs of trading. However, we
know from historical sources that the typical brokerage would have charged between 2 to 5 pips per trade, where a
pip is equal to one-hundredth of one percent. When we assume that traders were charged 2 pips, we can attribute
approximately 60% of traders’ losses to transaction costs (i.e., prior to the constraint, the U.S. traders’ high-leverage
portfolio return equals -0.44 net and -0.17 gross). When we assume 3 to 4 pips, the difference between the gross
returns of the high-leverage and the low-leverage portfolios is small and not statistically different from zero. When

14 International pricing factors are provided to us by Brusa et al. (2014). Brusa et al. (2014) show that three factors can price global equity
returns: a world market equity portfolio, a dollar factor (the investor borrows in the U.S. and invests in a basket of international currencies),
and a carry-trade factor. Because of the short time frame of our sample, a multivariable regression that includes all three factors is considerably
noisy, and so we focus specifically on the carry-trade factor.
15 It is worth emphasizing that these alphas do not necessarily reflect pricing anomalies since they correspond to portfolio returns after trading
costs (aggregated over many positions). For instance, one could not simply reverse the positions in these portfolios and obtain the minus of
these alphas—this would generate a very different return that would depend on the gross returns as well as trading costs.
16 A related concern is that while the leverage-constraint improves traders’ portfolio return on average, it might also increase the volatility
of their portfolios, which would generate a counteracting effect on their welfare. In unreported results, we analyze the effect of the policy on
traders’ portfolio volatility, calculated for each trader-month as the standard deviation of traders’ daily portfolio returns over the month. We
find mixed evidence that seems to point toward the constraint lowering portfolio volatility. Our model also predicts that the policy should
reduce portfolio volatility (see Section 2.2 and the Internet Appendix).

15

we assume 5 pips, the high-leverage traders’ portfolio actually has better gross performance than the low-leverage
traders.
4.2.2. Effect on trade-level returns
As a robustness check, we also investigate the effect of the leverage-constraint policy on the (after-fee) return
on each trade. Similar to our portfolio-level results, we find that the policy substantially reduces average per-trade
losses (see Appendix A.6). There are several ways in which these tests at the trade-level support our portfolio-level
findings that the leverage-constraint lessens traders’ underperformance. First, these tests allow us to use trader
fixed effects to control for unobserved heterogeneity in trader ability. These regressions also control for relevant
characteristics of each trade, such as the currency pair or the holding period, which give us confidence that our
findings are attributed to the leverage-constraint, and not to other time-varying changes in investors’ behavior.
Second, trade-level regressions give us the ability to test whether U.S. and European traders have common trends
in their trading returns prior to the regulation, and indeed they do whether we define time-trends in calendar-time
or trade-time.

5. The leverage-constraint’s effect on brokerages
Section 4 shows that the leverage-constraint reduces trading volume and traders’ net returns. Our model in
Section 2.2 suggests that the decline in trading volume also reduces the revenues for brokerages that intermediate
trades in this market. We expect the decline in revenue to be reflected in the financial accounts of the brokerages, and to reduce their capital in excess of the regulatory requirements. Therefore, we explore the effect of the
regulation on the brokerages by estimating the following regression,
log(excess capital)bt = γb + γt + β1 FX brokerb × post constraintt + controlsbt + εbt

(5)

where b is a broker and t is a month. FX broker equals one if the brokerage has retail forex obligations, and zero if it
does not. Post constraint equals one if month t comes after October 2010, and zero otherwise. The coefficient β1 is
an estimate of the average treatment effect of the reduction in leverage on brokerage excess capital. For these tests,
we restrict the sample to May 2010 to April 2011 to allow an equal amount of time before and after the constraint
was imposed, and to let the policy’s effect accrue over time. Summary statistics for these regression variables are
presented in Table 5. We calculate double-clustered standard errors that allow for correlated residuals across time
and brokerage.
The leverage-constraint leads to approximately a 25% reduction in brokerage’s excess capital, according to the
tests in Table 6, Panel A. All of our estimates of Eq. (5) include brokerage and month fixed effects, and Columns 2
and 4 control for the brokerage’s net capital requirement in month t . Columns 3 and 4 apply weights to balance
the average size of control and treatment brokerage. The weights are calculated using the method developed by
Hainmueller (2012).17 We apply these weights to refine our estimates, because brokerages with FX obligations tend
to be smaller than those without. The estimate of β1 equals approximately -0.28 when the sample is not balanced
by broker size and -0.31 when it is. In all cases, the coefficient estimate is statistically significant at the 5% level.

17 Hainmueller (2012) develops a procedure to balance covariates in observational studies with binary treatments. The procedure uses maximum entropy to reweight control and treatment groups. In Hainmueller’s (2012) words, this nonparametric balancing procedure “exactly
adjusts inequalities in representation with respect to first, second, and possibly higher moments of the covariate distribution.” In our case, it
re-balances the control group, brokerages without forex obligations, so that the first three moments of its distribution—mean, standard deviation, and skewness—match that of the treatment group, brokerages without forex obligations. In the finance literature, this procedure has also
been used by Hartzmark (2014).

16

We find evidence of common trends prior to the leverage-constraint between brokerages with and brokerages
without forex obligations. Fig. 3 presents an event study plot of the following regression
log(excess captal)bt = γb + γt +

7
X

β j FX brokerb × I T + j =t + εbt

(6)

j =−6

where I T + j =t is a set of indicator variables for the sequence of months that surround the leverage-constraint. From
February 2010 (the month after the CFTC’s initial announcement) through August 2010, the estimates of I are close
to zero, which suggests parallel trends. The estimate of I falls to approximately -0.2 in September and then to
approximately -0.4 starting in December 2010, and thereafter. That the treatment effect of the leverage regulation starts in September, the month prior to the compliance date of the leverage-constraint, we attribute to some
brokerages enforcing the constraint after the final rules were outlined (September 10), but before the mandated
compliance date (October 18). Furthermore, the policy has a larger effect on brokerages that allow traders substantial amounts of leverage (see Appendix Table A.7).18 This is precisely the group of brokerages that would be
more sensitive to the policy, furthering our confidence that we identify the leverage-constraint’s effect.
The reduction in brokerages’ excess capital is likely caused by the loss of revenue from intermediating retail
trading, as a result of the restrictions on providing leverage. This is evidenced by the reduction in trading volume
and retail trader losses documented in Section 4. However, an alternative story is that these brokerage firms were
less able to receive external financing because the regulations weakened their projected value.
Two additional tests provide evidence that the reduction in brokerage capital is the result of less internally
generated revenues. First, we find that the leverage-constraint has a stronger effect on small brokerage firms. Table
6, Panel B sorts the sample of firms into above and below median brokerage capital (using the median of the sample
of brokerage firms with retail forex obligation as the dividing point). The coefficient estimate is approximately -0.5
for below median brokerages Columns 1 and 2) and -0.1 for above median brokerages (Columns 3 and 4). These
small brokerage firms are presumably less able to raise external capital, or to make up for the loss of revenues
by reallocating internal firm resources toward other markets. Second, the January 2010 CFTC announcement of
leverage regulations did not strongly affect brokerage capital. According to regression estimates in Panel C, the
treatment effect of the announcement is small (approximately -0.045) and not statistically different from zero. If
the leverage-constraint caused reductions in brokerage capital through a channel of decreased external financing,
then we would expect the CFTC announcement to have an effect, because the announcement would have lowered
the projected revenues of these brokerage firms.
Furthermore, we consider whether the reduction in brokerage firms’ capital is also caused by the leverageconstraints’ effect on client retention and acquisition. The CFTC brokerage data include information on client
flows, and so we use the myForexBook account-level data set to estimate trader entry and exit from the forex
market. Appendix Section A.8 describes our approach.19 We find that, after controlling for time-trends in the
myForexBook data, the CFTC regulation reduces trader exits, which is consistent with Section 4’s result that traders
lose less money as a result of the leverage-constraint. But, the leverage-constraint reduces the entry rate of new
traders by more than the exit rate, causing an approximately 1% reduction in the number of clients per brokerage,

18 Note, we sort brokerages into high- versus low-leverage by searching web archives, the details of which we discuss in the Appendix. We are
unable to sort the brokerages using our trading data, because the brokerages in the myForexBook data set and those in the CFTC data set do
not always overlap.
19 Though the results on trader entry and exit corroborate our findings that the constraint lowered trading volume, we encourage readers to
carefully consider our tests and our estimates. This is because we have to estimate traders’ entry and exit into the forex market using empirical
proxies, and because some entry and exit could be mismeasured due to the fact that the account-level data come from an online social network
that does not provide us information on account openings and closings at traders’ brokerages.

17

per month. This suggests that the leverage-constraint lessened the appeal of forex trading, which also contributes
to the reduction in brokerages’ revenues.
Finally, we conjecture that the reduction in revenues caused by the leverage-constraint precipitated significant
changes in the structure of the brokerage market. Fig. 4 plots a time series of brokerages’ retail forex obligations.
When the CFTC’s reporting requirements began in November 2010, there were around 25 brokerages and these
brokerages had a wide range of sizes. Today, only four brokerages registered with the CFTC have retail forex obligations and these four are among the market’s largest brokerages.
6. The leverage-constraint and relative bid-ask spreads
So far, the leverage-constraint reduces the trading volume and traders’ losses, and thereby weakens the brokerages. As our stylized model illustrates, the policy can also affect the bid-ask spreads by changing the informativeness of traders’ orders. Moreover, adding realistic financial frictions (which we abstracted away from) could also
generate effects on bid-ask spreads. For instance, if the brokerages need some of their own capital to intermediate positions, then a reduction in their revenues and capital can further reduce market liquidity and increase the
bid-ask spreads (Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2008; Gromb and Vayanos, 2010). We therefore assess whether the
regulation caused brokers’ bid-ask spreads to rise.
We focus on local liquidity in the retail market, measured as the bid-ask spreads charged by the brokerages
relative to the interbank market. This is the appropriate measure for our analysis because the foreign exchange
market is very large, and the retail segment of the market is significantly smaller. Thus, the CFTC leverage regulation undoubtedly had no effect on global currency prices or liquidity in the interbank market, and measuring the
spreads relative to this market enables us to control for many factors. We construct this relative spread measure
using a data series we estimate from our interbank data merged with myForexBook transactions (see Section 3 for
details and Table 7 for summary statistics).
We test the effect of the leverage policy on the relative bid-ask spreads by estimating the following differencein-differences regression
relative bid-ask spread j i t = γi + γt + β1 US traderi × post constraintt + β2 controls j i t + ε j i t

(7)

where j is a trade executed by trader i. We estimate this regression at the trade-level and include daily fixed effects
(γt ) in all of the regressions.20 The coefficient β1 on the interaction between US trader and post constraint is an
estimate of the constraint’s effect on local bid-ask spreads.21 Furthermore, due to the imperfect matching between
myForexBook transactions and interbank price quotes, Table 8 presents results for trades that we can match to the
exact second (Columns 1 and 2), as well as for the full sample of trades while controlling for the distance of the
match (Columns 3 and 4).
The leverage-constraint does not have a strong effect on the relative bid-ask spreads at these brokerages. The
estimate of β1 equals -0.011 when we can match myForexBook trades to Tick Data prices precisely to the second
and it equals -0.014 when we control for the distance of the match, neither of which are statistically different from
zero. Columns 2 and 4 interact US trader with leads and lags around the month of the leverage-constraint. We

20 For regressions that test Eq. (7), we winsorize the dependent variable relative bid-ask spread at the 1% level.
21 In alternative, but unreported tests, we replace US trader with an indicator variable for the share of U.S. traders in the myForexBook

database that use a given brokerage. The idea behind these tests is that a given brokerage might not charge different prices to U.S. versus
European traders even after the leverage-constraint. However, we would expect brokerages that predominately have U.S. clientele to be more
strongly affected by the leverage regulations, and the regulations would affect all traders on the brokerage. The results of these tests are not
noticeably different than our findings in Table 8.

18

do not find that the leverage-constraint affects bid-ask spreads at different leads and lags around the regulation.
Likewise, similar to the results on trading activity and brokerage capital, we do not find any evidence that the
January 2010 CFTC announcement of the leverage restriction affects brokerages’ bid-ask spreads (see Panel B).
Recall that our model predicts an increase (resp. decrease) in bid-ask spreads if and only if the leverageconstraint policy increases (resp. decreases) traders’ average information. Hence, the zero effect on bid-ask
spreads can be reconciled with our model as long as the policy does not substantially change traders’ average information. In Section 4, we present back-of-the-envelope calculations on gross returns (which provides a measure
of traders’ information) that suggests this might be the case. Specifically, with our preferred measure of trading
costs, our analysis suggests the policy does not substantially change traders’ gross returns. Put differently, the brokerages seem to face a similar degree of adverse selection before and after the leverage-constraint policy, which
provides an explanation for why they do not change their bid-ask spreads.

7. Conclusion
This paper asks whether retail traders’ leverage should be limited by empirically analyzing a unique policy
intervention that restricted the provision of leverage to U.S. retail traders of foreign exchange. Using three data
sets—a large transaction level-data set, panel data on brokerages regulated by the CFTC, and a data set of interbank prices—and a difference-in-difference empirical strategy, we find that the policy reduces trading volume,
increases traders’ net returns, and lowers brokerages’ excess capital. Yet, the policy has no discernible effect on
the relative bid-ask prices charged by these brokerages. We reconcile these findings with a model in which traders
with heterogeneous and dogmatic beliefs take speculative positions, and a competitive brokerage sector intermediates these trades subject to technological and informational costs. From the lens of the model, these empirical
results suggest that the leverage-constraint policy generates a sizable improvement in belief-neutral welfare, by
economizing on productive resources used to intermediate speculation, while having no adverse effect on market
liquidity. Put differently, our analysis suggests leverage is attractive to speculative traders who do not necessarily
contribute to market quality. By providing leverage to these traders, financial intermediaries exacerbate speculation, which increases trading volume and their intermediation revenues, but at the expense of traders’ profits and
social welfare.
Our analysis is largely agnostic about the behavioral distortions that induce retail traders to speculate. This is
because, as our model illustrates, our results apply for a large class of behavioral distortions that ultimately translate into dogmatic beliefs and trade. That said, the most parsimonious explanation for our findings is an overconfidence bias. Leverage would be particularly attractive to overconfident speculators with precise beliefs about asset
payoffs. While some behavioral distortions sometimes struggle to explain asset market participation in the first
place, e.g., Cumulative Prospect Theory, Barberis and Xiong (2009), overconfident investors’ attraction to markets
with high-leverage can explain why the retail traders we study choose to join this market, why they are more likely
to leave the market when leverage is taken away, and why they are undeterred by the CFTC’s announcement of
leverage regulations. Furthermore, a robust empirical finance literature documents that overconfident individual
investors have high trading volume, and because these traders pay more in transaction costs, they have poor net
returns (e.g., Barber and Odean, 2000). Indeed, our results on retail forex traders’ leverage use (and the associated
transaction costs) mirror the literature’s findings.
Obviously, our motivating model is too stylized to capture all potential reasons for trade in the forex market.
For instance, some traders could be trading to hedge their background risks, as in Simsek (2013b). Others might
be enjoying the sensation from trading. If we were to model these other motives for trade, leverage would improve
social welfare through these channels. In an empirical analysis, it is impossible to capture all possible reasons for
19

trade. We view our analysis as capturing a key driving force for trade in the foreign exchange market (monetary
pursuits from speculation). Our empirical results suggest that through this channel the leverage-constraint policy
has a large positive impact on social welfare. This can also be viewed as setting a (very high) threshold that other
rationales for trade would have to exceed to overturn our qualitative conclusion that the leverage restriction policy
improves social welfare.
Our results also shed some light on the extraordinary growth of the financial services sector in the last decades
(although this growth is also driven by many other factors, which we haven’t touched upon in our analysis). We
present evidence that suggests the growth of the foreign exchange brokerage market has been socially excessive,
and that a leverage-constraint policy is an effective tool to reduce this excess. To the extent that our results apply in
other markets, leverage (that finances speculation) could have contributed to inefficient growth also elsewhere in
the financial sector. More broadly, recent decades have seen a considerable increase in trading volume, and some
of this volume has arguably been speculative, as evidenced by the recent trading frenzies in the Chinese stock market and cryptocurrencies. Our results suggest that speculative trading volume could have inefficiently increased
the size of the financial sector, and policies that target speculative trading could deal with this inefficiency without having adverse effects on market liquidity. We leave the analysis of other markets and other anti-speculation
policies (such as financial transaction taxes) to future work.

20

References
Adrian, T., Shin, H. S., 2010. Liquidity and leverage. Journal of Financial Intermediation 19, 418–437.
Bailey, M. C., Dávila, E., Kuchler, T., Stroebel, J., 2018. House price beliefs and mortgage leverage choice. Review of Economic
Studies Forthcoming.
Barber, B. M., Lee, Y.-T., Liu, Y.-J., Odean, T., 2014. The cross-section of speculator skill: Evidence from day trading. Journal of
Financial Markets 18, 1–24.
Barber, B. M., Odean, T., 2000. Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common stock investment performance of individual
investors. Journal of Finance 55, 773–806.
Barber, B. M., Odean, T., 2001. Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and common stock investment. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 116, 261–292.
Barber, B. M., Odean, T., Zhu, N., 2008. Do retail trades move markets? The Review of Financial Studies 22, 151–186.
Barberis, N., Xiong, W., 2009. What drives the disposition effect? An analysis of a long-standing preference-based explanation.
The Journal of Finance 64, 751–784.
Barrot, J.-N., Kaniel, R., Sraer, D., 2016. Are retail traders compensated for providing liquidity? Journal of Financial Economics
120, 146–168.
Ben-David, I., 2018. High leverage and willingness to pay: Evidence from the residential housing market. Real Estate Economics
Forthcoming.
Ben-David, I., Birru, J., Prokopenya, V., 2018. Uninformative feedback and risk taking: Evidence from retail forex trading. Review
of Finance Forthcoming.
Ben-David, I., Birru, J., Rossi, A., 2017. Industry familiarity and trading: Evidence from the personal portfolios of industry
insiders. Journal of Financial Economics Forthcoming.
Berkman, H., Koch, P. D., Westerholm, P. J., 2014. Informed trading through the accounts of children. The Journal of Finance 69,
363–404.
Bertrand, M., Morse, A., 2011. Information disclosure, cognitive biases, and payday borrowing. The Journal of Finance 66, 1865–
1893.
Black, F., 1986. Noise. The Journal of Finance 41, 528–543.
Brunnermeier, M. K., Pedersen, L. H., 2008. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. The Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201–
2238.
Brunnermeier, M. K., Simsek, A., Xiong, W., 2014. A welfare criterion for models with distorted beliefs. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 129, 1753–1797.
Brusa, F., Ramadorai, T., Verdelhan, A., 2014. The international CAPM redux. Unpublished working paper, Temple University .
Campbell, J. Y., Jackson, H. E., Madrian, B. C., Tufano, P., 2011. Consumer financial protection. Journal of Economic Perspectives
25, 91–114.
Cao, D., 2017. Speculation and financial wealth distribution under belief heterogeneity. The Economic Journal 128, 2258–2281.
Carlin, B. I., 2009. Strategic price complexity in retail financial markets. Journal of Financial Economics 91, 278–287.
Dorn, D., Huberman, G., Sengmueller, P., 2008. Correlated trading and returns. The Journal of Finance 63, 885–920.
Favara, G., Imbs, J., 2015. Credit supply and the price of housing. American Economic Review 105, 958–992.
Fostel, A., Geanakoplos, J., 2008. Leverage cycles and the anxious economy. The American Economic Review 98, 1211–1244.
Foucault, T., Sraer, D., Thesmar, D. J., 2011. Individual investors and volatility. The Journal of Finance 66, 1369–1406.
Gabaix, X., Laibson, D., 2006. Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia, and information suppression in competitive markets.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 505–540.

21

Garleanu, N., Pedersen, L. H., 2011. Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from the law of one price. The Review of Financial Studies 24, 1980–2022.
Geanakoplos, J., 2003. Liquidity, default, and crashes: Endogenous contracts in general equilibrium. In: Dewatripont, M.,
Hansen, L., Turnovsky, S. (eds.), Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Eighth World Congress,
Cambridge University Press, New York, vol. 2, pp. 170–205.
Geanakoplos, J., 2010. The leverage cycle. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 24, 1–65.
Gervais, S., Odean, T., 2001. Learning to be overconfident. Review of Financial Studies 14, 1–27.
Gilboa, I., Samuelson, L., Schmeidler, D., 2014. No-betting-pareto dominance. Econometrica 82, 1405–1442.
Glosten, L. R., Milgrom, P. R., 1985. Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders.
Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71–100.
Greenwood, R., Scharfstein, D., 2013. The growth of finance. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 27, 3–28.
Grinblatt, M., Keloharju, M., 2009. Sensation seeking, overconfidence, and trading activity. Journal of Finance 64, 549–578.
Gromb, D., Vayanos, D., 2010. A model of financial market liquidity based on intermediary capital. Journal of the European
Economic Association 8, 456–466.
Grossman, S. J., Stiglitz, J. E., 1980. On the impossibility of informationally efficient markets. The American Economic Review
70, 393–408.
Gurun, U. G., Matvos, G., Seru, A., 2016. Advertising expensive mortgages. The Journal of Finance 71, 2371–2416.
Hainmueller, J., 2012. Entropy balancing for causal effects: A multivariate reweighting method to produce balanced samples in
observational studies. Political Analysis 20, 25–46.
Hardouvelis, G. A., Peristiani, S., 1992. Margin requirements, speculative trading, and stock price fluctuations: The case of
Japan. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 1333–1370.
Hartzmark, S. M., 2014. The worst, the best, ignoring all the rest: The rank effect and trading behavior. The Review of Financial
Studies 28, 1024–1059.
Haughwout, A., Lee, D., Tracy, J., van der Klaauw, W., 2011. Real estate investors, the leverage cycle, and the housing market
crisis. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports No.514.
Heimer, R. Z., 2016. Peer pressure: Social interaction and the disposition effect. The Review of Financial Studies 29, 3177–3209.
Kahraman, B., Tookes, H. E., 2017. Trader leverage and liquidity. Journal of Finance 72, 1567–1610.
Kaniel, R., Liu, S., Saar, G., Titman, S., 2012. Individual investor trading and return patterns around earnings announcements.
The Journal of Finance 67, 639–680.
Kaniel, R., Saar, G., Titman, S., 2008. Individual investor trading and stock returns. Journal of Finance 63, 273–310.
Kelley, E. K., Tetlock, P. C., 2013. How wise are crowds? Insights from retail orders and stock returns. The Journal of Finance 68,
1229–1265.
King, M. R., Osler, C. L., Rime, D., 2013. The market microstructure approach to foreign exchange: Looking back and looking
forward. Journal of International Money and Finance 38, 95–119.
King, M. R., Rime, D., 2010. The $4 trillion question: what explains FX growth since the 2007 survey? BIS Quarterly Review
December 2010, 27–42.
Kumar, A., 2009. Who gambles in the stock market? Journal of Finance 64, 1889–1933.
Kupiec, P. H., 1989. Initial margin requirements and stock returns volatility: Another look. Journal of Financial Services Research
3, 287–301.
Kyle, A. S., 1985. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica 53, 1315–1335.
Linnainmaa, J. T., 2011. Why do (some) households trade so much? Review of Financial Studies 24, 1630–1666.

22

Mancini, L., Ranaldo, A., Wrampelmeyer, J., 2013. Liquidity in the foreign exchange market: Measurement, commonality, and
risk premiums. The Journal of Finance 68, 1805–1841.
Odean, T., 1998. Volume, volatility, price, and profit when all traders are above average. The Journal of Finance 53, 1887–1934.
Posner, E. A., Weyl, E. G., 2013. An FDA for financial innovation: Applying the insurable interest doctrine to 21st century financial markets. Northwestern University Law Review 107, 1307–1485.
Schwert, G. W., 1989. Margin requirements and stock volatility. Journal of Financial Services Research 3, 153–164.
Seguin, P. J., Jarrell, G. A., 1993. The irrelevance of margin: Evidence from the crash of ‘87. The Journal of Finance 48, 1457–1473.
Seru, A., Shumway, T., Stoffman, N., 2010. Learning by trading. Review of Financial Studies 23, 705–739.
Shleifer, A., Summers, L. H., 1990. The noise trader approach to finance. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 4, 19–33.
Simsek, A., 2013a. Belief disagreements and collateral constraints. Econometrica 81, 1–53.
Simsek, A., 2013b. Speculation and risk sharing with new financial assets. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 1365–1396.
Stiglitz, J. E., 1989. Using tax policy to curb speculative short-term trading. Journal of Financial Services Research 3, 101–115.
Summers, L. H., Summers, V. P., 1989. When financial markets work too well: a cautious case for a securities transactions tax.
Journal of Financial Services Research 3, 261–286.
Thaler, R. H., Benartzi, S., 2004. Save more tomorrow: Using behavioral economics to increase employee saving. Journal of
Political Economy 112, S164–S187.
Wang, Y., 2015. Why can margin requirements increase volatility and benefit margin constrained investors? Review of Finance
20, 1449–1485.
Zingales, L., 2015. Presidential address: Does finance benefit society? The Journal of Finance 70, 1327–1363.

23

Table 1
A comparison balancing test.
This table compares traders in the myForexBook data set from the United States to traders from Europe. Panel A includes a comparison of
means. Panel B presents Pearson’s correlation coefficients from
daily¢ fluctuations in aggregate trading activity between U.S. and European
¡
traders (weekends excluded). Daily fluctuations equal l og ȳ t ,i /ȳ t −1,i where ȳ is the average by day t , and i indexes U.S. versus European
traders. The sample window for these tests is the period immediately preceding the CFTC leverage-constraint – May 1 to October 17, 2010.

Panel A: Difference in means between U.S. and European traders
US
EUR
Personal characteristics
Trading experience (years)
0-1
1-3
3-5
5+
Trading approach
Technical
Fundamentals
News
Not specific
Momentum
Age

t -stata

0.29
0.45
0.10
0.15

0.31
0.44
0.10
0.14

1.17
0.40
0.25
0.76

0.65
0.046
0.024
0.23
0.053
37.4

0.66
0.053
0.020
0.22
0.048
37.4

0.66
0.78
0.70
0.62
0.57
0.09

364.6
6.59
8.46
0.16

307.3
7.03
8.17
0.19

0.68
0.60
1.15
2.67

1,193

1,479

Trading characteristics
Trades per account
Trades per account/day, if ≥ 1 trade in day
Distinct currency pairs traded at least once
Fraction trades w/ leverage > 50:1
Number of traders
a test of equality of means between US and EUR

Panel B: Correlation of aggregate daily trading for U.S. versus Europeans
Corr. coef.
0.59
0.62
0.44

Trading volume (USD)
Number of trades
Returns

24

Table 2
Summary statistics from traders’ accounts.
This table presents summary statistics from the myForexBook account-level database trimmed according to the criteria described in Section
3. The sample includes trades executed by U.S. and European retail forex traders. US trader equals one if the trader is located in the U.S. and
equal to zero if located in Europe. Post constraint equals one if the month comes after October 2010, the month in which brokerages needed to
comply with CFTC regulations limiting the leverage available to U.S retail forex traders at 50:1, zero otherwise. Post announcement equals one if
the trade was opened after the CFTC’s announcement in the Federal Registrar in January 2010 of their intent to restrict traders’ leverage to 10:1,
zero otherwise. High-leverage trader equals one if the traders’ average leverage use prior to the leverage-constraint is above the median of all
traders in the sample. Monthly portfolio returns are calculated using the account’s balances at the beginning and end of the month, excluding
deposits.

Panel A: Sample window around leverage-constraint (May 2010 - April 2011)
Variable
Mean
Std dev
5%
10%
11.7
2.65
7.14
8.29
Log trading volume (USD)
Log number of trades
3.31
1.62
0
1.10
Portfolio return
-0.19
0.90
-1.42
-1.00
US trader (= 1)
0.46
Post constraint (= 1)
0.54
High-leverage trader (= 1)
0.55
15,125
Trader-month observations

25%
10.00
2.20
-0.34

Panel B: Sample window around regulation announcement (August 2009 - July 2010)
11.9
2.46
7.67
8.85
10.3
Log trading volume (USD)
Log number of trades
3.31
1.55
0.69
1.10
2.30
Portfolio return
-0.31
1.05
-1.98
-1.22
-0.74
US trader (= 1)
0.47
Post announcement (= 1)
0.69
13,833
Trader-month observations

25

50%
11.8
3.43
-0.0092

75%
13.5
4.44
0.020

90%
14.8
5.28
0.23

95%
15.7
5.81
0.70

12.1
3.47
-0.046

13.6
4.42
0.013

15.0
5.16
0.26

15.8
5.62
0.89

Table 3
Leverage constraints and trading volume.
This table uses account level data from the myForexBook data set collapsed to the level of trader-month. It reports ordinary least squares
estimates of the regression
log(volume)i t = γi + γt + β1 US traderi × post constraintt + εi t ,
where i is a trader and t is a month. Trading volume is the USD value of the assets traded. US trader equals one if the trader is from the U.S. and
equal to zero if they are from Europe. Post constraint equals one in months starting in November 2010, and zero otherwise. The sample period
in Panel A and Panel B is May 2010 to April 2011 The sample period in Panel C is August 2009 to July 2010. Standard errors are double-clustered
by trader and month, and *, **, and *** denote significance at the p < 0.1, p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 levels, respectively.

Panel A: The October 2010 leverage constraint and trading volume
Dep var:
Log trading volume
(1a)
(2a)
US trader (=1) × Post constraint (=1) -0.265***
-0.200**
(0.094)
(0.097)
Trader FE
x
x
Month FE
x
Brokerage-month FE
x
Trader-month observations
15,125
15,016
R2
0.72
0.73

Log number of trades
(3a)
(4a)
-0.108*
-0.0685
(0.062)
(0.065)
x
x
x
x
15,156
15,047
0.61
0.61

Panel B: Alternative treatment and control groups – high- vs. low-leverage traders
Dep var:
Log trading volume
Log number of trades
(1b)
(2b)
(3b)
(4b)
-0.340***
-0.155**
-0.154**
High leverage trader (=1) × Post constraint (=1) -0.365***
(0.094)
(0.096)
(0.062)
(0.063)
Trader FE
x
x
x
x
Month FE
x
x
Brokerage-month FE
x
x
15,125
15,016
15,156
15,047
Trader-month observations
R2
0.72
0.73
0.61
0.61

Panel C: The January 2010 announcement of leverage regulation
Dep var: Log trading volume
(1c)
(2c)
0.148
0.153
US trader (=1) × Post announcement (=1)
(0.10)
(0.12)
Trader FE
x
x
Month FE
x
Brokerage-month FE
x
13,833
13,741
Trader-month observations
R2
0.70
0.71

26

Log number of trades
(3c)
(4c)
0.0433
0.0998
(0.075)
(0.080)
x
x
x
x
13,861
13,767
0.55
0.57

Table 4
Leverage constraints and traders’ portfolio returns.
This table reports portfolio returns of traders in the myForexBook database. Monthly returns are calculated using the account’s balances at the beginning and end of the month, excluding deposits. We
sort traders monthly by the average amount of leverage the trader uses in t −1. We calculate one-factor alphas by regressing the return difference between the high- and low-leverage portfolios (highminus-low return) on the carry-trade factor described in Brusa et al. (2014). To calculate statistical differences between pre- and post-constraint portfolios, we use seemingly unrelated regressions
(joint equation regressions) to conduct χ2 tests on the regression alphas; the table presents p-values for the null hypothesis that the difference in alphas is equal to zero. Stars *, **, and *** denote
significance levels p < 0.10 , p < 0.05 , and p < 0.01, respectively.

Panel A: Sample window around leverage-constraint (May 2010 - April 2011)

Sample average
Leverage quintile
High
4
3
2
Low
High minus low
1-Factor alpha

US traders
Pre-constraint
Post-constraint
-0.174
-0.095
-0.444
-0.229
-0.094
-0.086
-0.032
-0.412***
[5.75]
-0.434***
[30.02]

-0.195
-0.142
-0.079
-0.041
-0.020
-0.175***
[4.07]
-0.196***
[3.64]

Post minus pre
0.079***

t-stat
[4.46]

0.249***
0.086**
0.014
0.045*
0.012
0.237
–
0.237***
χ2 p-val < 0.00

[4.02]
[2.18]
[0.44]
[1.64]
[0.46]

European traders
Pre-constraint
Post-constraint
-0.149
-0.119
-0.340
-0.205
-0.134
-0.058
-0.021
-0.319***
[6.84]
-0.298***
[3.70]

-0.285
-0.176
-0.055
-0.056
-0.024
-0.261***
[4.35]
-0.255***
[9.76]

Post minus pre
0.030

t-stat
[1.53]

0.055
0.029
0.079**
0.003
-0.003
0.058
–
0.043
χ2 p-val = 0.62

[0.87]
[0.64]
[2.18]
[0.09]
[0.09]

Local ave. treatment effect
(USpost − USpr e ) minus ...
... (EURpost − EURpr e )
0.05
0.19
0.06
-0.06
0.04
0.01
0.18
0.19**
χ2 p-value = 0.01

27

Panel B: Sample window around regulation announcement (August 2009 - July 2010)

Sample average
Leverage quintile
High
4
3
2
Low
High minus low
1-Factor alpha

US traders
Pre-announce
Post-announce
-0.145
-0.169
-0.392
-0.224
-0.018
-0.044
-0.057
-0.335***
[3.05]
-0.349***
[4.01]

-0.458
-0.192
-0.078
-0.071
-0.066
-0.392***
[3.80]
-0.414***
[4.12]

Post minus pre
-0.023

t-stat
[0.83]

-0.066
0.032
-0.060
-0.027
-0.009
-0.057
–
-0.066*
χ2 p-val = 0.06

[0.66]
[0.50]
[1.19]
[0.83]
[0.21]

European traders
Pre-announce
Post-announce
-0.193
-0.213
-0.420
-0.355
-0.153
-0.049
0.012
-0.432***
[5.07]
-0.662***
[8.40]

-0.518
-0.265
-0.180
-0.064
-0.051
-0.467***
[5.57]
-0.459***
[5.00]

Post minus pre
-0.020

t-stat
[0.66]

-0.098
0.090
-0.027
-0.015
-0.063
-0.035
–
0.203
χ2 p-val = 0.49

[0.97]
[1.16]
[0.52]
[0.36]
[1.41]

Local ave. treatment effect
(USpost − USpr e ) minus ...
... (EURpost − EURpr e )
0.00
0.03
-0.06
-0.03
-0.01
0.05
-0.02
-0.27*
χ2 p-val= 0.05

Table 5
Summary statistics on retail forex brokerages.
The data comes from monthly reports to the CFTC. The CFTC requires futures commission merchants and retail foreign exchange dealers to file monthly financial reports with the CFTC’s Division of
Swap Dealer and Intermediary Oversight. The CFTC collects data on brokerage excess capital and net capital requirements for the entire sample. They begin collecting data on retail forex obligations
in November 2010. Net capital requirement is set as a minimum of $1,000,000 or some greater amount as determined under CFTC Regulation 1.17(a). FX broker equals one if the broker has retail forex
obligations greater than zero post-November 2010, and zero otherwise. Post constraint equals one starting in November, 2010, the date by which brokerages needed to comply with CFTC regulation
limiting the leverage available to U.S retail forex traders at 50:1, zero otherwise. Post announcement equals one starting in February 2010, following the CFTC’s announcement in the Federal Registrar
of their intent to restrict traders’ leverage to 10:1, zero otherwise.

Panel A: Sample window around leverage-constraint (May 2010 - April 2011)
Variable
Broker-month obs.
Mean
1,505
17.4
Log excess net capital
Log net capital requirement
1,505
16.1
FX broker (=1)
1,505
0.16
Post constraint (=1)
1,505
0.50
Log retail forex obligations if FX broker = 1
117
16.5

Std dev
2.88
2.27

5%
13.2
13.8

10%
13.6
13.8

25%
15.1
13.8

50%
17.3
16.0

75%
19.5
17.5

90%
21.3
19.8

95%
22.6
20.6

1.79

14.1

14.2

15.0

16.9

17.5

18.8

18.8

5%
12.7
13.1

10%
13.3
13.1

25%
14.9
13.8

50%
17.0
15.6

75%
19.4
17.2

90%
21.2
19.2

95%
22.6
20.5

28

Panel B: Sample window around regulation announcement (August 2009 - July 2010)
Variable
Broker-month obs.
Mean
Std dev
1,571
17.2
2.98
Log excess net capital
Log net capital requirement
1,573
15.8
2.37
FX broker (=1)
1,573
0.14
Post announcement (=1)
1,573
0.49
Log retail forex obligations
no data prior to November 2010

Table 6
The effect of the leverage-constraint and announcement on brokerage excess capital.
This table reports OLS estimates of the regression
log(excess capital)bt = γb + γt + β1 FX brokerb × post constraintt + εbt ,
where b is a broker and t is a month. The data come from monthly CFTC Futures Commission Merchants Financial Reports. Excess capital
is the capital in excess of the regulatory requirement, for each brokerage in the CFTC data set. FX broker equals one if the brokerage has any
retail forex obligations after they were required to report these obligations starting in November 2010. Post constraint equals one in months
starting in November 2010, and zero otherwise. Post announcement equals one in months starting in February 2010, and zero otherwise. Using
the non-parametric, entropy balancing procedure designed by Hainmueller (2012), some regressions weight observations so that the control
group’s mean, standard deviation, and skewness match that of the set of the FX brokers in the pre-constraint period. The sample period is May
2010 to April 2011 in Panels A and B , and is August 2009 to July 2010 in Panel C. Standard errors are double-clustered by broker and month, and
*, **, and *** denote significance at the p < 0.1, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01 levels, respectively.

Panel A: The October 2010 leverage constraint’s effect on brokerage capital
Dep var: Log excess capital
(1a)
(2a)
(3a)
FX broker (=1) × Post constraint (=1) -0.276**
-0.289**
-0.312**
(0.12)

Log net capital requirement
Brokerage FE
Month FE
Sample balanced by broker size
Brokerage-month observations
R2

x
x
no
1,503
0.99

(0.14)
-0.207
(0.17)
x
x
no
1,503
0.99

(0.13)

x
x
yes
1,456
0.97

(4a)
-0.313**
(0.13)
-0.00912
(0.19)
x
x
yes
1,456
0.97

Panel B: The leverage constraint, brokerage capital sorted by broker size
Sample: Broker size ...
Below median
Above median
Dep var: Log excess capital
(1b)
(2b)
(3b)
(4b)
FX broker (=1) × Post constraint (=1) -0.495**
-0.548*
-0.100
-0.100
(0.23)

Log net capital requirement
Brokerage FE
Month FE
Brokerage-month observations
R2

x
x
635
0.86

(0.29)
-0.367
(0.27)
x
x
635
0.88

Panel C: The January 2010 announcement of leverage regulation
Dep var: Log excess capital
(1c)
(2c)
FX broker (=1) × Post announcement (=1) -0.0542
-0.0456
(0.11)

Log net capital requirement
Brokerage FE
Month FE
Sample balanced by broker size
Brokerage-month observations
R2

x
x
no
1,570
0.98

29

(0.11)
0.0284
(0.081)
x
x
no
1,570
0.98

(0.092)

x
x
821
0.98

(3c)
-0.0418
(0.12)

x
x
yes
1,542
0.98

(0.093)
-0.00250
(0.057)
x
x
821
0.98

(4c)
-0.0463
(0.11)
-0.0146
(0.086)
x
x
yes
1,542
0.98

Table 7
Summary statistics on relative bid-ask spreads.
This table presents summary statistics from the myForexBook account-level database trimmed according to the criteria described in Section 3. The sample includes trades executed by U.S. and European retail forex traders. US trader equals one if the trade is executed
by a trader located in the U.S. and equal to zero if located in Europe. Post constraint equals one if the trade was opened after October 18, 2010, the date by which brokerages needed to comply with CFTC regulations limiting the leverage available to U.S retail forex
traders at 50:1, zero otherwise. Post announcement equals one if the trade was opened after the CFTC’s announcement in the Federal
Registrar on January 13, 2010 of their intent to restrict traders’ leverage to 10:1, zero otherwise. The trade’s relative bid-ask spread is deÃ broker interbank ask
interbank bid
broker !

Ã

P tinterbank bid −P broker
jit
P tinterbank bid

+

Pjit

P

−P

−P t
t0
ji t0
+
bid
P tinterbank ask
P interbank
0
t
ask !
P broker
−P interbank
ji t0
t0
if the transaction is short, where j
ask
P interbank
t0

fined as: relative bid-ask spreadjit =

if the transaction is long, and relative bid-ask spreadjit =
is a trader, i is a trade, and t is the second the trade is opened.

To calculate relative bid-ask spread, we match traders’ transactions in the myForexBook data with the closest (in time) quoted price in Tick
Data - a data set of interbank foreign exchange quotes.

Panel A: Sample window around leverage-constraint (May 1, 2010 - April 30, 2011)
Variable
Mean
Std dev
5%
10%
25%
Relative bid-ask spreads
-0.00035
0.31
-0.49
-0.32
-0.14
US trader (= 1)
0.47
post constraint (= 1)
0.47
Number of trades
1,444,159
Panel B: Sample window around regulation announcement (August 1, 2009 - July 31, 2010)
Relative bid-ask spreads
0.0021
0.31
-0.49
-0.32
-0.13
US trader (= 1)
0.48
Post announcement (= 1)
0.69
1,140,274
Number of trades

30

50%
-0.022

75%
0.12

90%
0.36

95%
0.57

-0.021

0.11

0.36

0.57

Table 8
The effect of the leverage-constraint on brokers’ relative bid-ask spreads.
This table reports OLS estimates of the following regression:
relative bid-ask spread j i t = γi + γt + β1 US traderi × post constraintt + β2 trade j i t + ε j i t
where i is a trader,

j is a trade, and t is a day (trades are recorded by the second).
Ã broker interbank ask
interbank bid
broker !
Pjit

relative bid-ask spreadjit =
Ã

P tinterbank bid −P broker
jit
P tinterbank bid

−P t

P tinterbank ask
interbank ask !

+

P broker
−P 0
ji t0
t

ask
P interbank
0

+

P 0
t

The dependent variable is

−P

ji t0
bid
P interbank
0
t

if the transaction is long, and relative bid-ask spreadjit =

if the transaction is short. US trader equals one if the trade is executed by a trader located

t

in the U.S. and equal to zero if located in Europe. To calculate relative bid-ask spread, we match traders’ transactions in the myForexBook data
with the closest (in time) quoted price in Tick Data - a data set of inter-bank foreign exchange quotes. Columns 1 and 2 include trades that
we can match perfectly to the second, while Columns 3 and 4 include all trades that we can match and the regression controls for the match
distance (in seconds). Post constraint equals one if the trade was opened after October 18, 2010, the date by which brokerages needed to
comply with CFTC regulation limiting the leverage available to U.S retail forex traders at 50:1, zero otherwise. Post announcement equals one
if the trade was opened after the CFTC’s announcement in the Federal Registrar on January 13, 2010 of their intent to restrict trader leverage to
10:1, zero otherwise. In Panel A, the sample period is from May 1, 2010 to April 30, 2011. In Panel B, the sample period is from August 1, 2009
to July 31, 2010. Standard errors are double-clustered by day and trader, and *, **, and *** denote significance levels p < 0.10 , p < 0.05 , and
p < 0.01, respectively.

Panel A: The October 2010 leverage constraint and relative bid-ask spreads
Dep var: Relative bid-ask spreads
(1a)
(2a)
-0.0105
0.00559
US trader (=1) × Post constraint (=1)
(0.0080)
(0.053)
US trader (=1) × ...
... Ind[May 2010 - Jul 2010]
0.0256
(0.17)
... Ind[Aug 2010 - Sep 2010]
0.00851
(1.24)
... Ind[Nov 2010 - Dec 2010]
-0.00606
(0.0056)
... Ind[Jan 2011 - Feb 2011]
-0.0103*
(0.0062)
... Ind[Mar 2011 - Apr 2011]
-0.00247
(0.0070)
Trader FE
x
x
Day FE
x
x
yes
yes
Bid-ask quotes matched perfectly to trades
Controls for match distance in log(seconds)
no
no
920,573
920,573
Number of trades
R2
0.016
0.016

(3a)

(4a)

-0.0138
(0.0085)

0.00145
(5.10)
0.0263
(3.71)
0.0113
(0.91)
-0.00692
(0.0048)
-0.00732
(0.0050)
0.00307
(0.0077)

x
x
no
yes

x
x
no
yes

1,444,159
0.015

1,444,159
0.015

Panel B: The January 2010 regulation announcement and relative bid-ask spreads
Dep var: Relative bid-ask spreads
(1b)
(2b)
(3b)
-0.00940
0.00789
-0.00586
US trader (=1) × Post announcement (=1)
(0.013)
(6.16)
(0.0099)
US trader (=1) × ...
... Ind[Aug 2009 - Oct 2009]
-0.0118
(6.96)
... Ind[Nov 2009 - Dec 2009]
-0.0141
(1.67)
... Ind[Feb 2010 - Mar 2010]
-0.0235
(0.015)
... Ind[Apr 2010 - May 2009]
-0.0227
(0.019)
... Ind[Jun 2009 - Jul 2009]
-0.0586
(0.040)
Trader FE
x
x
x
Day FE
x
x
x
yes
yes
no
Bid-ask quotes matched perfectly to trades
Controls for match distance in log(seconds)
no
no
yes
644,755
644,755
1,140,274
Number of trades
R2
0.017
0.018
0.013

31

(4b)

0.0110
(0.33)
-0.00869
(2.42)
-0.0105
(1.01)
-0.0200
(0.013)
-0.0217
(0.017)
-0.0535
(0.036)
x
x
no
yes

1,140,274
0.013

Treatment effect of CFTC regulation capping leverage provision
Dep var: Log trading volume per−account
0.5
0.25
0
−0.25
−0.5
−0.75
−1
Feb 2010: Apr 2010
Post−regulation
announcement

Jun 2010

Aug 2010

Oct 2010: Dec 2010
Leverage cap
compliance

Feb 2011

Apr 2011

Fig. 1. Impulse response of treatment effect on trading volume. This table reports ordinary least squares estimates of the following regression:
log(trading volume)i t = γi + γt +

TX
+l
k=T −l

β1k US traderi × I T +k=t + εi t

where i is a trader and t is a month. The dependent variable is log(trading volume), which is the natural logarithm of total monthly trading
volume in USD. US trader equals one if the trader is located in the U.S. and equal to zero if located in Europe. T is the date of the regulation,
i.e., October 2010. I T + j =t is an indicator variable for months surrounding the regulation. Therefore, β j for j = {−T, ..., T } is the sequence of
treatment effects, and hence maps out the impulse response. Standard errors are double-clustered by day and trader, and the dashed lines are
95% confidence intervals around the point estimate of β j .

32

Monthly portfolio returns, U.S. traders

Monthly portfolio returns, European traders

0

0

−0.1

−0.1

−0.2

−0.2

−0.3

−0.3

−0.4

−0.4

Pre−constraint

−0.5
Average

High−leverage

4th

Post−constraint
3rd

Quintile of leverage

2nd

Pre−constraint

−0.5
Low−leverage

Average

High−leverage

4th

Post−constraint
3rd

2nd

Low−leverage

Quintile of leverage

Fig. 2. Leverage constraints and portfolio returns. This table reports average portfolio returns of traders in the myForexBook database. Monthly returns are calculated using the account’s balances at
the beginning and end of the month, excluding deposits. We sort traders monthly by the average amount of leverage the trader uses in t − 1.

33

Treatment effect of CFTC regulation capping leverage provision
Dep var: Brokerage’s log excess capital
0.5
0.25
0
−0.25
−0.5
−0.75
−1
Feb 2010: Apr 2010
Post−regulation
announcement

Jun 2010

Aug 2010

Oct 2010: Dec 2010
Leverage cap
compliance

Feb 2011

Apr 2011

Fig. 3. Impulse response of treatment effect on brokerage excess capital. This table reports ordinary least squares estimates of the following
regression:
7
X
log(excess captal)bt = γb + γt +
β j FX brokerb × I T + j =t + εbt ,
j =−6

where b is a broker and t is a month. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the brokerages’ excess capital, recorded by the CFTC. FX broker
equals one if the brokerage has any retail forex obligations after they were required to report these obligations starting in November 2010. T
is the date of the regulation, i.e., October 18, 2010. I T + j =t is an indicator variable for months surrounding the regulation. Therefore, β j for
j = {−T, ..., T } is the sequence of treatment effects, and hence maps out the impulse response. Standard errors are double-clustered by month
and broker, and the dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals around the point estimate of β j .

34

Log retail forex obligations
20

15

10

5
Oct 2010:
Oct 2011
Leverage cap,
CFTC commences
data collection

High−leverage brokerage
Oct 2012

Oct 2013

Oct 2014

All other brokerages
Oct 2015

Oct 2016

Fig. 4. Brokerages’ retail forex obligations. This figure presents each brokerage’s retail foreign exchange obligations. Obligations are equal to
the total amount of funds at a brokerage that would be obtained by combining all money, securities, and property deposited by a retail forex
customer into a retail forex account or accounts, adjusted for the realized and unrealized net profit or loss. The CFTC began requiring this
reporting in November 2010. We manually classify brokerages as high-leverage if they were advertised as offering traders at least 400:1 leverage
per-trade around the time of the November 2010 CFTC regulation. To generate this classification, we searched Internet archives. Most of the
brokerages were listed on the website www.100forexbrokers.com, which provides a directory of forex brokerages and their characteristics.

35

Appendix to:
Should Retail Investors’ Leverage Be Limited?
(intended for online publication)

Appendix A.1: Currency Pairs Affected by the CFTC Regulation
Table A.1
The CFTC regulation and Leverage-Constraints across Currency Pairs
Description: This table lists the currency pairs affected by the CFTC trading rule restricting the amount of leverage at 50:1 or 20:1.

50:1 leverage
USD/JPY

AUD/NZD

NZD/CAD

EUR/GBP

USD/CHF

USD/SEK

CHF/JPY

EUR/JPY

GBP/USD
GBP/JPY

AUD/USD

USD/DKK

CAD/JPY

EUR/AUD

GBP/CHF

USD/CAD

USD/NOK

CAD/CHF

EUR/CAD

GBP/CAD

NZD/USD

AUD/CHF

CHF/SEK

EUR/SEK

GBP/NZD

AUD/CAD

NOK/JPY

CHF/NOK

EUR/NOK

GBP/AUD

AUD/JPY

SEK/JPY

EUR/USD

EUR/NZD

GBP/SEK

NZD/JPY

NZD/CHF

EUR/CHF

EUR/DKK

USD/MXN

USD/CZK

USD/HKD

USD/RUB

EUR/PLN

USD/ZAR

SGD/JPY

EUR/HUF

USD/PLN

USD/SGB

USD/TRY

USD/HUF

EUR/CZK

HKD/JPY

EUR/TRY

TRY/JPY

20:1 leverage

i

ZAR/JPY

Appendix A.2: A Stylized Model of the Retail Forex Market
In this appendix, we present a stylized model that motivates our empirical analysis and enables us to evaluate social welfare. We first describe the environment and characterize the equilibrium together with various
variables of interest. We then analyze how the leverage-constraint policy affects the equilibrium variables as well
as social welfare.
Environment and equilibrium
Agents, information structure, and beliefs.. Consider an economy with a single consumption good (which will be
referred to as a dollar) and a single trading period. There is a risk-free asset with gross return normalized to one.
There is also a single risky asset (a currency). In the interbank market, the asset currently trades at an exogenous
market price normalized to one, p 0 = 1. At the next period, the asset will trade at price, p 1 , which is a random
variable. The objective
distribution
of the asset price change (that will be reflected in our empirical analysis) is
¡
¢
given by p 1 − 1 ∼ N µts r ue , σ2 . Here, s ∈ S denotes an aggregate state realized at the beginning of date 0. We let q s
P
denote the ex-ante probability of the aggregate state (according to each agent) and assume s q s µts r ue = 0 so that
the price is a martingale under the objective belief.
There are traders, denoted by i ∈ I , that take optimal positions in the asset that will be described below.
For simplicity, we normalize the mass of traders to one so that the aggregate and the per-trader outcomes are the
same. Traders have dogmatic beliefs and do not learn from prices (formally, traders know each others’ beliefs and
agree to disagree). Traders’ beliefs can also depend¡on the¢ aggregate state s ∈ S. Specifically, trader i believes the
price change is distributed according to, p 1 − 1 ∼ N µis , σ2 . Since the objective belief is unique, the heterogeneity
in traders’ beliefs can be thought of as capturing various behavioral distortions (which we leave unmodeled for
simplicity). On the other hand, the dependence of traders’ beliefs on the aggregate state allows traders also to be
somewhat informed. In particular, to the extent that a trader’s belief and the objective belief (µis and µts r ue ) are
positively correlated, the trader’s positions will tend to generate positive expected return before transaction costs,
which we refer to as “information.”
Trader i also starts with initial initial wealth given by, n 0i , and has
with
coefficient
of
¡ CARA preferences
¢
¡
¢
absolute risk aversion, γi . The type of trader i is given by the parameters, γi , n 0i , µis . We let d F s γi , n 0i , µis denote
the joint distribution function over trader types conditional on the aggregate state. We can be quite general about
the shape of this distribution
¡ except ¢for a technical condition that we note below. All agents
¡ ¢ know and agree upon
the type distribution, d F s γi , n 0i , µi , as well as the probability of aggregate states, q s s . Their disagreements
concern he asset’s expected payoff.
There is also a competitive retail brokerage sector that provides intermediation services. Consider a single
(representative) broker. For simplicity, the broker is risk neutral and she has the objective¡ belief about
the asset
¢
payoff. In particular, she believes the price change is distributed according to p 1 − 1 ∼ N µts r ue , σ2 conditional
on the aggregate state s ∈ S. However, the broker does not observe the aggregate state, and it sets bid and ask
prices at the beginning of the period before she can observe endogenous signals about the aggregate state (such
as aggregate trading volume). Since traders’ beliefs depends on the aggregate state, this might put the broker at
an informational disadvantage relative to traders. As in Glosten and Milgrom (1985), the broker will set bid and
ask prices that take into account the information content of traders’ orders. For simplicity, we assume the broker
sets a single bid price and a single ask price, p 0bi d and p 0ask , and stands ready to fill sell and buy orders linearly at
these prices regardless of the size of the order.22 We will make assumptions so that, similar to Glosten and Milgrom
(1985), the equilibrium bid price will be lower than the ex-ante objective value of the broker (normalized to one)
which in turn will be lower than the equilibrium ask price, p 0bi d < 1 < p 0ask .
Traders’ optimal positions.. Trader i takes the bid and ask prices as given and decides to take a long or short position in the risky asset denoted by x si . She invests her residual wealth in the risk-free asset. She can also use leverage
on long or short positions without any additional fees but that might
¯ ¯ be subject to a regulatory limit. Specifically,
we require the position (evaluated at the market value) to satisfy, ¯x si ¯ ≤ l n i where l is an exogenous leverage limit
22 In general, the size of the order can also contain some information about the aggregate state (e.g., larger orders might be associated with
better information), and the broker might want to set size-dependent prices that reflect this information. Modeling this feature explicitly could
generate additional interesting predictions but it wouldn’t change our qualitative conclusions. We therefore restrict attention to linear prices
and simplify the analysis.

ii

set by regulation. We also allow for the case l = ∞, which corresponds to the equilibrium without leverage restriction.23 The trader’s portfolio problem can be written as,
i
i Es
hmax
x si ∈ −l n 0i ,l n 0i

¡
¢
½ i
h
³ ´i
n 0 + x si p 1 − p 0ask
¡
¢
− exp n 1i where n 1i =
n 0i + x si p 1 − p 0bi d

if x si > 0
if x si < 0

(8)

In view of the CARA-Normal setup, the trader’s optimal position (conditional on the aggregate state realization) is
given by,
¶
µ i ask

µs −p 0

i

,
l
n
if µis > p 0ask
min

0 ,

γi σ2

¡
¢
(9)
x si =
0,
if µis ∈ p 0bi d , p 0ask .
¶
µ



µis −p 0bi d
i
bi
d
i

 max −l n 0 , i 2 ,
if µs < p 0
γ σ
The broker’s problem and bid-ask spreads.. The broker is subject to two types of costs. First, as we already mentioned, the broker can be subject to informational costs since traders might on average have some information.
The broker takes the opposite side of traders’ (possibly informed) positions, and keeps the positions on its balance
sheet, which exposes it to potential losses.24 Second, the broker also incurs technological costs that capture the
infrastructure and the employees utilized to facilitate intermediation. For simplicity, we assume these costs grow
linearly in the size of traders’ positions: specifically, intermediating each unit of long or short position costs the
broker c > 0 additional dollars. Using these assumptions, the broker’s expected certainty equivalent wealth (under
its objective belief) conditional on the aggregate state is given by,
C E sb

¡ t r ue £ ¤ ¡ ask
¢¢
¡
¢
R
i
p 1 − p 0 − c d F s γi , n 0i , µis
s
i ,x si >0 −x s E
¡
£
¤
¡
¢¢
¡
¢ .
R
=
+ i ,x i <0 −x si E st r ue p 1 − p 0bi d + c d F s γi , n 0i , µis

(10)

s

We assume there are a large number of identical brokers that compete a la Bertrand to set bid and ask prices, p 0bi d
and p 0ask . Competition drives down the broker’s expected profit from both buy and sell orders to zero, that is,
X

Z
qs

i ,x si <0

s∈S

and

X
s∈S

Z
qs

i ,x si <0

³
´´
³
´
£ ¤ ³
−x si E st r ue p 1 − p 0ask − c d F s γi , n 0i , µis = 0,
³
´´
³
´
£ ¤ ³
−x si E st r ue p 1 − p 0bi d + c d F s γi , n 0i , µis = 0.

This also implies£ that
¤ the broker’s total expected profit is zero,
and using E st r ue p 1 = 1 + µts r ue , we obtain,

P

s∈S

q s C E sb = 0. After rearranging these expressions

p 0ask = 1 + m l ong + c and p 0bi d = 1 − m shor t − c
where
m

l ong

£
¤
£
¤
E x si µts r ue |x si < 0
E x si µts r ue |x i > 0
shor t
and m
=
=
£
¤
£
¤ .
E x si |x si > 0
E −x si |x si < 0

(11)

(12)

Here, the expectation operator E [·] is taken with respect to the distributions d F s and q s (on which there is no
disagreement). The terms m l ong and m shor t reflect traders’ average information: their expected profit per unit
position on respectively long and short trades. In particular, m l ong is positive if the traders on average purchase
the asset when it has a positive expected return. Likewise, m shor t is positive if the traders’ on average sell the asset
when it has a negative expected return.

23 In practice, there might also be endogenous restrictions on the leverage ratio as in Geanakoplos (2009) or Simsek (2013). We abstract away
from these endogenous leverage limits since they do not affect our qualitative results.
24 One could wonder whether the broker could avoid this outcome by outlaying the position immediately to the interbank market. Our
empirical analysis shows that the bid-ask spreads in the interbank market are on average very similar to the bid-ask spreads in the retail market.
This means that outlaying the position to the interbank market is on average not profitable, arguably because similar intermediation costs also
apply in the interbank market.

iii

Eq. (11) says that, similar to Glosten and Milgrom (1985), the broker takes into account the information
content in buy and sell orders. If m l ong is positive, then the broker that receives a buy order faces adverse selection. In equilibrium, it increases the ask price so as to break even (otherwise, it would consistently lose money).
Symmetrically, if m l ong is negative, then the broker faces an advantageous selection and lowers its ask price (due
to competitive pressure) while still breaking even. Similar considerations explain the relationship between traders’
market-timing profit on the short trades, m shor t , and the broker’s bid price.
¡¡
¢ ¡¡ ¢ ¢ ¢
Definition of equilibrium.. The equilibrium in this model is a collection, p 0ask , p 0bi d , x si i ∈I s∈S , such that the
positions satisfy (9) given the bid-ask
prices,
¡
¢ and the bid-ask prices satisfy (11) given the positions and the cumulative distribution function F s γi , n 0i , µis . We assume there exists a unique equilibrium that also satisfies the
inequality, p 0bi d < 1 < p 0ask (the bid price is lower than the ex-ante expected payoff which is lower than the ask
price). This would be the case under a mild technical assumption on the distribution F s .25
Trading volume.. We next characterize traders’ expected profit as well as their expected utility and the social welfare. As we will see, trading volume plays a central role in these characterizations. Therefore, we define the long,
the short, and the total trading volume as respectively,
)
(
³
´
h
i X Z
d F s γi , n 0i , µis
(13)
qs
V l ong = E x si |x si > 0
s∈S

i .x si >0

(

V

shor t

h
i X Z
qs
= E −x si |x si < 0
s∈S

and

V =V

l ong

+V

shor t

i .x si <0

)
³
´
i
i
i
d F s γ , n 0 , µs

.

Here, the terms in set brackets capture the fraction of traders that take respectively long or short positions.26 The
expressions illustrate that the trading volume reflects the fraction of long or short trades as well as the expected
size of each trade.
¡
£ ¤
¢
P
Traders’ expected profit.. Under the objective distribution, trader i ’s expected profit is given by, s∈S q s x si E st r ue p 1 − p 0ask ,
if he takes a long position, and a similar expression if he takes a short position. Aggregating these positions, traders’
overall expected profit is given by,
¡ t r ue £ ¤
¢
¡
¢
R
P
i
p 1 − p 0ask d F s γi , n 0i , µis
s∈S q s i ,x si >0 x s E s
¡
£
¤
¢
¡
¢ .
R
P
Π=
+ s∈S q s i ,x i <0 x si E st r ue p 1 − p 0bi d d F s γi , n 0i , µis
s

E st r ue

£

¤

1 + µts r ue ,

After substituting
p1 =
together with the definitions of the volume and market-timing profit in
Eqs. (12) and (13), we can further rewrite this as,
³
´
³
³
´´
Π = V l ong 1 + m l ong − p 0ask + V shor t p 0bi d − 1 − m shor t
(14)
The intuition behind this expression is that the typical long position pays 1 + m l ong and costs the ask price, p 0ask .
Likewise, the typical short position pays the bid price, p 0bi d , and it costs 1 − m shor t . The expression illustrates that
the traders’ expected profit is increasing in their average information and decreasing in the bid-ask spreads.
In equilibrium, the bid and ask prices are given by Eq. (11). Substituting this into Eq. (14), traders’ expected
profit in equilibrium is given by,
Π = −cV l ong − cV shor t = −cV .
(15)
³

´

25 To illustrate this, suppose F γi , n i , µi is independent of s. In this case, traders’ positions contain no information about the aggregate
s
s
state, the information terms drop out of (11). Then, there exists a unique equilibrium which also satisfies the inequality, p 0bi d < 1 < p 0ask

(since c > 0). By
argument, there exists a unique equilibrium that satisfies the same inequality as long as the dependence of the
³ a continuity
´
distribution F s γi , n i , µis on the aggregate state s is sufficiently small. We could parameterize this dependence and formalize the assumption
but this is not necessary for our purposes.
26 These two fractions do not necessarily sum to one since there are also traders that take a zero position (see Eq. (9)).

iv

That is, the equilibrium profit depends negatively on the trading volume. Intuitively, since the competitive broker
breaks even, the technological intermediation costs are ultimately passed through to traders via bid-ask spreads.
The more traders trade, the more they incur these costs. Perhaps more surprisingly, traders’ average information
does not affect their equilibrium profit. The intuition is that the market maker sets bid and ask prices to neutralize
information. For instance, if the traders’ average information improves, then the market maker widens the bidask spreads (otherwise, it would consistently make losses and go out of business). Once the broker adjusts, the
improved information does not affect traders’ profits but it is reflected in bid and ask prices.
The broker’s expected revenue and size.. Recall that the broker breaks even in equilibrium. In particular, its expected intermediation revenues are equal to the technological intermediation costs, cV . Recall that we view these
costs as capturing the infrastructure and the labor the brokerage employees. Hence, the brokerage’s intermediation revenues and size depend positively on the trading volume.
Belief-neutral social welfare.. We next characterize the social welfare in equilibrium. Since there are heterogeneous beliefs about the asset payoff, the social welfare will generally depend on the belief used to calculate agents’
utilities. The standard Pareto welfare criterion would correspond to maximizing each agent’s utility under her own
belief. However, it is unclear whether perceived gains from speculation should be counted towards social welfare
since they capture a collective form of irrationality: while all agents believe they have the correct belief, at most
one of them could be right.
An alternative is to evaluate investors’ beliefs under the objective belief distribution (which in this model
corresponds to the broker’s belief distribution). While appropriate, this approach faces a challenge in practice:
The planner might not know who has the correct belief. Following Brunnermeier et al. (2014), we instead assume
the planner evaluates the welfare under a fixed belief h, but she also makes the welfare comparisons robust to the
choice of the belief. Specifically, we allow h to be an arbitrary convex combination of the traders’ beliefs or the
broker’s (objective) belief.
We also focus on a utilitarian social planner that maximizes the sum of agents’ certainty-equivalent wealth,
µ
Z
³
´¶
X
Wh =
q s C E sb,h + C E si ,h d F s γi , n 0i , µis .
(16)
s∈S

i

Here, C E sb,h denotes the broker’s certainty-equivalent payoff and C E si ,h denotes trader i ’s certainty-equivalent
payoff conditional on the aggregate state. In view of the CARA-Normal setting, restricting attention to traders’
certainty-equivalent payoffs is without loss of generality. Assigning all traders as well as the broker the same Pareto
weight is slightly more restrictive but it provides a natural benchmark.27
Combining Eqs. (9) and (8), trader i ’s certainty-equivalent payoff under belief h can be calculated as,

¡ h£ ¤
¢ 1 i ¡ i ¢2 2
i
ask

− 2 γ xs σ ,
 xs E s p1 − p0
C E si ,h = n 0i +
0

¡ ¢2
¢
 i¡ h£ ¤
x s E p 1 − p 0bi d − 12 γi x si σ2 ,

if µis > p 0ask
¡
¢
∈ p 0bi d , p 0ask .

if µis

if µis

(17)

< p 0bi d

Thus, traders’ certainty-equivalent payoff reflects their expected profits under belief h as well as their risk aversion
and portfolio variance. Likewise, the broker’s certainty-equivalent payoff under belief h can be calculated as,
C E sb,h

¡ h £ ¤ ¡ ask
¢¢
¡ i i i¢
R
i
s p 1 − p 0 − c d F s γ , n 0 , µs
iR,x si >0 −x s E
¡ £ ¤ ¡
¢¢
¡
¢ .
=
+ i ,x i <0 −x si E sh p 1 − p 0ask − c d F s γi , n 0i , µis

(18)

s

This is similar to Eq. (10) with the difference that the expected asset payoff is calculated according to a general
belief h (which is not necessarily the true belief).

27 In fact, this assumption is also without loss of generality as long as we allow the planner to do one-time ex-ante transfers among the agents.
In this case, an allocation x that leads to greater utilitarian welfare, W h , than another allocation y can be also made to Pareto dominate the
allocation y (under belief h) after combining it with appropriate ex-ante transfers.

v

Combining Eqs. (16) , (17), and (18), we can calculate the social welfare as,
¶
µ
³
´
X Z
1 i ³ i ´2 2
h
i
W
= −cV +
qs
n 0 − γ x s σ d F s γi , n 0i , µis
2
i
s∈S
· ³ ´
¸
h i
2
1
i
i
i
2
= E n 0 − cV − E γ x s σ .
2

(19)

Here, the expectation operators in the second line are taken with respect to the distributions d F s and q s (on which
there is no disagreement). Hence, Eq. (19)
£ ¤illustrates that the welfare does not depend on the belief h used for the
calculation (i.e., the expected price, E sh p 1 , drops out of the welfare calculations). This is because, under any fixed
belief h, the expected gain of an agent is the expected loss of another agent. This captures the idea that speculation
transfers wealth among agents without creating social value. Once properly accounted for, these transfers do not
affect social welfare.28 As in Brunnermeier et al. (2014), the planner can evaluate the effect of speculation on social
welfare without taking a stand on whose belief is correct. We refer to W ≡ W h as the belief-neutral welfare.
Eq. (19) also illustrates that the belief-neutral welfare is decreasing inh the expected
intermediation costs,
¡ i ¢2 2 i
i
−V c, as well as their expected (risk-aversion weighted) portfolio variance, E γ x σ . Intuitively, every intermediated position requires technological costs, which reduces social welfare as the resources or people used for
intermediation could also be used elsewhere. These costs are naturally increasing in trading volume. In addition,
to the extent that speculation induces investors to take riskier positions, the resulting portfolio risks also reduce
social welfare.
Comparative statics of the leverage-constraint policy
We next characterize the effect of the leverage restriction policy on the equilibrium variables. It is useful to
break this exercise into two steps: a partial equilibrium exercise in which brokers’ bid-ask spread remain at their
pre-policy levels, and a general equilibrium exercise in which the spreads also adjust. In practice, brokers are unlikely to change their spreads in the very short run (which we view as a month or so) due to inertia or optimization
frictions.29 Hence, we view our short-run empirical results as testing the partial equilibrium predictions. In the
longer run (which we view as several months), brokers would arguably adjust their bid-ask spreads to their new
equilibrium levels. Thus, we view our longer-run empirical results as testing the general equilibrium predictions.
We denote the partial equilibrium with hatted variables, and the general equilibrium (after the policy change) with
starred variables.
Partial equilibrium effects on trading volume.. Before the leverage-constraint policy, traders’ positions are given
by Eq. (9) with l = ∞ and the volume is given by Eq. (13). Now suppose the leverage-constraint policy is imposed.
In partial equilibrium, traders’ positions are still given by Eq. (9) but with a finite l (but still evaluated at the same
bid and ask prices). That is, we have,



x̂ si = l n 0i < x si ,

if x si =



x̂ si = −l n 0i > −x si ,

if x si =

µis −p 0ask
γi σ2
µis −p 0bi d
γi σ2

> l n 0i
< l n 0i

.

In particular, the long and short positions that violate the leverage-constraint are downscaled to satisfy the leverageconstraint. Thus, the expected size of the long and short positions both decline. By Eq. (13), the trading volumes
decline, that is,
V̂ l ong ≤ V l ong , V̂ shor t ≤ V shor t and V̂ ≤ V .
h ¡ ¢
i
2
Partial equilibrium effects on portfolio risks.. In partial equilibrium, the average portfolio risks decline, E γi x̂ si σ2 ≤
h ¡ ¢
i
2
E γi x si σ2 , since the risky positions that violate the leverage-constraint are reduced, x̂ si ≤ x si .

28 Likewise, the bid and ask prices, p ask and p bi d , do not affect social welfare since they represent transfers between the traders and the
0
0
brokers. In particular, Eq. (19) would apply not only with the equilibrium bid and ask prices given by Eq. (11)—which ensure that brokers break
even, but also with other bid and ask prices that might generate net profits or net losses for the brokers.
29 Since the leverage-constraint changes the set of trades the broker intermediates, it might take a while for the broker to figure out its overall
profits and losses in this new market, and to adjust its bid-ask spreads appropriately.

vi

Partial equilibrium effects on traders’ expected profit.. In partial equilibrium, Eq. (14) still applies and implies that
traders’ expected profit becomes,
´´
³
³
´
³
Π̂ = V̂ l ong 1 + m̂ l ong − p 0ask + V̂ shor t p 0bi d − 1 − m̂ shor t .
However, the bid-ask spreads are still at their old equilibrium levels,
p 0ask = 1 + m l ong + c and p 0bi d = 1 − m shor t − c.
Combining these expressions with Eq. (15), which applies before the policy, we obtain,
³
´
³
´
¡
¢
Π̂ − Π = −c V̂ − V + V̂ l ong m̂ l ong − m l ong + V̂ shor t m̂ shor t − m shor t .
Here, the first term captures the effect of the constraint via trading volume. Since V̂ ≤ V , the leverage-constraint
tends to improve traders’ profits through its effect on volume. The second and the third terms capture the effect via changes in average information. To the extent that the leveraged positions are associated with a different
level of information than other positions, then the policy would also affect traders’ (partial equilibrium) profit by
improving or worsening their average information.
General equilibrium effects on bid-ask spreads.. In general equilibrium, bid and ask prices adjust to neutralize the
changes in traders’ average information. More specifically, Eq. (11) implies,
p 0ask,∗ − p 0ask = m l ong ,∗ − m l ong and p 0bi d − p 0bi d ,∗ = m shor t ,∗ − m shor t .
Recall also that the equilibrium level of the bid and ask prices are determined as a fixed point. Under the regularity
assumptions we made (that ensure unique equilibrium), the signs of the price changes are determined by the sign
of the partial equilibrium change in average information, respectively, m̂ l ong −m l ong and m̂ shor t −m shor t . Hence,
the model predicts that the bid-ask spreads should eventually increase (resp. decrease) if the policy increases (resp.
decreases) the average information in traders’ orders.
Note also that, once the bid-ask spreads adjust, traders’ payoffs are given by Eq. (15), and the effect of the
policy on these payoffs is given by, M ∗ − M = −c (V ∗ − V ). In general equilibrium, the leverage-constraint policy
affects traders’ payoffs only by its effect on trading volume.
General equilibrium effects on the broker... Recall that, in general equilibrium, the broker’s revenue and its size are
determined by the technological intermediation costs, cV . Hence, by lowering the trading volume, the leverageconstraint policy lowersthe revenue as well as the size of the brokerage sector.
Effects on social welfare.. Before the leverage-constraint policy, the belief-neutral social welfare is given by Eq.
(19). After the policy, the social welfare is given by the same expression but evaluated with the partial equilibrium
(hatted) variables or the general equilibrium (starred) variables. In particular, the welfare effect of the policy is
characterized by its effect on trading volume and average portfolio risks. Recall that in partial equilibrium, the
model predicts that the policy reduces the trading volume as well as average portfolio risks. Hence, the model also
predicts that the policy improves belief-neutral social welfare in partial equilibrium. This prediction also applies
in general equilibrium as long as the endogenous price response is not strong to overturn the sign of the partial
equilibrium effects on trading volume and portfolio risks.
In our empirical analysis, we find that the policy substantially reduces the trading volume in the short run
as well as in the longer run (see Section 4.1). In unreported results, we also analyze the effect on the volatility
of traders’ portfolio returns, and find mixed evidence that seems to point toward the policy lowering portfolio
volatility (see Footnote 15 in Section 4.2). Hence, from the lens of this model, our empirical evidence suggests that
the leverage-constraint policy improves social welfare.
Obviously, our model is too stylized to capture all potential reasons for trade in the forex market. For instance, some traders could be trading to hedge their background risks, as in Simsek (2013a). Others might be
enjoying the sensation from trading. If we were to model these other motives for trade, they would show up as
additional terms in Eq. (19). Moreover, restricting leverage (and trade) would typically tend to lower social welfare
through these terms. In an empirical analysis, it is impossible to capture all possible reasons for trade. We view

vii

our analysis as capturing a key driving force for trade (monetary pursuits from speculation). Our empirical analysis suggests that through this channel the leverage restriction policy had a large positive impact on social welfare.
This can also be viewed as setting a (very high) threshold that other rationales for trade would have to exceed to
overturn our qualitative conclusion that the leverage restriction policy improved social welfare.
Finally, recall that according to our welfare criterion the bid and ask prices do not matter for the social welfare. This is because they represent transfers among investors, which is ignored by a utilitarian planner that uses a
single belief and puts equal weight on all agents (see also Footnote 28).30 While this provides a reasonable benchmark, one could imagine reasons for why the social planner might also care about bid-ask spreads. For instance,
suppose some traders are trading for non-speculative reasons, e.g., to hedge their background risks. Higher bidask spreads would reduce these traders’ welfare. To the extent that the planner overweights such traders’ welfare
(and underweights the welfare of the “speculative” traders), then higher bid-ask spreads could also lower social
welfare. More generally, bid-ask spreads reflect market quality, which the planner might care about in addition to
social welfare.
As we noted, our theoretical analysis suggests the policy increases the bid-ask spreads over the longer run
if and only if it improves traders’ average information. In our empirical analysis, we find no significant effect on
bid-ask spreads. We also find (in back-of-the-envelope calculations) that the policy does not substantially change
traders’ gross returns, which provides a measure of their average information. Hence, the zero result on bid-ask
spreads can also be reconciled with our model, and it suggests that the leverage-constraint policy does not have
an adverse effect on social welfare through bid-ask spreads.

30 This is also why the social welfare is characterized by the same equation (19) in partial as well as general equilibrium, even though the
corresponding equilibrium allocations differ in terms of the bid and ask prices.

viii

Appendix A.3: Evidence on the Representativeness of the myForexBook Data
This section provides evidence that the trade level data from myForexBook provides a good representation
of the population of retail forex traders. The myForexBook web platform provides a social networking environment
for traders who have accounts with at least one of around fifty partnering brokerages. Because traders choose to
use the myForexBook platform, these traders could be unrepresentative of the overall population.
We first compare the myForexBook traders’ performance to that of the population of traders on the brokerage eToro, one of the market’s largest off-exchange brokerages. The eToro data includes all transactions between
June 2, 2013, and July 14, 2014.31 The data include over 11 million transactions from retail traders located in nearly
200 countries and independent territories.
Our analysis is specifically interested in how the availability of leverage affects traders’ wealth. Though
our eToro sample comes from a time period different than the myForexBook data, eToro traders also have worse
returns on positions that use more leverage (A.2, columns 3 and 4). On average, they lose between 65 and 75% ROI
per trade for every additional 100 units of leverage. myForexBook traders during our main sample window lose
around 28% per trade for every 100 unit increase in leverage. These results are consistent with the myForexBook
data being plausibly representative of how traders in the market respond to having less leverage.
Table A.2
Correlation Between Leverage and Trader Returns Across Different Data Sets
Description: This table reports OLS estimates of the following regression:
ROI j i t = γi + γt + β1 leverage j i t + ε j i t
where i is a trader, j is a trade, and t is a day (trades are recorded by the second). The dependent variable is ROI, which is per-trade return on
investment. Columns (1) and (2) use the myForexBook sample that is used throughout the paper. Columns (3) and (4) use the entire population
of trades on eToro between June 2, 2013 and July 14, 2014. Standard errors are double-clustered by day and trader, and *, **, and *** denote
significance levels p < 0.10 , p < 0.05 , and p < 0.01, respectively.

data set:
dep var: ROI
leverage / 100
trader FE
day FE
Number of trades
R2

myForexBook
(1)
-0.281**
(0.12)
x
270,051
0.038

(2)
-0.278**
(0.12)
x
x
270,051
0.040

eToro (June 2013 - July 2014)
(3)
-0.660***
(0.16)
x
11,580,789
0.079

(4)
-0.744***
(0.13)
x
x
11,580,789
0.082

We also find that the myForexBook data is similar to the CFTC data (the brokerages in the CFTC reports
account for about 95% of the U.S. market for retail forex). We calculate the total number of trades per month in the
myForexBook data and take the log first difference. We also take the log first difference of aggregate retail foreign
exchange obligations in the CFTC reports. We multiply the forex obligations time series by negative one, because
we would expect the brokerage’s obligations to decrease when there is more trading; on average, traders lose money
when they trade, which would reduce the value of the traders’ accounts (lower the brokerages’ obligations). These
series overlap from November 2011 to April 2012. The Pearson’s correlation coefficient between these series is
0.41, which suggests a reasonably strong correlation between the myForexBook and CFTC data sets. Figure A.1
plots these times series.

31 The data come from the brokerage, eToro. Per our NDA, eToro maintains the right to approve the use of the company’s name in the
description of the data prior to any publication.

ix

Fig. A.1. Correlation Between the myForexBook Data and the CFTC Brokerage Reports
Description: This figure plots time series of the number of trades in the myForexBook data set and retail foreign exchange obligations for
brokerages in the CFTC reports. The time series are transformed to the logarithm of monthly first differences. Retail forex obligations are
multiplied by negative one.

−.4

−.2

0

.2

log first difference, monthly

−.6

Number of trades, myForexBook accounts
Retail FX obligations × −1, CFTC brokerages
Jan 2011

Jul 2011

x

Jan 2012

Appendix A.4: Awareness of the CFTC Regulation Announcement
On January 13, 2010, the CFTC announced in the Federal Registrar their intent to restrict foreign exchange
dealers’ provision of leverage at 10:1. Our analysis shows that this announcement did not affect trader returns,
brokerage capital, or the spreads charged by forex brokerages. One plausible explanation for these results is that
the announcement could have gone unnoticed by traders, and therefore did not significantly affect trader behavior.
Figure A.2 plots the time series of Google search volume index (SVI) for the search term “forex leverage.”
Google SVI is often used by the literature to measure attention. There is a substantial increase in attention on forex
leverage that occurs as a result of the CFTC’s announcement, which is consistent with traders being aware that
they were going to have less available leverage.

Fig. A.2. Attention on the CFTC Announcement of Leverage Regulation
Description: This figure plots a time series of U.S. Google search volume index (SVI) for the search term “forex leverage.” Google SVI is the ratio
of searches for a particular term to the total number of Google searches, normalized on a scale from 0 to 100. The data is at a weekly frequency.

0

20

40

60

80

100

Google SVI for search term forex leverage

Oct 4
2009

Nov 1
2009

Dec 6
2009

Jan 17, 2010:
week after CFTC
announcement of
leverage constraint

xi

Mar 7
2010

Apr 4
2010

Appendix A.5: Trading Costs and Traders’ Gross Returns

xii

Section presents traders’ net portfolio returns. Table A.3 presents estimates of traders’ gross portfolio returns. To make these back-of-the-envelope
estimates, we have to make assumptions about the transaction costs paid by retail forex traders. Trading costs come from traders paying the bid-ask spread on
each transaction (to our knowledge, no brokerages charge fixed per-fee costs presently, or during the period of our study). Unfortunately, our transaction-level
data set does not tell us the spreads paid by traders, and the amount of trading we observe is too thin to estimate spreads by matching buy to sell orders (for
example, many studies use trade and quote database (TAQ) quotes to estimate spreads).
Therefore, our approach is to make assumptions about average spreads and then apply these assumptions to traders’ net portfolio returns. Specifically,
we believe that average spreads paid are between 3 to 4 pips, where a pip is one one-hundredth of one percent (for example, it would cost three to four dollars
to execute the modal trade in our data ($1,000)). We come to this conclusion by noting that most brokerages advertise spreads that are as low as 1 to 2 pips.
This headline number is presumably in reference to the most liquid currency pair, the EUR/USD, but other currency pairs cost more to trade. Spreads can also
change depending on market conditions: spreads increase by as much as 10 times during episodes of high volatility (see for example, the live spreads presented
by the brokerage Oanda: www.oanda.com/forex-trading/markets/recent). Additionally, price slippage would increase the spreads traders actually pay, and
the National Futures Association (NFA) found that, during the period we study, at least a few brokerages had computer systems designed to take advantage of
slippage (reference). Finally, in support of our assumption that transactions cost an average of 3 to 4 pips, MarketWatch’s May 2011 review comparing retail
forex brokerages writes that the only brokerage to offer fixed spreads was FX Solutions, which offered 3 pips per EUR/USD transaction (reference).
Under these assumptions, when traders are charged 2 pips per trade, transaction costs explain about 60% of high-leverage traders’ about transaction
costs (e.g., prior to the leverage-constraint high-leverage traders lose 44% on net and 18% gross). The high-leverage traders still perform worse than lowleverage traders, but not by nearly as much as the difference in their net returns. If we assume that traders are charged 3 to 4 pips per trade, there would be no
difference between high- and low-leverage traders gross returns.
Table A.3
Back-of-the-envelope Calculation of Trading Costs’ Effect on Gross Returns
Description: This table extends the results on traders’ portfolio returns presented in Table 4. Monthly returns are calculated using the account’s balances at the beginning and end of the month,
excluding deposits. The columns in this table present gross returns calculated after adjusting net returns by the assumed amount of transaction costs paid by traders. Transaction costs in retail forex
are the spreads paid by traders. We assume that average spreads during the period we study fell within a range of 2 to 5 pips, where a pip is one one-hundredth of one percent. Stars *, **, and ***
denote significance levels p < 0.10 , p < 0.05 , and p < 0.01, respectively.

U.S. Traders’ Portfolio Returns
gross returns
assumed per-trade spreads:
pre- or post-constraint:
sample average
leverage quintile
high
low
high minus low

net returns (from Table 4)
prepost-0.174
-0.095
-0.444
-0.032
-0.412***
(5.75)

-0.195
-0.020
-0.175***
(4.07)

2 pips

3 pips

4 pips

5 pips

pre-0.063

post-0.026

pre-0.007

post0.008

pre0.043

post0.040

pre0.102

post0.074

-0.176
-0.002
-0.174***
(3.43)

-0.061
-0.004
-0.058*
(1.86)

-0.028
0.012
-0.040
(0.71)

0.002
0.008
-0.006
(0.19)

0.092
0.025
0.067
(0.97)

0.060
0.020
0.040
(0.90)

0.246
0.038
0.207**
(2.42)

0.122
0.033
0.089
(1.54)

Appendix A.6: Trade-level Returns
This section shows that the leverage-constraint improves traders’ returns using tests at the trade-level.
These tests look exclusively at the narrow window around the dates of the leverage-constraint (the sample window September 1, 2010 - December 1, 2010) and the regulation’s announcement (December 1, 2009 - March 1,
2010). Table A.4 presents summary statistics for trade-level outcomes in this window. Table A.5 uses differencein-difference regressions to show that the leverage-constraint reduces per-trade losses by about 20 percentage
points. A.3 and A.4 plot the impulse-response of the treatment effect of the leverage-constraint in calendar-time
and trade-time, respectively. These tests show that the U.S. treatment group and European control group have
common trends prior to the regulation. A.5 presents placebo tests for false dates of the regulation. These tests
produce few false positive results, indicating that our tests are unlikely to suffer from Type I error. Table A.6 shows
that the CFTC’s regulation announcement does not significantly affect trade-level outcomes.
Table A.4
Trade-level summary statistics
Description: This table presents summary statistics from the myForexBook account-level database trimmed according to the criteria described
in Section 3. The sample includes trades executed by U.S. and European retail forex traders. Return on investment (roi) for long (short)
positions equals the difference between the nominal value of the currency pair when the position is closed (opened) and when it is opened
(closed), divided by the trader’s dollar stake in the trade. Post constraint equals one if the trade was opened after October 18, 2010, the date by
which brokerages needed to comply with CFTC regulation limiting the leverage available to U.S retail forex traders at 50:1, zero otherwise. Post
announcement equals one if the trade was opened after the CFTC’s announcement in the Federal Registrar on January 13, 2010 of their intent
to restrict traders’ leverage to 10:1, zero otherwise. High leverage trader equals one if trader i uses at least 50:1 leverage on at least one trade
prior to the CFTC regulation, zero otherwise. Holding period is the length of time in hours between when the position is opened and when it is
closed.

Panel A: sample window around leverage-constraint (Sep 1 - Dec 1, 2010)
variable

mean

std dev

median

10t h %tile

90t h %tile

-0.26
0.084

4.81

0.016

-2.33

1.79

2.24
2.43

0.69
0.073

-2.30
-2.93

3.04
3.39

Dependent variables
Return on investment (ROI)
trade uses leverage > 50:1 (= 1)

Treatment variables
US trader (= 1)
Post constraint (= 1)
High leverage trader (= 1)

0.45
0.48
0.49

Additional Controls
log trade size (USD)
log holding period (hours)
Number of trades

0.57
0.16
270,595

Panel B: sample window around regulation announcement (Dec 1, 2009 - Mar 1, 2010)
variable

mean

std dev

median

10t h %tile

90t h %tile

-0.22
0.42

3.93

0.087

-3.21

2.44

1.83
2.50

1.61
-0.083

0
-2.99

3.40
3.18

Dependent variables
Return on investment (ROI)
trade uses leverage > 10:1 (= 1)

Treatment variables
US trader (= 1)
Post announcement (= 1)
High leverage trader (= 1)

0.48
0.59
0.63

Additional Controls
log trade size (USD)
log holding period (hours)
Number of trades

1.41
0.041
167,035

xiii

Table A.5
Leverage-Constraints and Trade-Level Outcomes
Description: This table reports OLS estimates of the following regression:
Y j i t = γi + γt + β1 US traderi × post constraintt + β2 trade j i t + ε j i t
where i is a trader, j is a trade, and t is the day trades are opened (execution of trades are recorded at the second). In Panel A, the dependent
variable is trade uses leverage > 50:1, which equals one if the trade uses at least 50:1 leverage. In Panels B and C, the dependent variable is ROI,
which is per-trade return on investment. US trader equals one if the trade is executed by a trader located in the U.S. and equal to zero if located
in Europe. Post constraint equals one if the trade was opened after October 18, 2010, the date by which brokerages needed to comply with
CFTC regulation limiting the leverage available to U.S retail forex traders at 50:1, zero otherwise. High leverage trader equals one if trader i uses
at least 50:1 leverage on at least one trade prior to the CFTC regulation, zero otherwise. The sample period is from September 1 to December
1, 2010. Standard errors are double-clustered by day and trader, and *, **, and *** denote significance levels p < 0.10 , p < 0.05 , and p < 0.01,
respectively.

Panel A: The Binding Effect of the October 2010 Leverage-Constraint on Trading
dep var: trade uses leverage > 50:1 (=1)
(1a)
(2a)
(3a)
-0.0491**
-0.0523**
-0.0520**
US trader (=1) × post constraint (=1)
(0.022)

(0.021)

(0.021)
0.0148***
(0.0043)

x
x

x
x
x
270,541
0.53

x
x
x
270,541
0.54

log(trade size)
log(holding period)
trader FE
day FE
broker-pair FE
Number of trades
R2

270,595
0.51

(4a)
-0.0520**
(0.021)
0.0145***
(0.0043)
-0.00138**
(0.00058)
x
x
x
270,541
0.54

Panel B: Oct 2010 Leverage-Constraint & Performance, Euro Traders Control Group
dep var: per-trade ROI
(1b)
(2b)
(3b)
(4b)
US trader (=1) × post constraint (=1) 0.191**
0.207**
0.204**
0.204**
(0.094)

(0.098)

(0.098)
-0.110***
(0.024)

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
270,541
0.041

x
x
x
x
x
270,541
0.042

log(trade size)
log(holding period)
trader FE
day FE
currency risk-free rate differential
std dev of trader’s weekly returns
broker-pair FE
Number of trades
R2

270,595
0.037

(0.099)
-0.124***
(0.025)
-0.0649***
(0.017)
x
x
x
x
x
270,541
0.042

Panel C: Constraint and Performance; Alt. Control Group – High- vs. Low-Leverage Traders
dep var: per-trade ROI
(1c)
(2c)
(3c)
(4c)
high leverage trader (=1) × post constraint (=1) 0.237**
0.252***
0.247***
0.253***
(0.098)

(0.093)

(0.094)
-0.110***
(0.024)

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
270,541
0.041

x
x
x
x
x
270,541
0.042

log(trade size)
log(holding period)
trader FE
day FE
currency risk-free rate differential
std dev of trader’s weekly returns
broker-pair FE
Number of trades
R2

270,595
0.037

xiv

(0.093)
-0.124***
(0.025)
-0.0652***
(0.016)
x
x
x
x
x
270,541
0.042

Fig. A.3. Impulse Response of Treatment Effect on Per-Trade Returns
Description: This table reports OLS estimates of the following regression:
ROI j i t = γi + γt +

TX
+l
k=T −l

β1k US traderi × I T +k=t + ε j i t

where i is a trader, j is a trade, and t is a week (trades are recorded by the second). The dependent variable is ROI, which is per-trade return on
investment. US trader equals one if the trade is executed by a trader located in the U.S. and equal to zero if located in Europe. T is the date of
the regulation, i.e. October 18, 2010. I T + j =t is an indicator variable for weeks surrounding the regulation. Therefore, β j for j = {−T, ..., T } is
the sequence of treatment effects, and hence maps out the impulse response. Standard errors are double-clustered by day and trader, and the
dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals around the point estimate of β j .

−0.5

−0.25

0

0.25

0.5

Treatment effect of CFTC regulation capping leverage provision
Dep var: per−trade ROI

September
week 1

October
week 1

Oct 18 2010:
leverage cap
compliance

xv

November
week 1

Fig. A.4. Impulse Response of Leverage-Constraint on Per-Trade Returns Using Trade-time
Description: This table reports OLS estimates of the following regression:
TX
+l

ROI j i t = γi + γt +

k=T −l

β1k US traderi × I T +k=t + ε j i t

where i is a trader, j is a trade, and t is a week (trades are recorded by the second). The dependent variable is ROI, which is per-trade return on
investment. US trader equals one if the trade is executed by a trader located in the U.S. and equal to zero if located in Europe. T is the date of
the regulation, i.e. October 18, 2010. I T + j =t is an indicator variable for weeks surrounding the regulation. Therefore, β j for j = {−T, ..., T } is
the sequence of treatment effects, and hence maps out the impulse response. We sort trades into quartiles, within a trader’s account, according
to their distance from the leverage-constraint. The omitted coefficient is the interaction between US trader and the indicator for the fourth
quartile in distance prior to the leverage-constraint. We restrict this sample to traders that use greater than 50:1 leverage on at least one trade
prior to the leverage-constraint. Standard errors are double-clustered by day and trader, and the dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals
around the point estimate of β j .

−1.5

−1.0

−0.5

0

0.5

1.0

Treatment effect of CFTC regulation capping leverage provision, using trade time
Dep var: per−trade ROI

−3

−2

−1

1

2

3

Trade−time quartiles, pre− and post−leverage constraint (w/ in trader’s account)

xvi

4

Fig. A.5. Placebo test for the effect of the leverage-constraint
Description, Panel A: This figure illustrates the placebo exercise described in Section ?? and below.

May 3, 2009

Dec 1, 2010

Sep 1, 2010

2009

1997

2010

2006

Oct 18, 2010
Aug 1, 2009

May 3, 2009

Actual DF Compliance Date

June 15, 2009

False DF Compliance Date
Aug 8, 2009

May 10, 2009
June 22, 2009

False DF Compliance Date
Repeat 70 Total Times

Aug 29, 2010

Description, Panel B: This figure plots kernel density estimates using the Epanechnikov kernel function and a histogram of β1 ’s from a series
of placebo tests for the effect of the CFTC regulation on trading outcomes. We run the following regression 70 times
Y j i t = γi + γt + β1 US traderi × post constraintt + β2 trade j i t + ε j i t
collecting the coefficient, β1 after each iteration. For each iteration, we change the date of post constraint, starting from Sunday, May 3, 2009
rolling forward a week at a time until Aug 29, 2010. Prior to each iteration, we trim the sample using the procedure described in Section 3. This
restricts the sample to include only traders that execute trades before and after the false date for post constraint.

Dep var: per−trade leverage above 50:1 (=1)

Dep var: per−trade ROI

Placebo coefficients
Kernel density
Actual coef. estimate

−.06

−.04

Placebo coefficients
Kernel density
Actual coef. estimate

−.02

0

.02

xvii

−.4

−.2

0

.2

.4

Table A.6
The Announcement of Regulation and Trade-Level Outcomes
Description: This table reports OLS estimates of the following regression:
Y j i t = γi + γt + β1 US traderi × post announcementt + β2 trade j i t + ε j i t
where i is a trader, j is a trade, and t is a day (trades are recorded by the second). In Panel A, the dependent variable is trade uses leverage
> 50:1, which equals one if the trade uses at least 10:1 leverage. In Panels B and C, the dependent variable is ROI, which is per-trade return
on investment. US trader equals one if the trade is executed by a trader located in the U.S. and equal to zero if located in Europe. Post
announcement equals one if the trade was opened after the CFTC’s announcement in the Federal Registrar on January 13, 2010 of their intent
to restrict traders’ leverage to 10:1, zero otherwise. High leverage trader equals one if trader i uses at least 50:1 leverage on at least one trade prior
to the CFTC regulation, zero otherwise. The sample period is from December 1, 2009 to March 1, 2010. Standard errors are double-clustered by
day and trader, and *, **, and *** denote significance levels p < 0.10 , p < 0.05 , and p < 0.01, respectively.

Panel A: The January 2010 Regulation Announcement and High-Leverage Trading
dep var: trade uses leverage > 10:1 (=1)
(1a)
(2a)
(3a)
(4a)
0.0443
0.0169
0.0205
0.0203
US trader (=1) × post announcement (=1)
(0.033)

(0.030)

(0.026)
0.144***
(0.017)

x
x

x
x
x
166,985
0.56

x
x
x
166,985
0.61

log(trade size)
log(holding period)
trader FE
day FE
broker-pair FE
Number of trades
R2

167,035
0.54

(0.026)
0.143***
(0.017)
-0.00299
(0.0023)
x
x
x
166,985
0.61

Panel B: The Regulation Announcement and Performance, using Euro control group
dep var: per-trade ROI
(1b)
(2b)
(3b)
(4b)
US trader (=1) × post announcement (=1) 0.00425
-0.0125
-0.0152
-0.0236
(0.075)

(0.079)

(0.078)
-0.0649
(0.047)

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
166,985
0.057

x
x
x
x
x
166,985
0.057

log(trade size)
log(holding period)
trader FE
day FE
currency risk-free rate differential
std dev of trader’s weekly returns
broker-pair FE
Number of trades
R2

167,035
0.053

Panel C: Performance; Alternative Control Group – High- vs. Low-Leverage Traders
dep var: per-trade ROI
(1c)
(2c)
(3c)
high leverage trader (=1) × post announcement (=1) -0.0544
-0.0696
-0.0763
(0.072)

(0.075)

(0.075)
-0.0655
(0.047)

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
166,985
0.057

x
x
x
x
x
166,985
0.057

log(trade size)
log(holding period)
trader FE
day FE
currency risk-free rate differential
std dev of trader’s weekly returns
broker-pair FE
Number of trades
R2

167,035
0.053

xviii

(0.081)
-0.0946*
(0.048)
-0.103***
(0.017)
x
x
x
x
x
166,985
0.060

(4c)
-0.0665
(0.076)
-0.0950*
(0.048)
-0.103***
(0.017)
x
x
x
x
x
166,985
0.060

Appendix A.7: Alternative Treatment Groups for Tests of Brokerage Capital
Table 6 shows that the CFTC regulation reducing the provision of leverage to retail traders reduced the
amount of capital held by brokerages. The table establishes this finding by comparing CFTC-regulated brokerages that have retail forex obligations to those that do not. However, a plausible concern with this test is that –
despite having similar trends prior to the regulation – brokerages without forex obligations are different in unobservable ways, and are therefore not suitable to be a control group. Brokerages with and without forex brokerages
could diverge following the regulation because of factors that are unrelated to the leverage restrictions. We address
this concern by showing that the regulation has the strongest effect on brokerages that provided more leverage to
traders prior to the regulation.
To do so, the following variation on Table 6 sorts brokerages into the amount of leverage they offer traders.
We define brokerages as high leverage (low leverage) if they were providing traders with above (less than) 400:1
leverage around the time of the October 2010 CFTC regulation. We assign brokerages to these classifications by
manually searching internet archives, and most of the brokerages were listed on the website: www.100forexbrokers.com.32
We choose 400:1 leverage as a cutoff, because the website specifies 400:1 as the minimum for a broker’s inclusion
in their list of “high leverage brokers”. Seven brokerages classify as high leverage and sixteen as low leverage.
Columns (1) and (2) of Table A.7 run difference-in-difference regressions that compare high leverage brokerages against brokerages without forex obligations. Columns (3) and (4) use low leverage brokerages. The dependent
variable is log brokerage excess capital. The point estimate on the difference-in-difference coefficient is between
-0.36 and -0.51 for the high leverage brokerages and -0.19 to 0.23 for low leverage brokerages. These estimates are
close to being significant at the 10% level. The lack of statistical significance is presumably due to having few brokerages with forex obligations after conducting the sample splits. Regardless, the effect of the constraint is larger
for brokerages that provide more leverage, consistent with the CFTC regulation affecting brokerage excess capital
through its effect on retail trader leverage.
Table A.7
Leverage-Constraints and the Excess Capital of High-Leverage-Brokerages
Description: This table reports OLS estimates of the regression
log(excess capital)bt = γb + γt + β1 FX brokerb × post constraintt + εbt ,
where b is a broker and t is a month. The data comes from monthly CFTC Futures Commission Merchants Financial Reports. Excess capital is
the capital in excess of the regulatory requirement, for each brokerage in the CFTC data set. FX broker equals one if the brokerage has any retail
forex obligations after they were required to report these obligations starting in November 2010. Post constraint equals one in months starting
in November 2010, and zero otherwise. Appendix 7 describes how FX brokerages are sorted into high- and low-leverage. Standard errors are
double-clustered by broker and month, and *, ** and *** denote significance at the p < 0.1, p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 levels, respectively.

dep var: brokerage excess capital
FX broker high leverage (=1) × post constraint (=1)

(1)∗
-0.367
(0.29)

(2)∗
-0.512
(0.36)

FX broker low leverage (=1) × post constraint (=1)
log net capital requirement
brokerage FE
month FE
N (broker-month)
Number of high (or low) leverage brokers
R2

x
x
1,332
7
0.99

-0.274
(0.17)
x
x
1,332
7
0.99

(3)†

(4)†

-0.234**
(0.12)

-0.190
(0.13)
-0.292
(0.18)
x
x
1,427
16
0.99

x
x
1,427
16
0.99

∗ sample includes high-leverage FX brokerages and CFTC regulated brokerages w/ no-FX obligations
† sample includes low-leverage FX brokerages and CFTC regulated brokerages w/ no-FX obligations

32 An alternative approach to this classification would be to assign brokerages to high leverage or low leverage using the amount of leverage
used by traders in the myForexBook data set. However, there are only seven brokerages that are common to the CFTC’s data set and the
myForexBook data set.

xix

Appendix A.8: Trader Flows
This section tests for the effect of the leverage-constraint on the entry and exit rates of traders into the retail
forex market. Unfortunately, the CFTC brokerage reports do not list the number of trader accounts. So, we use
the myForexBook account-level data set to approximate account flows. We define trader entry as the first month
a trader is in the data. We define trader exit as the last month that they trade. We then collapse the indicators for
trader entry and exit to the brokerage-month-location level, where location is either traders from the U.S. or from
Europe.
Table A.8 presents difference-in-differences regressions that compare the number of new (or exiting) U.S.
traders to European traders, as a result of the leverage-constraint. The logarithm of new traders is the dependent
variable in columns (1) and (2), and the logarithm of exiting traders is the dependent variable in columns (3) and
(4). The coefficient of interest is the interaction of post constraint and US traders – an indicator that equals one if
the traders come from the U.S. and zero if they come from Europe. The regressions include month, brokerage, and
trader location fixed effects. Columns (2) and (4) have brokerage fixed effects interacted with a time trend, which
accounts for the possibility that the growth and exit rates of new traders can vary by brokerage. This also helps
control for the unconditional growth rate of the membership of the myForexBook website during this period (the
website started in 2009 and its population grew to a peak of around 10,000 traders by the middle of 2011).
The leverage-constraint caused a reduction in trader inflows for new U.S. traders. The constraint reduced
trader outflows, but the estimate is not statistically distinguishable from zero. Moreover, the reduction in inflows
of U.S. traders is larger than the reduction in outflows. The difference-in-difference coefficient for trader inflows is
-0.118, and the sample average of monthly inflows is 1.21, which suggests a 0.118 / 1.21 = 9.8% reduction in inflows.
Using the same calculation, the reduction in outflows is 8.5%. Furthermore, columns (2) and (4) use distributed
lags around the regulation date to test for pre-trends. The effect of inflows is close to zero before the regulation,
but the coefficient falls to around -0.1 persistently thereafter. On the other hand, the effect on outflows is noisy
around the regulation date.
Table A.8
The Effect of the Leverage Regulation on Trader Flows
Description: This table uses account level data from the myForexBook data set collapsed to observations at the level of brokerage, month, and
the geography of traders within the brokerage. It reports OLS estimates of the regression
log(number of traders)bg t = γb + γg + γt + β1 US flowsg × post constraintt + εbg t ,
where b is a broker, g is trader geography (either U.S. or Europe), and t is a month. US flows equals one if the number of traders are from
the U.S. and equal to zero if they are from Europe. Post constraint equals one in months starting in November 2010, and zero otherwise. The
sample period is May 2010 to April 2011 Standard errors are double-clustered by broker and month, and *, ** and *** denote significance at the
p < 0.1, p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 levels, respectively.

dep var:
US flows (=1) × post constraint (=1)
US flows (=1) × Sept 2010 (=1)
US flows (=1) × Oct 2010 (=1)
US flows (=1) × Nov 2010 (=1)
US flows (=1) × Dec 2010 (=1)
US flows (=1) × Jan 2011 (=1)
month FE
US flows FE
brokerage FE
time trend × broker FE
mean of dependent variable
Broker-month-trading region obs.
R2

trader inflows
log(# new traders + 1)
(1)
(2)
-0.118*
(0.065)
0.0160
(0.072)
-0.0122
(0.14)
-0.101
(0.066)
-0.141***
(0.044)
-0.104
(0.061)
x
x
x
x
x
x
1.21
1.48
393
286
0.75
0.87

xx

trader outflows
log(# exiting traders + 1)
(3)
(4)
-0.134
(0.080)
-0.0459
(0.042)
0.111***
(0.019)
0.0258
(0.072)
0.136
(0.090)
-0.0699***
(0.0063)
x
x
x
x
x
x
1.57
1.81
345
260
0.78
0.84

