                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE INTERGENERATIONAL EFFECTS OF PARENTAL INCARCERATION

                                          Will Dobbie
                                         Hans Grönqvist
                                         Susan Niknami
                                         Mårten Palme
                                          Mikael Priks

                                      Working Paper 24186
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24186


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2018




We thank Manudeep Bhuller, Stephen Billings, Leah Platt Boustan, Hank Farber, Randi
Hjalmarsson, Alan Krueger, Ilyana Kuziemko, Matthew Lindquist, Alex Mas, Joseph Murray,
David Price, Torsten Santavirta, Christopher Wildeman, Crystal Yang, Owen Zidar, and
numerous seminar participants for helpful comments and suggestions. Kevin DeLuca, Nicole
Gandre, Disa Hynsjo, James Reeves, Amy Wickett, and numerous students in Sweden provided
excellent research assistance. Ann-Sofie Arvidsson, Malcolm Pettersson, and many others
provided invaluable help in answering our questions about the institutional context. Funding for
this project was provided by FORTE and Handelsbankens forskningsstiftelser. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Will Dobbie, Hans Grönqvist, Susan Niknami, Mårten Palme, and Mikael Priks. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Intergenerational Effects of Parental Incarceration
Will Dobbie, Hans Grönqvist, Susan Niknami, Mårten Palme, and Mikael Priks
NBER Working Paper No. 24186
January 2018
JEL No. J13,J24,J62,K14,K42

                                         ABSTRACT

We estimate the causal effect of parental incarceration on children’s medium-run outcomes using
administrative data from Sweden. Our empirical strategy exploits exogenous variation in parental
incarceration from the random assignment of criminal defendants to judges with different
incarceration tendencies. We find that the incarceration of a parent in childhood leads to
significant increases in teen crime and pregnancy and a significant decrease in early-life
employment. The effects are concentrated among children from the most disadvantaged families,
where teen crime increases by 18 percentage points, teen pregnancy increases by 8 percentage
points, and employment at age 20 decreases by 28 percentage points. In contrast, there are no
detectable effects among children from more advantaged families. These results imply that the
incarceration of parents with young children may increase the intergenerational persistence of
poverty and criminal behavior, even in affluent countries with extensive social safety nets.

Will Dobbie                                    Mårten Palme
Industrial Relations Section                   Department of Economics
Louis A. Simpson International Bldg.           Stockholm University
Princeton University                           SE-106 91 Stockholm
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098                       SWEDEN
and NBER                                       and IZA
wdobbie@princeton.edu                          Marten.Palme@ne.su.se

Hans Grönqvist                                 Mikael Priks
Uppsala University and IFAU                    Department of Economics
Department of Economics                        Stockholm University
75120                                          SE-106 91 Stockholm
Uppsala                                        SWEDEN
Sweden                                         mikael.priks@ne.su.se
hans.gronqvist@nek.uu.se

Susan Niknami
Stockholm University
SOFI
10691
Stockholm
Sweden
susan.niknami@sofi.su.se
    There has been a dramatic rise in the number of children growing up with an incarcerated
parent. In the United States, for example, the proportion of children with an incarcerated father on
any given day has nearly doubled over the last twenty-five years, increasing from 1.3% of children
in 1990 to 2.2% of children in 2015. The proportion of children with an incarcerated father has also
roughly doubled in most European countries over this time period, albeit from a much lower level.1
Poor children are particularly likely to grow up with an incarcerated parent, with approximately
12.5% of low-income children in the United States having a parent incarcerated at some point during
their childhood.2 These trends have fueled a long-standing debate on the causal effects of parental
incarceration on children. Children growing up with an incarcerated parent fare worse than those
without an incarcerated parent on a wide range of economic, behavioral, and educational outcomes
(e.g., Murray, Farrington, and Sekol 2012). Existing studies, however, have been unable to separate
the causal effects of parental incarceration from pre-existing risk factors such as living in an unstable
or abusive home, attending a low-quality school, and growing up in a high-crime neighborhood (e.g.,
Wildeman and Western 2010).
    In this paper, we estimate the causal effect of parental incarceration on children’s medium-run
outcomes in the context of the Swedish criminal justice system. Our work draws on two strengths
of the Swedish setting. First, Swedish administrative data allow us to measure the impacts of
parental incarceration for individuals who were between the ages of 11 and 14 at the time of their
parent’s trial and whose outcomes we observe in each year up to age 20. We observe a wide range
of important outcomes in the data, including teen criminal convictions, teen pregnancies, high
school graduation, welfare receipt at age 20, and formal sector earnings and employment at age 20.
The second strength of our setting is that we are able to isolate exogenous variation in parental
incarceration using the random assignment of defendants to judges who differ systematically in their
stringency. We measure judge stringency using a leave-out measure based on all other cases that

   1
      The available data suggest that the share of children with an incarcerated father in most European countries
is about one-seventh the equivalent number in the United States in any given year, with slightly lower rates in the
Nordic countries. The available data vary considerably across countries, however, with parental incarceration rates in
many countries being imputed using the number of male prisoners and the likelihood of each prisoner being a father.
See Wildeman and Western (2010) and Children of Prisoners Europe (2017) for additional details on these data for
the United States and Europe, respectively.
    2
      Low-income is defined as having a total household income below the federal poverty line. Information on the
cumulative risk of parental incarceration, both overall and by subsample, is not available in most European countries.
In our data, we find that approximately 6.5% of low-income children in Sweden have a parent incarcerated at some
point during their childhood compared to only 1.9% of all children. In Denmark, Wildeman and Andersen (2015)
similarly find that 1.5% of children experience paternal imprisonment, while 8.8% experience paternal incarceration
when including jail stays of less than 24 hours. See Wildeman and Western (2010) and Murphey and Cooper (2015)
for additional details on the U.S. data and Wildeman and Andersen (2015) for a comparison of the cumulative risks
of paternal incarceration in the United States and other developed countries.


                                                          1
a judge has handled during the same year. This leave-out stringency measure is highly predictive
of parental incarceration decisions, but uncorrelated with case and family characteristics. Using
our judge stringency measure as an instrumental variable (IV) for parental incarceration, we can
identify the causal effect of parental incarceration for children whose parents are at the margin of
incarceration compared to children whose parents were convicted but not incarcerated.3
    Using this empirical strategy, we find that the assignment of a parent to a more stringent judge
leads to significant increases in teen crime and pregnancy and a significant decrease in early-life
employment. Under the stronger assumptions necessary to use judge stringency as an instrumental
variable, we estimate that parental incarceration increases teen convictions by 9.9 percentage points
(41.8%), increases teen pregnancies by 6.0 percentage points (200.0%), and decreases employment
at age 20 by 16.5 percentage points (23.7%). The only outcome that is not substantially impacted
by parental incarceration in the full sample is high school graduation, which decreases by only a
statistically insignificant 1.3 percentage points (3.4%). We find larger effects for first-time cases
and cases involving mothers, but large standard errors mean that not all of the differences are
statistically significant. We also find that our instrumental variables estimates are systematically
larger than the corresponding OLS estimates, suggesting that there are particularly large effects of
parental incarceration for cases where judges disagree on the appropriate sentence.
    The negative effects of parental incarceration on children are driven almost entirely by children
from the most disadvantaged families. We measure family disadvantage using an index of baseline
education, employment, criminal history, and drug and alcohol abuse for both biological parents.
For children from the most disadvantaged families, parental incarceration increases teen convictions
by 18.4 percentage points (71.0%), increases teen pregnancies by 8.0 percentage points (222.2%),
and decreases employment at age 20 by 27.9 percentage points (41.8%). By comparison, there are no
detectable effects of parental incarceration among children from advantaged families for any of our
outcomes. There is more suggestive evidence that the characteristics of the non-convicted parent
are at least as important as those of the incarcerated parent, with the largest point estimates for
children whose non-convicted parent has a criminal history or a history of drug and alcohol abuse.
These findings add to a growing body of evidence that disadvantaged children are more sensitive

   3
     Our IV strategy is similar to that used in prior work to estimate the intergenerational effects of parental DI
receipt in Norway (Dahl, Kostøl, and Mogstad 2014) and the impact of incarceration on an individual’s own outcomes
in the United States (Mueller-Smith 2015) and Norway (Bhuller et al. 2016). In other related work using a random-
judge design, all from the United States, Kling (2006) estimates the impact of sentence length, Aizer and Doyle (2015)
estimate the impact of juvenile incarceration, and Dobbie, Goldin, and Yang (forthcoming) estimate the impact of
pre-trial incarceration.


                                                          2
to shocks such as growing up in a bad neighborhood (e.g., Wilson 1996, Harding 2003, Wodtke,
Elwert, and Harding 2016), parental job loss (Oreopoulos, Page, and Stevens 2008, Coelli 2011),
parental death (Adda, Björklund, and Holmlund 2011), and parental EITC transfers (Dahl and
Lochner 2012).
    In sharp contrast to the results for children, the negative effects of incarceration on a parent’s
own outcomes are concentrated among the most advantaged families. For these households, incarcer-
ation decreases parental employment over the next six years by 24.5 percentage points (35.9%) and
the probability that the parent lives in a two-adult household by 45.8 percentage points (102.0%).
By comparison, there are small and imprecisely estimated effects of incarceration on parental em-
ployment and family structure among the most disadvantaged families, i.e., the families where the
effects on children’s outcomes are most concentrated. In other words, we find a negative correla-
tion between the effects on children’s outcomes and the effects on a parent’s own outcomes across
different samples.4
    The results from our analysis suggest that the incarceration of parents with young children
significantly increases the intergenerational persistence of poverty and criminal behavior, even in
affluent countries with extensive social safety nets. Putting our results together, the negative effects
of parental incarceration can be explained by the particular sensitivity of disadvantaged children
to the trauma of having a parent sent to prison, not the increase in single-parent households or
the loss of family income following an incarceration spell. These findings are consistent with recent
work arguing that the negative effects of parental incarceration come from both the initial shock of
losing a parent to prison and the cycle of imprisonment and release that often follows, not changes
in economic resources or family structure (e.g., Wildeman 2010, Murray, Loeber, and Pardini 2012).
Our findings are also consistent with recent evidence showing that positive wealth shocks have little
effect on children’s medium-run outcomes in either the United States (Jacob, Kapustin, and Ludwig
2015) or Sweden (Cesarini et al. 2016).
    We conclude by using our new estimates to calculate the net social cost of parental incarceration.
In our social cost calculation, we account for the costs of future child crime, pregnancy, and welfare
receipt, the costs of future parental crime and welfare receipt, and the direct economic impacts
on both parents and their children. We also account for the average number of children in each

   4
      The null result of incarceration on parental employment among the most disadvantaged families may be partially
due to floor effects, as only 29.8% of parents from these families are employed following an incarceration spell. These
floor effects are unlikely to explain the effects on family structure, however, as 66.7% of parents from these families
live in a two-adult household following an incarceration spell.


                                                          3
family in our sample (2.767) and discount all benefits and costs back to the time of the trial using a
discount rate of 3%. We estimate that the social cost of parental incarceration at the margin is over
$300,000 per family, with just over half of these social costs coming from the effects on children’s
outcomes. In other words, we find that the costs of incarcerating a parent are roughly double the
costs of incarcerating a non-parent.
   These social cost estimates likely represent a lower bound on the costs of parental incarceration
in settings such as the United States. The criminal justice system in Sweden is broadly similar to
other Nordic countries, but considerably less punitive than the criminal justice systems in most other
countries, including the United States. Like the other Nordic countries, Sweden also has a much
more generous social welfare system than most other countries, likely ameliorating at least some of
the adverse consequences of parental incarceration. Consistent with this theory, intergenerational
correlations of both poverty and criminal behavior are weaker in Sweden than in other developed
countries (e.g., Björklund and Jäntti 1997, Murray, Janson, and Farrington 2007).
   Our results contribute to an important literature estimating the impact of parental incarceration
on children’s outcomes (see Wildeman and Western 2010 and Murray et al. 2012 for recent reviews).
Parental incarceration has been linked to children’s academic problems (e.g., Foster and Hagan 2007,
Cho 2009a, Cho 2009b), infant mortality (e.g., Wildeman et al. 2014), behavioral and mental health
problems (e.g., Murray and Farrington 2005, Wildeman 2010), and criminal behavior (e.g., Johnson
2009, Hjalmarsson and Lindquist 2011, Hjalmarsson and Lindquist 2012). Three recent papers
go beyond these associations to estimate the causal effect of parental incarceration on children.
Wildeman and Andersen (2016) find significant effects of paternal incarceration on the criminal
behavior of boys, but not girls, using variation from a Danish reform that decreased the risk of
incarceration for some crimes. Conversely, Billings (2017) finds that paternal incarceration decreases
school behavioral problems in the United States after accounting for child fixed effects. Finally,
Bhuller et al. (forthcoming) find imprecise effects of paternal incarceration on children’s criminal
activity and school performance in Norway using a random-judge design similar to our own.
   This paper is also related to a large literature examining the determinants of youth crime and
delinquent behavior. There are significant peer effects on youth criminal behavior within neigh-
borhoods (e.g., Kling, Ludwig, and Katz 2005, Sciandra et al. 2013, Damm and Dustmann 2014),
schools (e.g., Billings, Deming, and Rockoff 2013), and juvenile corrections facilities (e.g., Bayer,
Hjalmarsson, and Pozen 2009). Criminal behavior among youth is also affected by educational at-
tainment (e.g., Lochner and Moretti 2004, Anderson 2014, Hjalmarsson, Holmlund, and Lindquist


                                                  4
2015, Cook and Kang 2016), school quality (e.g., Deming 2011, Dobbie and Fryer 2015), the home
environment (e.g., Doyle 2008), birth order (e.g., Breining et al. 2017), and parental education (e.g.,
Meghir, Palme, and Schnabel 2012).
   The paper is structured as follows. Section I provides a brief overview of the Swedish criminal
justice system, describes how criminal court cases are assigned to courtrooms, and compares the
criminal justice systems in Sweden with other developed countries. Section II describes our data
and sample restrictions. Section III describes our empirical strategy. Section IV presents the results,
Section V examines potential mechanisms, and Section VI concludes. An online appendix provides
additional results.


                         I. The Swedish Criminal Justice System

In this section, we describe the aspects of the criminal justice system in Sweden that are most
relevant for our study. We also discuss the most important differences between Sweden and other
developed countries and how these differences may impact the external validity of our estimates.


                                    A. The Swedish Court System

The criminal court system in Sweden consists of three levels: the district court, the court of appeals,
and the supreme court. The vast majority of criminal cases are settled at the district court level,
where each district court is generally responsible for all cases originating in its jurisdiction. In this
paper, we focus on criminal cases tried in any of the 48 district courts in Sweden. Appendix Table
A1 provides additional details on each of the district courts in our data. The largest district courts
are located in large cities, such as Stockholm and Uppsala, and have 20 to 45 judges, while the
smallest courts are located in more rural areas and only have a few judges.
   District courts in Sweden are usually divided into divisions (avdelningar ) and then sections
(rotlar ), although some small courts are only divided into sections. Each section consists of one
professional judge, one clerk, and a number of administrative personnel. District court judges are
appointed for life and can only lose their jobs if they are convicted of a serious crime. Prior to
their appointment, district court judges must have a law degree but are not required to have any
prior experience working in the court system. Each district court also maintains a large pool of
politically-appointed lay jurors (nämndemän) that serve a similar function as juries in the American
system. Each lay juror works approximately 10 to 15 days per year, with the assignment of lay jurors



                                                   5
to both cases and judges being essentially random (Anwar, Bayer, and Hjalmarsson forthcoming).5
    In most district court trials, both the verdict and sentence are decided by one professional judge
and three lay jurors. Following the hearing, the judge summarizes the facts of the case and any
relevant laws for the three lay jurors. The judge and three lay jurors then discuss the possible
decisions, including the verdict and sentence. If the judge and the lay jurors disagree on the verdict,
a vote is held to determine the outcome of the case. The votes of the judge and lay jurors have
equal weight, but the judge holds the tiebreaker if there is no clear majority. If a defendant is found
guilty, there is a second vote to determine the sentence, with the least severe option chosen if there
is an even split between different sentencing options (e.g., probation rather than incarceration).
    Appendix Figure A1 provides additional details on how suspected crimes are processed in Swe-
den’s criminal justice system. If there is suspicion of a crime, then a preliminary investigation
is undertaken by the police or a prosecutor. The prosecutor then decides whether the individual
should be charged with a crime and whether the case should advance to a court trial.6 Of these
charged cases, 77% result in a court trial. The other charged cases are typically settled without a
trial, usually because the suspect has confessed to a petty crime. A small number of charged crimes
result in no prosecution, trial, or penalty, usually because the defendant is under 18 years of age.
Once a case proceeds to trial, it is assigned to a judge in the relevant court. Of these court trials,
23% result in incarceration, 37% in a fine, 24% in probation, and in only 6% of cases, the defendant
is found not guilty.
    One important advantage of the Swedish criminal justice system compared to other countries is
the absence of plea bargaining. In the United States, for example, criminal defendants often know
the assigned judge before deciding whether to plead guilty to a charge in exchange for a reduced
sentence, a process known as “bargaining under the shadow of the judge.” The fact that these
types of pre-trial agreements are not taking place in our setting simplifies the interpretation of our
estimates using the assigned judge as an instrument for parental incarceration.



    5
      Specifically, lay jurors indicate their availability for different fixed dates in the upcoming year (e.g., the first
Monday of each month). Lay jurors are then assigned specific dates in advance of any knowledge about the cases to
be tried on those dates. For each date, a court administrator then forms juror triplets, with some attempt to balance
gender, age, and political party. Finally, the court coordinator assigns each juror triplet to a courtroom scheduled
to be in session in a quasi-random fashion. See Anwar et al. (forthcoming) for additional details on lay jurors in
Sweden.
    6
      There are 32 local prosecution offices in Sweden. Within each office, there are a number of teams working
on different types of crime. The allocation to a specific prosecutor within a team is based on time available and
experience. Apart from the 32 local prosecution offices, four national offices work only special cases (e.g., corruption)
and three national offices work only on international cases.


                                                            6
                                      B. Assignment of Cases to Judges

During our sample period, nearly all criminal cases were randomly allocated to the sections (and
hence judges) within each district court by government decree (Förordning (1996:381) med tingsrättsin-
struktion, §9). The random assignment of cases was meant to ensure that each section received an
equal number of cases, with no consideration of the scope or complexity of the case. The random-
ization of cases to sections was executed by the computer program MÅHS.7
    The government decree allowed for some exceptions from the randomization procedure described
above. These exceptions often included cases involving youth defendants and cases involving the
least serious crimes (e.g., traffic offenses). Often, cases involving the most serious crimes (e.g.,
murder, rape) were also assigned outside of the MÅHS program to ensure that both the judge
and prosecutor have enough experience for the case. In practice, these exceptions meant that the
randomization of cases to court sections typically occurred within crime type and age group during
our sample period. As discussed below, we therefore account for both defendant age and crime type
when calculating our measure of judge stringency.8


                                   C. Comparison to the Other Countries

The criminal justice system in Sweden is broadly similar to many other developed countries, par-
ticularly other Nordic countries. In comparison, the United States is an outlier in most dimensions.
This section briefly reviews the differences most relevant to our analysis.

Incarceration Rates: Appendix Figure A2 plots incarceration rates per 100,000 individuals in Swe-
den, the United States, and all remaining European and North American OECD countries. The
incarceration rate in Sweden has been relatively stable over the last 35 years, increasing from 55
individuals per 100,000 in 1980 to 79 individuals per 100,000 in 2006, then falling back to 61 indi-
viduals per 100,000 in 2014. Incarceration rates in other OECD countries have followed a largely
similar trend over time, albeit from a slightly higher base. In stark contrast, incarceration rates in
the United States increased from 220 individuals per 100,000 in 1980 to 693 individuals per 100,000

   7
      The exact procedure used to randomize cases to sections varied somewhat across the different courts in our
sample. In smaller courts, cases were usually randomly assigned to sections directly. In larger courts, however,
cases were usually randomly assigned first to departments, then to sections. In both scenarios, cases are effectively
randomized to sections.
    8
      Information on the case assignment process during our sample period is available in numerous publicly available
court documents. We were able to independently confirm the details of the case assignment process during this time
period through informal conversations with judges and court administrators and hand-collected district court work
orders (Arbetsordningarna) documenting the assignment processes in each court.


                                                         7
by 2014.9
    Sentence lengths are also considerably shorter in Sweden compared to the United States. Condi-
tional on any incarceration, the median prison sentence in our sample is only 3.0 months, and more
than 80% of sentences are shorter than one year. The actual time served is also much less than
the recorded sentences, as nearly all prisoners receive probation after two-thirds of the sentence if
there are no extraordinary circumstances. In contrast, the typical prison sentence is 6.8 months in
Western Europe (Aebi, Tiago, and Burkhardt 2015) and 2.9 years in the United States (Pew Center
2011).

Prison and Post-Prison Supports: Similar to the other Nordic countries, the Swedish criminal justice
system offers an extensive set of prison and post-prison supports meant to rehabilitate incarcerated
individuals. Upon their incarceration, prisoners work with the prison staff to develop a personalized
plan for their prison sentence. The prison staff use information on each prisoner’s socioeconomic
background, education, housing, family, drug addictions, and so on when developing the personalized
incarceration plan. Swedish prisoners are also required to participate in some combination of work,
education, treatment, vocational training, or parental skills training during their incarceration, and
all Swedish prisons offer formal educational services and programs in self-management and self-
control. In addition, Swedish prisons offer prisoners extensive free medical services, with basic
medical services provided by a full-time nursing staff, and more specialized services provided by
visiting general practitioners and psychiatrists. Most prisons also provide accommodation where
family members can stay free of charge for weekends with the prisoner without supervision.
    Swedish prisons take a number of steps just prior to prisoners’ release to ease readjustment to
general society and reduce recidivism. For example, many prisoners are allowed to work (for about
$1.50 per hour), receive treatment or education, or participate in training away from prison during
the day while remaining in residence at the prison. Some prisoners are even allowed to live at home
and go back to regular work near the end of their incarceration spell. There are also programs that
allow prisoners to receive treatment, normally for substance abuse, at their home rather than in
prison during this time. Finally, some inmates are allowed to live in halfway homes, run by the
   9
      There is a longstanding debate on reasons behind the low incarceration rate in the Nordic countries. This
debate has only intensified after the closure of four Swedish prisons due to low occupancy in 2013. One potential
reason for the low incarceration rate is that the Nordic countries tend to prioritize other forms of criminal sanctions
(e.g., community service, supervision, probation and mandatory treatment) above incarceration. As will be discussed
below, another possibility is the extensive post-prison supports provided by the Nordic countries (e.g., treatment
programs for offenders with drug/alcohol or violence issues). The Swedish Supreme Court also reduced the length of
prison sentences for serious drug offenses by more than a third in 2011, contributing to the falling incarceration rate
observed in Appendix Figure A2.


                                                          8
Prison and Probation Service, towards the end of their prison sentence to help bridge the gap from
incarceration to normal life.
   Appendix Figure A3 plots the estimated costs of incarcerating an inmate for one year in a
selected set of OECD countries. The annual cost per inmate in Sweden is over $140,000, about
the same as Norway but considerably higher than most other European countries. The high costs
in Sweden are largely due to the extensive prison supports described above, as well as a relatively
high ratio of guards to inmates. In contrast, costs per inmate are particularly low in the United
States at about $35,000 per year, in part due to the underfunding of prison supports and substantial
overcrowding in many prisons (e.g., Davis et al. 2013, Department of Justice 2015).

The Swedish Welfare State: Like the other Nordic countries, Sweden has a much more generous social
welfare system than most other developed countries. This social welfare system includes high-quality
health care and education programs for children and generous public income security programs for
adults. For example, health care is free for all children in Sweden, with nearly all children attending
regular check-ups to monitor their development. Child care is also highly subsidized, with about
90% of costs are covered by the state for most families. In addition, there is a flat rate child allowance
available to families and, from the age of six, every child has equal access to free education in their
local area and universities free of charge. Families are also eligible for a means-tested social aid
program that provides economic resources sufficient to keep them out of poverty as a last resort. All
of these programs are considerably more generous than the equivalent programs in most European
countries and the United States.10
   Despite the large welfare state, however, there are no specific supports provided to the children
of incarcerated parents in Sweden. There are no official efforts to even identify these children by
school or government administrators, and little is known about the well-being of these children (e.g.,
Kriminalvården 2015). In this way, Sweden is broadly similar to most other developed countries,
where there are few specific supports for the children of incarcerated parents.


                                               D. External Validity

Given the considerable differences between the criminal justice and social welfare systems in Sweden
and other developed countries, our results likely represent a lower bound on the consequences of
parental incarceration. For example, it is likely that the free health care, the high-quality education

  10
       See Johansson, Laun, and Palme (2014) for additional details on the Swedish social welfare system.


                                                          9
programs, and the more generous government transfers in Sweden ameliorate some of the adverse
consequences of parental incarceration. It is also likely that Sweden’s criminal justice system, with
comparatively short sentences, relatively family-friendly prisons, and an emphasis on rehabilitation,
mitigates some of the negative effects of incarceration for both parents and their children. On the
other hand, since incarceration is less common in Sweden than in many other countries, including
the United States, it may be perceived as more stigmatizing.
    Murray et al. (2007) find a much weaker correlation between parental incarceration and child
delinquency in Sweden than in other European countries, supporting the hypothesis of weaker long-
term effects of incarceration in Sweden than in other countries. Growing up in a poor neighborhood
is also less harmful in Sweden than in the United States (Åslund et al. 2011) and, perhaps as a
result, intergenerational mobility is also considerably higher in Sweden than in the United States
(Björklund and Jäntti 1997). On the other hand, we find that incarceration has a very similar effect
on an individual’s own labor market outcomes in Sweden as in the United States (Mueller-Smith
2015), suggesting that the effects on children may be similar as well.11


                                                      II. Data

                                  A. Data Sources and Sample Construction

Our empirical analysis uses several administrative datasets that we can link through unique personal
identification numbers for each individual. The merged dataset covers all Swedish residents born
between 1940 and 1985, along with their parents and children.
    Information on criminal behavior and court cases comes from the conviction register provided
by the Swedish National Council for Crime Prevention (see www.bra.se). The crime data include
information on all convictions between 1973 and 2010. We observe the date of the crime, the date of
conviction, the type of crime committed, the sentence imposed by the court, and unique identifiers
for judges, defendants, and district courts. For children, crime outcomes are only available from
age 15. We merge these data to information on family linkages contained in the multi-generation
register created and maintained by Statistics Sweden (Statistics Sweden 2017).


   11
     Our results may also differ from those in other countries if there are differences in what types of cases are at
the margin of incarceration. Given the comparative leniency of the Swedish criminal justice system, it seems likely
that parents at the margin of incarceration in Sweden are more negatively selected than parents at the margin of
incarceration in other countries. However, it is not clear how the effects of parental incarceration will differ at these
other margins and, as mentioned above, there are nearly identical effects of incarceration on an individual’s own labor
market outcomes in Sweden and the United States.


                                                           10
   The multi-generation register contains the personal identification numbers for all individuals
born in Sweden starting in or after 1932 along with the personal identification numbers of each
individual’s parents and children. We then merge these datasets to the LISA register provided by
Statistics Sweden (Statistics Sweden 2016). The LISA data contains rich longitudinal data that
includes outcomes for every Swedish resident from 1990 to 2010. For each year, the data contain
information on the entire families’ earnings and transfers from the tax registers, and information
on educational attainment after age 16 from the education register. We convert all nominal values
in the LISA data to U.S. dollars using an exchange rate of eight Swedish Krona to one U.S. dollar.
   We make three restrictions to our estimation sample. First, we restrict the sample to criminal
cases occurring between January 1997 and December 2004. Prior to January 1997, criminal cases
did not have to be randomly assigned to judges. After December 2004, the data handling system
was changed and several courts abandoned the case assignment procedure that randomized cases to
judges. Second, we restrict the sample to sections who handle at least 50 criminal cases (of either
parents or non-parents) in a given year to reduce the noise in our judge stringency measure. Finally,
we restrict the sample to families with children between the ages of 11 and 14 as of the trial date so
that we observe each outcome for all children in our sample. The final estimation sample contains
45,425 cases from 604 sections and 55,324 children from 32,455 families. As discussed below, we
calculate judge stringency using cases of both parents and non-parents in our sample range in order
to reduce noise in the instrument. This larger sample contains 351,354 cases from the same 604
sections.


                                      B. Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 reports summary statistics for our estimation sample. Panel A presents demographic char-
acteristics for children in our estimation sample whose parents are and are not incarcerated following
their trial. In our sample, 51.5% of children are male and over 90% are Swedish born, with a slightly
higher proportion of native-born children among those with an incarcerated parent. The average
age is just under 12.5 years old for both those with and without an incarcerated parent.
   Panel B presents subsequent outcomes for children whose parents are and are not incarcerated.
Consistent with the strong intergenerational correlations documented in prior work (e.g., Wildeman
and Western 2010), children with an incarcerated parent have far worse outcomes than children
without an incarcerated parent. In our sample, for example, 23.7% of children with an incarcerated
parent are convicted of a crime between the ages of 15 and 17 compared to 19.0% of children


                                                 11
without an incarcerated parent. Over half of these convictions involve property crime, about a
quarter involve violent crime, and about 10% involve drug crime. For female children, 3.0% of
children with an incarcerated parent have a pregnancy between the ages of 15 and 17 compared to
2.3% of children without an incarcerated parent. High school graduation is low for both groups, with
only 38.7% of children with an incarcerated parent and 46.2% of children without an incarcerated
parent receiving a diploma by age 19.
   In terms of labor market outcomes, employment rates at age 20 are relatively high at 69.7% for
children with an incarcerated parent and 73.9% for children without an incarcerated parent. Formal
sector earnings are low, however, at just over $8,000 for both groups (including 0s). Welfare receipt
at age 20 is also relatively high, at 38.6% or children with an incarcerated parent and 30.3% for
children without an incarcerated parent. Taken together, these statistics indicate that children in
our sample have largely left the education system by age 20, with relatively high rates of formal
sector employment for such young individuals. However, the low earnings and high rates of welfare
receipt among these youth suggest relatively weak connections to the formal sector.
   Panel C presents demographic characteristics and baseline outcomes for the parent on trial.
Over 89% of incarcerated parents and 78.7% of non-incarcerated parents are male. Just over 69%
of both incarcerated and non-incarcerated parents are native born, with an average age of about
40 years old at the time of incarceration. Education levels are extremely low in our sample, with
only 11.8% of incarcerated parents and 21.5% of non-incarcerated parents having at least a high
school degree. Baseline outcomes are also extremely poor for parents in our sample, particularly
for the incarcerated parents. Sixty-eight percent of incarcerated parents have a prior conviction,
38.6% were employed at baseline, and average baseline earnings were only $6,775 (including 0s).
For non-incarcerated parents, 38.3% have a prior conviction, 58.9% were employed at baseline, and
average baseline earnings were $13,864.
   Finally, Panel D presents subsequent outcomes for the parent on trial. Over the next six years,
74.6% of incarcerated parents and 52.7% of non-incarcerated parents have a new criminal conviction.
Employment rates are only 32.5% for incarcerated parents and 54.9% for non-incarcerated parents
over the same time period, with welfare use at 51.0% for incarcerated parents and 33.9% for non-
incarcerated parents. The proportion of parents living in a single-adult household is also relatively
high, at 70.6% for incarcerated parents and 50.4% for non-incarcerated parents.




                                                 12
                                     III. Research Design

Overview: For individual i with parent p charged in case c in year t, consider a model that relates
outcomes such as teen crime to an indicator for whether the individual’s parent was incarcerated
during childhood, P risonpct :


                             Yipct = β0 + β1 P risonpct + β2 Xipct + εipct                        (1)


where Yipct is the outcome of interest for individual i, Xipct is a vector of case- and family-level
controls, and εipct is an error term. The key problem for inference is that OLS estimates of Equation
(1) are likely to be biased due to unobserved factors which are correlated across generations. For
example, criminal behavior could be correlated across generations due to unobservable variables
common to the parent and child, such as living in a bad neighborhood or attending a low-quality
school. The potential for this type of bias is suggested by the strong intergenerational links in
outcomes such as education (e.g., Currie and Moretti 2003, Björklund, Lindahl, and Plug 2006,
Holmlund, Lindahl, and Plug 2011, Lundborg, Nilsson, and Rooth 2014, Chetty et al. 2017) and
earnings (e.g., Lee and Solon 2009, Chetty et al. 2014, Chetty et al. 2017).
   To address this issue, we estimate the causal impact of parental incarceration using a leave-out
measure of judge stringency as an instrument for the incarceration of a parent in childhood. In
this specification, we interpret the reduced form impact of a parent being assigned to a more strict
judge as the causal effect of the change in the probability of incarceration associated with judge
assignment. This empirical design allows us to recover the local average treatment effect (LATE)
of parental incarceration for cases where judges disagree on the appropriate sentence.

Instrumental Variable Calculation: Following Dahl et al. (2014) and Dobbie et al. (forthcoming), we
construct our instrument using a residualized, leave-out measure of judge stringency that accounts
for court-by-year, court-by-age, and court-by-crime-type fixed effects. Including exhaustive court-
by-time, -age, and -crime-type effects effectively limits the comparison to defendants at risk of
being assigned to the same set of judges. We can therefore interpret the within-cell variation in
the instrument as variation in the propensity of a quasi-randomly assigned judge to incarcerate a
defendant relative to the otherwise similar cases seen in the same court and year. The use of a
residualized stringency measure, rather than a simple leave-out measure of judge stringency, allows
us to construct our instrument using all defendants, not just those with children in the estimation


                                                  13
sample. The larger sample means that our instrument is measured with considerably more precision,
particularly in smaller courts where there are a relatively small number of cases involving parents
each year. In unreported results, we find similar but less precise results when we calculate the
instrument using only our estimation sample.
    Formally, let the residual incarceration decision after removing the effect of court-by-time, -age,
and -crime-type fixed effects be denoted by:


                                  P rison∗pct = P risonpct − γXct = Zctj + εpct                                     (2)


where Xct includes the court-by-year, court-by-age, and court-by-crime-type fixed effects described
above.12 The residual incarceration decision, P rison∗pct , includes our measure of judge stringency
Zctj , as well as idiosyncratic defendant- and case-level variation εpct .
    For each parent p, we use these residual incarceration decisions to calculate the leave-out incar-
ceration rate of the assigned judge based on all other cases assigned in the same year:

                                                    ntj
                                                    X                        nptj                !
                                          1                                   X
                         Zptj =                            (P rison∗pkt ) −          (P rison∗pct )                 (3)
                                      ntj − nptj
                                                     k=0                      c=0


where ntj is the number of cases seen by judge j in year t and nptj is the number of cases of parent
p seen by judge j in year t. This leave-out measure is important for our analysis because regressing
outcomes for parent p on our judge stringency measure without leaving out the data from parent p
would introduce the same estimation errors on both the left- and right-hand side of the regression
and produce biased estimates of the causal impact of being incarcerated. We remove the residualized
incarceration decisions of all of an individual’s cases seen by judge j in each year, not just case c,
to remove all such estimation errors. In our two-stage least squares results, we use this leave-out
judge stringency measure, Zptj , as an instrumental variable for whether a parent is incarcerated.13
    We calculate our instrument across all defendants and cases (e.g., cases involving both male
and female defendants), but allow the instrument to vary across years in order to capture the fact
that judge tendencies tend to evolve over time. While we find that judge stringency is correlated

   12
      We construct crime-type controls using detailed information on each charge. We aggregate these charge data
into just over 500 separate charge types to flexibly control for crime type. Results are robust to more aggregate
codings of the crime-type variable.
   13
      Our leave-out mean measure is algebraically equivalent to a judge fixed effect estimated in a leave-out regression
estimated in each year. The leave-out procedure is essentially a reduced-form version of jackknife IV, which is
recommended when the number of instruments (the judge-by-year fixed effects) is likely to increase with sample size
(Stock, Wright, and Yogo 2002, Kolesár et al. 2015).


                                                            14
across the different years in our sample period, the correlation falls sharply with time (see Appendix
Table A2). We also find that judge stringency calculated using cases in the same year is far more
predictive of case decisions than judge stringency calculated in other years (see Appendix Table
A3). In robustness checks, we present results using a number of alternative instruments to test the
sensitivity of our results.

Judge Variation: Appendix Figure A4 plots the distribution of our leave-out judge stringency
measure at the judge-by-year level. We observe just over 300 judges in each year of our data, with 604
judges observed over the course of the entire sample period. The median judge-by-year cell contains
127 cases, although only a subset of these cases include parents. The standard deviation of our
leave-out measure is 0.051, indicating that a one standard deviation increase in the judge stringency
distribution is associated with a 5.1 percentage point increase in the probability of incarceration,
an 18.1% change from the mean incarceration rate of 28.1%.
   Using this variation in judge stringency as an instrument for the incarceration of a parent, we
identify the LATE of parental incarceration for children whose parents are at the margin of incar-
ceration compared to children whose parents were convicted but not incarcerated. The conditions
necessary to interpret these two-stage least squares estimates as the causal impact of parental in-
carceration are that: (1) judge assignment impacts parental incarceration, (2) judge assignment
only impacts child outcomes through the probability of parental incarceration, and (3) there is a
monotonic impact of judge assignment on parental incarceration. We now consider whether each of
these conditions holds in our data.

First Stage: To examine the first stage relationship between judge stringency Zctj and parental
incarceration (P rison), we estimate the following equation for individual i with parent p who is
charged in case c, assigned to judge j, at time t using a linear probability model:


                              P risonipctj = α0 + α1 Zctj + α2 Xipct + εipct                      (4)


where the vector Xipct includes court-by-time fixed effects. As described previously, Zctj are leave-
out (jackknife) measures of judge stringency that are allowed to vary across years. We obtain similar
results using a probit model, which is unsurprising given that the mean incarceration rate is 0.281
and far from zero or one. Robust standard errors are two-way clustered at the family and court
section level throughout.


                                                   15
   Table 2 presents formal first stage results from Equation (4). Column 1 of Table 2 presents the
mean incarceration rate in our estimation sample. Column 2 reports first stage results controlling
only for court-by-year fixed effects. Column 3 adds the baseline case and family characteristics from
Table 1 and indicators for any missing baseline characteristics. With all controls (column 3), we
find that having a parent assigned to a judge that is 10 percentage points more likely to incarcerate
increases the probability of parental incarceration by 5.49 percentage points.
   Appendix Figure A4 provides a graphical representation of the same first stage relationship
but with no parametric assumptions. We again find that our residualized judge instrument is
highly predictive of whether a parent is incarcerated, with the probability of incarceration increasing
monotonically, and approximately linearly, with our judge stringency measure. Consistent with past
work (e.g., Mueller-Smith 2015, Bhuller et al. 2016), however, the probability of incarceration does
not increase one-for-one with our measure of judge stringency, likely because of measurement error
that attenuates the effect toward zero. For example, judge stringency may drift over the course
of the year or case outcomes may be influenced by the lay jurors, reducing the accuracy of our
leave-out stringency measure. Nevertheless, these results confirm that judge assignment is highly
predictive of parental incarceration in our setting.

Instrument Validity: Two additional conditions must hold to interpret our two-stage least squares
estimates as the LATE of parental incarceration: (1) an exclusion restriction where judge assignment
only impacts child outcomes through the probability of parental incarceration and (2) a monotonicity
restriction where the impact of judge assignment on the probability of incarceration is monotonic
across parents.
   Table 3 verifies that assignment of cases to judges is random after we condition on the fixed
effects described above. The first column of Table 3 uses a linear probability model to test whether
baseline case and family characteristics are predictive of parental incarceration. We control for
court-by-year fixed effects and two-way cluster standard errors at the family and court section
level. We find that defendants with native-born children are 8.6 percentage points more likely to
be incarcerated, a 30.6% increase from the mean incarceration rate of 28.1%. Fathers are also 17.5
percentage points more likely to be incarcerated than mothers, a 62.3% change from the mean
incarceration rate. Defendants with lower levels of education and lower earnings are also at a higher
risk of incarceration compared to more educated and higher earning defendants. Column 2 assesses
whether these same observable characteristics are predictive of our judge stringency measure using



                                                  16
an identical specification. We find that judges of differing tendencies are assigned very similar cases
(joint p-value = 0.401).
    The exclusion restriction could also be violated if judge assignment impacts future outcomes
through channels other than parental incarceration. If judge stringency impacts future outcomes
through any other channels, then the resulting LATE would incorporate any additional impacts
associated with judge assignment. The assumption that judges only systematically affect child
outcomes through parental incarceration is fundamentally untestable, and our estimates should be
interpreted with this potential caveat in mind. However, we argue that the exclusion restriction
assumption is reasonable in our setting. Unlike judges in the United States who typically impose
a combination of incarceration, probation, and fines (Mueller-Smith 2015), the Swedish penal code
requires that judges only impose one type of punishment in the vast majority of situations.14 We also
find little relationship between our measure of judge stringency and sentence length conditional on
any incarceration, and only 6% of defendants are found innocent in our sample, leaving relatively
little scope through which the assigned judge could influence outcomes other than through the
incarceration of a parent.15 While we cannot rule out every possible channel through which judge
assignment could impact defendants and their children (e.g., speaking harshly at the sentencing
hearing), we believe that such factors are unlikely to significantly bias our results. To the extent
that the exclusion restriction is violated, our reduced form estimates can still be interpreted as the
causal impact of having a parent assigned to a more or less stringent judge.16
    The second condition needed to interpret our estimates as the LATE of parental incarceration is
that the impact of judge assignment on the probability of incarceration is monotonic across parents.
In our setting, the monotonicity assumption requires that parents who are not incarcerated by a
strict judge would also not be incarcerated by a more lenient judge, and that parents incarcerated by
a lenient judge would also be incarcerated by a more strict judge. If the monotonicity assumption

   14
      Swedish judges are only allowed to assign multiple punishments in a few, limited cases. For example, judges may
sometimes impose both a fine and probation for certain low-level crimes. Consistent with these restrictions, there are
virtually no defendants receiving multiple punishments in our sample. Results are identical if we drop these isolated
cases or control for all of the imposed punishments.
   15
      We find no meaningful relationship between our measure of judge stringency and sentence length conditional on
incarceration, likely because judges are required to follow relatively strict sentencing length guidelines determined by
the Supreme Court and the Prosecutor Authority. Bhuller et al. (2016) also find no meaningful relationship between
judge stringency and sentence length conditional on incarceration in Norway, the setting most similar to our own,
while Mueller-Smith (2015) finds a more significant relationship between judge assignment and sentence length in the
United States, where judges may be less constrained when assigning prison sentences.
   16
      As discussed above, other court actors such as the prosector and lay jurors are assigned through different
processes than the judge. These institutional characteristics make it unlikely that judge assignment is correlated with
the assignment of other criminal justice actors, who may independently affect the outcomes of defendants of their
children.


                                                          17
is violated, our two-stage least squares estimates would still be a weighted average of marginal
treatment effects, but the weights would not sum to one (Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996, Heckman
and Vytlacil 2005). The monotonicity assumption is therefore necessary to interpret our IV estimates
as a well-defined LATE. The bias away from this well-defined LATE is an increasing function of
the number of individuals for whom the monotonicity assumption does not hold and the difference
in the marginal treatment effects for those individuals for whom the monotonicity assumption does
and does not hold. The amount of bias is also a decreasing function of the strength of the first stage
relationship shown in Table 2 and Appendix Figure A4 (Angrist et al.1996).
    An implication of the monotonicity assumption is that the first stage estimates should be non-
negative for all subsamples. In Appendix Table A4 results, we find that our residualized measure of
judge stringency is consistently positive and sizable in all subsamples, in line with the monotonicity
assumption. In robustness checks, we relax the monotonicity assumption by letting our leave-out
measure of judge stringency differ across case and family characteristics.


                                                 IV. Results

In this section, we examine the causal effects of parental incarceration on risky behaviors, educational
attainment, and early-life labor market outcomes. We then discuss potential mechanisms for our
results.


                                              A. Risky Behaviors

Table 4 presents OLS, reduced form, and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of parental
incarceration on teen crime and pregnancy. Teen crime is measured using an indicator for having a
criminal conviction between the ages of 15 and 17, a proxy for criminal behavior during this time
period. Pregnancy is measured using an indicator for having a pregnancy in the national health
records between the ages of 15 and 17. The pregnancy results only include female children, while the
crime results include both male and female children. Column 1 reports dependent variable means for
children whose parents were incarcerated. Column 2 reports OLS estimates controlling for court-by-
year effects and the baseline controls listed in Table 1. Column 3 reports OLS estimates reweighted
so that the proportion of compliers matches the share of the estimation sample.17 Column 4 reports
  17
     Following Bhuller et al. (2016) and Dobbie et al. (forthcoming), we split our estimation sample into eight mu-
tually exclusive and collectively exhaustive subsamples based on prior criminal history and the predicted probability
of incarceration. We then calculate the share of compliers in each subsample. The weights are calculated as the share
of compliers relative to the share of the estimation sample in each subsample. See Online Appendix B for additional


                                                         18
reduced form results of the impact of having a parent assigned to a more stringent judge using the
leave-out measure of judge stringency described in Section III. Finally, column 5 reports two-stage
least squares results where we instrument for parental incarceration using the leave-out measure
of judge stringency. All regressions control for court-by-year fixed effects and the baseline controls
listed in Table 1. Standard errors two-way clustered at the family and court section level are
reported in parentheses.
    Consistent with past work (e.g., Johnson 2009), OLS estimates show that individuals with an
incarcerated parent are significantly more likely to have a criminal conviction in their teen years.
For example, controlling for court-by-year effects and all baseline controls (column 2), we find that
an individual with an incarcerated parent is 1.5 percentage points more likely to have a criminal
conviction between the ages of 15 and 17, a 6.3% increase from the mean for these individuals.
Convictions for property crime are 1.1 percentage points higher over the same age range, while
violent crime convictions are 0.4 percentage points higher and drug crime convictions are only 0.3
percentage points higher. The OLS estimates suggest little to no relationship between parental
incarceration and pregnancy between the ages of 15 and 17, with the point estimate suggesting a
statistically insignificant 0.2 percentage point increase for female children. Reweighting our estima-
tion sample to match the sample of compliers (column 3) only modestly changes the size of the OLS
estimates, suggesting that any differences between the OLS and two-stage least squares estimates
are not due to treatment effect heterogeneity, at least on observables.
    The reduced form and two-stage least squares estimates in columns 4-5 improve upon our OLS
estimates by exploiting plausibly exogenous variation in parental incarceration from the random
assignment of cases to judges. We find that the assignment of a parent to a more stringent judge leads
to economically and statistically significant increases in both teen crime and pregnancy (column
4). Under the stronger assumptions necessary to use judge stringency as an instrumental variable
(column 5), we estimate that parental incarceration increases the probability of having a criminal
conviction between the ages of 15 and 17 by 9.9 percentage points for children whose parents
are on the margin of incarceration, a 41.7% increase from the mean. We find particularly large
effects for property and violent crime convictions for these individuals, with smaller and statistically
insignificant effects on drug crime convictions. We also find that parental incarceration increases the
probability of teen pregnancy by 6.0 percentage points for marginal cases, a 200.0% increase from
the mean. All of the reduced form and two-stage least squares results suggest economically and

details on these calculations.


                                                  19
statistically significant effects of parental incarceration on children’s early-life behavioral outcomes.
    The fact that our IV estimates are systematically larger than the corresponding OLS estimates
suggests that there are particularly large effects of parental incarceration for children whose parents
are at the margin of incarceration. This finding further suggests that there are particularly small
effects of parental incarceration for children whose parents are not at the margin of incarceration,
perhaps because they are at such a low or high risk of teen crime and pregnancy that their decisions
are not affected by the incarceration of a parent. Children whose parents are charged with relatively
minor offenses may, for example, be at such a low risk of teen crime or pregnancy that they never
participate in these types of risky behaviors, while children whose parents are charged with the
most serious offenses may be at such a disadvantage that they will almost always be involved in
these risky behaviors.18


                             B. Human Capital and Labor Market Outcomes

Table 5 presents estimates of the impact of parental incarceration on educational attainment and
formal sector employment and earnings. Educational attainment is measured using indicators for
high school graduation by age 19 and any school enrollment at age 20. Unfortunately, we cannot
distinguish between high school and college enrollment in our data, meaning that the latter results
include both types of schooling. We measure early-life labor market participation using an indicator
for any positive earnings at age 20, total earnings at age 20, and an indicator for welfare receipt at
age 20.
    The OLS estimates in Table 5 show that individuals with an incarcerated parent are only mod-
estly less likely to graduate from high school by age 19, be enrolled in either high school or college
at age 20, or be employed in the formal sector labor market at age 20 (columns 2-3). The two-stage
least squares estimates for our education outcomes are broadly similar to the OLS estimates, but less
precisely estimated. We find, for example, that parental incarceration decreases the probability of
graduating from high school by age 19 by a statistically insignificant 1.3 percentage points for cases
at the margin of incarceration, a 3.4% decrease from the mean. The probability of being enrolled in
any type of schooling at age 20 decreases by only a statistically insignificant 6.0 percentage points,
  18
      There is little systematic relationship between the IV and OLS estimates in prior work using random-judge
designs. Consistent with our findings, for example, Aizer and Doyle (2015) and Dobbie et al. (forthcoming) find
IV estimates that are larger (in absolute value) than the corresponding OLS estimates for juvenile incarceration and
pre-trial detention in the United States, respectively. In contrast, Mueller-Smith (2015) finds IV estimates that are
approximately equal to the corresponding OLS estimates for adult incarceration in the United States, and Bhuller
et al. (2016) find IV estimates that are smaller (in absolute value) than the corresponding OLS estimates for adult
incarceration in Norway.


                                                         20
a 15.0% decrease.
   In contrast, our two-stage least squares estimates reveal economically large effects of parental
incarceration on labor market participation. Parental incarceration significantly decreases the prob-
ability of paid employment at age 20 by 16.5 percentage points for children whose parents are on
the margin of incarceration, a 23.7% decrease from the mean. Earnings at age 20 also decrease by
$1,654 for these marginal cases, a 20.2% change, while welfare receipt increases by 9.6 percentage
points, a 24.9% change. Neither estimate is statistically significant, however, due to large standard
errors.
   To explore why we find a less precisely estimated impact of parental incarceration on the intensive
margin of employment, Panel A of Appendix Figure A5 plots two-stage least squares estimates and
corresponding 90% confidence intervals of the impact of parental incarceration on the probability of
a child’s earnings at age 20 falling above various thresholds. The impact of parental incarceration
on child earnings is concentrated in the left tail of the earnings distribution, with little to no effect
on the probability of earning above higher thresholds such as $20,000 or $30,000. These results
suggest that parental incarceration primarily affects child earnings at the very low-end of the income
distribution, with little discernible effect at other points of the distribution. One possible explanation
for these results is that parental incarceration has a larger impact on children at the margin of any
employment, with relatively little impact on children with higher potential earnings. Consistent
with this explanation, we show below that the effects of parental incarceration are concentrated
among children from the most disadvantaged families. We also find that employment at age 20 is
a much stronger predictor of earnings at ages 25, 30, and 35 than earnings at age 20 (see Online
Appendix C), perhaps because of the considerable dispersion in early-life earnings.


                                         C. Subsample Results

Appendix Table A5 presents two-stage least squares results by child gender, child age, and the
gender of the convicted parent. While we caution against a strong interpretation of these subsample
results given concerns about multiple hypothesis testing, there is some evidence that the effects of
parental incarceration are larger for both female children and younger children. For female children,
for example, parental incarceration increases teen convictions by 14.7 percentage points (90.2%)
and decreases employment by 32.0 percentage points for cases at the margin of incarceration. In
comparison, parental incarceration increases teen convictions by only 6.9 percentage points (22.5%)
and decreases employment by only a statistically insignificant 5.9 percentage points (8.8%) for


                                                   21
male children. Similarly, we find that parental incarceration decreases high school graduation by
39.8 percentage points (103.4%) and employment by 70.1 percentage points (101.2%) for children
who were 11 to 12 years old when their parent was incarcerated, with smaller and statistically
insignificant effects for children who were 13 to 14 years old at the time of incarceration.19 We also
find larger point estimates for children with an incarcerated mother compared to children with an
incarcerated father, but large standard errors mean that most of these differences are not statistically
significant.20


                                                  D. Robustness

Appendix Table A6 explores the sensitivity of our main results to alternative samples and specifi-
cations. Column 1 broadens our estimation sample to district court sections that handle at least
25 criminal cases in a given year. Column 2 instead restricts the estimation sample to sections that
handle at least 75 criminal cases in a given year. Column 3 restricts the sample to first time cases.
Column 4 calculates judge stringency using a random 25% subset of the data and estimates the treat-
ment effects in the opposing subset of data. Column 5 calculates judge stringency in two equal-sized
and mutually exclusive sub-samples and estimates results by stacking the two subsamples. Results
are generally similar to our preferred specification across these alternative specifications, although
some of our estimates lose statistical significance. In particular, our point estimates on teen con-
victions and employment at age 20 are more sensitive to alternative specifications, although large
standard errors mean that the results are not statistically different from our preferred specifications.
    Appendix Table A7 presents a second set of robustness checks where the instrument is cal-
culated separately by different mutually exclusive subsamples, thereby relaxing the monotonicity
assumption. We include results using instruments calculated separately for male and female parents,
parents living in one- and two-adult households at baseline, parents above and below the median age
in our sample at baseline, native- and foreign-born parents, parents with less than or at least a high


   19
      These subsample results are broadly consistent with prior work finding larger effects of early-life interventions
(e.g., Anderson 2008, Gould, Lavy, and Paserman 2011, Hoynes, Schanzenbach, and Almond 2016, Grönqvist, Nilsson,
and Robling 2017), peer effects (e.g., Kling, Liebman, and Katz 2007, Lavy, Silva, and Weinhardt 2012, Deming et
al. 2014), and schooling (Hastings, Kane, and Staiger 2006, Jackson 2012, Deming et al. 2014), for female children,
and larger effects of family income (e.g., Dahl and Lochner 2012, education (e.g., Levy and Duncan 2000, Jacob
and Lefgren 2009), and neighborhood quality (e.g., Chetty, Hendren, and Katz 2016, Chetty and Hendren 2017) for
younger children.
   20
      There is an ongoing debate within the criminology literature on the relative effects of paternal versus maternal
incarceration. While our results suggest that there are larger effects of maternal incarceration, they are by no means
definitive proof on this issue. See Wildeman and Turney (2014) and Wildeman (forthcoming) for recent evidence on
this issue.


                                                          22
school education, nonemployed and employed parents at baseline, and parents with and without a
prior offense at baseline. Importantly, these are the same parent- and case-level subsamples where
we find most treatment effect heterogeneity. Results across these different specifications are again
similar to our preferred specification, although there is considerably more noise when using smaller
cells to calculate the leave-out judge stringency measure. None of the estimates suggest that our
preferred estimates are invalid, suggesting that the potential bias from any monotonicity violations
is likely to be small.


                                        V. Potential Mechanisms

In this section, we explore two potential mechanisms that might explain our findings: (1) changes
in family income and family structure and (2) the particular sensitivity of disadvantaged children
to the shock of parental incarceration.

Family Income and Family Structure: One potential explanation for our results is that parental
incarceration disrupts family relationships (e.g., Lopoo and Western 2005) and reduces future em-
ployment and earnings opportunities (e.g., Mueller-Smith 2015, Bäckman, Estrada, and Nilsson
2017), leading to the negative effects on children documented above. Consistent with this hypothe-
sis, there is a large literature showing significant correlations between later-life outcomes and both
family income and family structure (e.g., Brooks-Gunn and Duncan 1997), although the extent to
which these associations are causal remains contested (e.g., Mayer 1997).
    We begin by estimating the impact of incarceration on a parent’s own outcomes in Table 6. We
find little impact of incarceration on future crime for parents at the margin of incarceration, but
a large negative impact of incarceration on parental employment and family structure.21 Over the
first six years following conviction, employment decreases by 15.7 percentage points for parents at
the margin of incarceration, a 48.3% change, formal sector earnings decrease by $7,045, a 104.3%
change, and welfare use increases by 10.9 percentage points, a 21.4% change. The increase in welfare
use only partially offsets the fall in labor market earnings, with income net of government transfers
falling by a statistically insignificant $2,632 following an incarceration spell (see Appendix Table

  21
     In theory, incarceration may decrease future crime through deterrence, incapacitation, or rehabilitation effects,
or increase future crime due to negative peer or stigmatization effects. These competing theoretical channels may
explain the null result on future crime, particularly the emphasis on rehabilitation in the Swedish criminal justice
system. Appendix Table A8 presents additional estimates by future crime type. Incarceration decreases future
property crime by 15.6 percentage points, but increases future violent crime by 13.9 percentage points and future
drug crime by 9.9 percentage points.


                                                         23
A8). We also find that incarceration increases the probability that the convicted parent lives in a
one-adult household by 19.5 percentage points, a 27.6% change. All of our results suggest substantial
negative effects of incarceration on a parent’s own outcomes and, as a result, the home environment
for children in the full sample.22
    To test whether the deterioration of parent outcomes can explain our results, we examine whether
the child effects and the parent effects are concentrated in the same subsamples. If the child effects
are driven by the parent effects, we would expect to see a positive correlation in the subsamples
where these effects are concentrated. The failure to find such a correlation would therefore suggest
that some other mechanism must be driving our results. To implement this test, Table 7 presents
estimates for both children and parents separately by a summary index of family disadvantage based
on the baseline education, employment, criminal history, and history of drug or alcohol abuse for
both biological parents. We use family disadvantage to split our sample both the prior literature
suggests considerable heterogeneity in the effects of other shocks by baseline disadvantage (e.g.,
Wilson 1996, Oreopoulos et al. 2008, Adda et al. 2011, Coelli 2011) and, just as importantly, family
disadvantage is constant within a family, unlike baseline variables such as gender or nationality that
can vary across family members.23
    Table 7 reveals a significant negative correlation between the effects on children’s outcomes and
the effects on a parent’s own outcomes at the subsample level, suggesting that the effects of parental
incarceration on children are unlikely to be driven by changes in family income or family structure.
The negative effects of parental incarceration on children are driven almost entirely by children

    22
       We provide a number of robustness checks for these results in the appendix. We find economically and statistically
significant effects throughout the earnings distribution (see Appendix Figure A5). We also find similar results among
the full sample of defendants, indicating that our results are not specific to parents (see Appendix Table A9), and
nearly identical labor market results in both the first through third and fourth through sixth years after the initial
conviction, indicating that our results are not driven by a mechanical incapacitation effect (see Appendix Table A10).
Our results are broadly consistent with recent work showing large negative effects of incarceration on labor market
outcomes in both Sweden (Bäckman et al. 2017) and the United States (Mueller-Smith 2015), but contrast sharply
with recent work showing large positive effects of incarceration on labor market outcomes in Norway (Bhuller et
al. 2016). The reason for these contrasting results is unclear. We find smaller but still negative results among all
defendants, indicating that the difference is unlikely to be due to the difference in samples. We also find similar results
in a sample of unemployed defendants where the effects are most positive in Norway. One possible explanation is the
slightly stronger focus on rehabilitation in Norway, where, for example, 16% of those employed in prisons are working
on workplace rehabilitation and education compared to only 9% in Sweden (Aebi, Tiago, and Burkhardt 2017).
    23
       Formally, we construct our family disadvantage index in three steps. First, we standardize each individual
measure in our index to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, with the sign of each variable oriented
so that worse outcomes have higher scores. We then take the average of each standardized z-score measure. Finally,
we divide the sample at the median of the index. Baseline education is measured using an indicator for having less
than a high school diploma. Baseline employment is measured using indicators for paid employment prior to the
trial. Criminal history is measured using an indicator for having a prior conviction at any point in the last 20 years.
Drug and alcohol abuse is measured using an indicator for whether the parent has either been convicted for a drug-
or alcohol-related crime or been hospitalized for a drug- or alcohol-related disease at any point in the last 20 years.


                                                            24
from the most disadvantaged families, with no detectable effects of parental incarceration among
children from advantaged families for any of our outcomes. In sharp contrast to the results for
children, the negative effects of incarceration on a parent’s own outcomes are concentrated among
the most advantaged families. In other words, there is no overlap in the subsamples where we
observe significant child effects and significant parent effects. The negative correlation between the
effects on children’s outcomes and the effects on a parent’s own outcomes largely holds when we
define family disadvantage using either just the convicted parent or just the non-convicted parent,
with particularly stark results when defining disadvantage using just the convicted parent (see
Appendix Table A11). We also find a negative correlation between the effects on children’s outcomes
and the effects on a parent’s own outcomes for almost every one of the individual components of
the disadvantage index, although some estimates become imprecise due to small sample sizes (see
Appendix Tables A12 and A13).
   These results suggest that the effects of incarceration on children’s outcomes are concentrated
among families where the effects on parents are small and imprecisely estimated, while the effects on
parent’s own outcomes are concentrated among families where the effects on children are similarly
small and indistinguishable from zero. Thus, our results provide no support for the hypothesis that
the effects of parental incarceration on children are driven by changes in parental earnings or family
structure.

Fragile Families: A second possibility is that the negative effects of parental incarceration can be
explained by the particular sensitivity of disadvantaged children to the trauma of having a parent
sent to prison. Prior work suggests that disadvantaged children may be particularly harmed by
shocks such as parental incarceration because they are more sensitive to the loss of a (relatively)
positive role model (e.g., Wilson 1996), to the negative stigma effects of having an incarcerated
parent (e.g., Hagan and Dinovitzer 1999), or to psychological trauma more generally (e.g., Harding
2003, Wodtke et al. 2016). There is also work showing that low-income children are particularly
sensitive to parental job loss (Oreopoulos et al. 2008, Coelli 2011), parental death (Adda et al.
2011), and parental EITC transfers (Dahl and Lochner 2012).
   One piece of evidence in support of this hypothesis comes from the Table 7 results discussed
above, which show that the negative effects of parental incarceration on children are driven al-
most entirely by children from the most disadvantaged families. For these disadvantaged children,
parental incarceration increases teen convictions by 18.4 percentage points (71.0%), increases teen



                                                 25
pregnancies by 8.0 percentage points (222.2%), and decreases employment at age 20 by 27.9 per-
centage points (41.8%). By comparison, there are no detectable effects of parental incarceration
among children from advantaged families for any of our outcomes.
    Further evidence comes from a more an examination of the most disadvantaged children in our
data. For children whose non-convicted parent has a prior conviction, for example, parental incar-
ceration increases teen convictions by 30.6 percentage points (103.4%) and decreases employment
at age 20 by 45.6 percentage points (71.7%) (see Appendix Table A13). For children whose non-
convicted parent has a history of drug and alcohol abuse, teen convictions similarly increase by 39.6
percentage points (133.8%) and employment at age 20 decreases by 54.4 percentage points (83.4%)
(see Appendix Table A13). We also find larger estimates for children where both parents are clas-
sified as highly disadvantaged, another group that is arguably among the most disadvantaged (see
Appendix Table A14). While there is no conclusive evidence on this issue, all of our results suggest
that disadvantaged children are particularly sensitive to the effects of parental incarceration.24

Other Mechanisms: There are several additional explanations for our results that we cannot examine
with our current data. For example, it is possible that the harmful effects of parental incarceration
can be explained by changes in neighborhood or school quality. Parental incarceration could also
impact children through its effects on the mental health or emotional well-being of the remaining
parent. Unfortunately, our data do not include information on these variables.25

Taken together, our results suggest that the negative effects of parental incarceration on children can
be explained by the particular sensitivity of disadvantaged children to the shock of having a parent
sent to prison. In contrast, we find limited support for the hypothesis that changes in family income
or family structure negatively impact children. These results are broadly consistent with recent
   24
      Though we hesitate to draw strong conclusions from Appendix Table A14 due to large standard errors, the
results are consistent with the quality of the remaining parent being particularly important, perhaps because he or
she becomes the primary caregiver after the incarceration of the convicted parent. The results in Appendix Table
A14 also speak against the idea that our findings are due to the temporary removal of a (relatively) positive role
model, as this would imply larger effects for children with relatively more advantaged convicted parents.
   25
      Another explanation for our results is that parental incarceration increases the probability that a child is placed
into foster care, which can directly impact both risky behavior and decrease employment (e.g., Doyle 2007, Doyle
2008). While our current data do not have information on foster care placements, we consider this explanation
unlikely in our setting for two reasons. First, very few children are placed into foster care in Sweden, with only 0.2%
of children under the age of 12 and only 0.5% of children between the ages of 13 and 17 spending one or more nights
in foster care during our sample period (Socialstyrelsen 2013). Second, prior work suggests that there are much more
modest negative effects of foster care placement in Sweden than in the United States, perhaps because of the stronger
emphasis on placing foster children with families in Sweden (e.g., Vinnerljung et al. 2006, Lindquist and Santavirta
2014). On the other hand, there are slightly larger effects of foster care placement on crime for children between the
ages of 11 and 14 in both Sweden (Lindquist and Santavirta 2014) and the United States (Doyle 2007), suggesting
that we cannot completely rule out this explanation for our results.


                                                           26
work showing that positive wealth shocks have little effect on children’s medium-run outcomes in
either the United States (Jacob et al. 2015) or Sweden (Cesarini et al. 2016). Our results also
provide additional support for prior work arguing that the negative effects of parental incarceration
come from both the initial shock of losing a parent to prison and the cycle of imprisonment and
release that often follows, not the loss of family income or the rise in single-parent households per
se (e.g., Wildeman 2010, Murray et al. 2012).


                                         VI. Conclusion

This paper estimates the causal impact of parental incarceration on teen crime and pregnancy,
high school graduation, and early-life employment. We find that the incarceration of a parent
in childhood significantly increases teen crime and pregnancy and significantly decreases early-life
employment. Our estimate for educational attainment is smaller and statistically insignificant. The
negative effects of parental incarceration on children can be explained by the particular sensitivity
of disadvantaged children to having a parent sent to prison, rather than the increase in single-adult
households or the loss of family income that often follow an incarceration spell.
   Our findings suggest that the incarceration of parents with young children may significantly
increase the intergenerational persistence of poverty and criminal behavior. While we are unable
to directly measure the long-run impact of parental incarceration on children using our data, we
consider a partial back-of-the-envelope calculation that accounts for the costs of future child crime,
pregnancy, and welfare receipt, the benefits of future parental crime reduction due to incapacita-
tion, the costs of future parental welfare receipt, and the direct economic impacts on both parents
and their children. To calculate the implied effect of parental incarceration on children’s lifetime
earnings, we regress later-life earnings on indicators for teen crime, teen pregnancy, high school
graduation, and employment at age 20 using information on older cohorts of Swedish children with
an incarcerated parent. We then multiply each OLS coefficient from this regression with the cor-
responding two-stage least squares coefficient from Tables 4 and 5. We repeat this procedure for
earnings at age 25, 30, and 35, assuming a constant treatment effect after age 35. Information on
the social costs coming from future crime, pregnancy, and welfare receipt come from the existing
literature. See Online Appendix C for a full description of this exercise.
   Based on these calculations, we estimate that parental incarceration decreases each child’s future
lifetime earnings by $79,962. This is equivalent to a loss of $36,471 per child in present value at age
14 if we discount future earnings at a 3% interest rate. The social costs coming from the effects of

                                                  27
parental incarceration on child crime, pregnancy, and welfare receipt add an additional $21,792 to
$27,193 in present value to this amount. Taking into account the average number of children per
family (2.767) and the effects of incarceration on an individual’s own outcomes, we find that the
social cost of incarcerating a parent is over $300,000 per family, more than double the social cost of
incarcerating a non-parent.26
    There are three important limitations to our analysis. First, we are unable to estimate the
deterrence effects of a more or less strict incarceration policy (e.g., Chalfin and McCrary 2017).
Our analysis will therefore overstate the social costs of incarceration if the threat of incarceration
decreases crime rates. Second, we are unable to directly measure the long-run impacts of parental
incarceration on long-run outcomes, and must instead rely on the tentative calculations described
above to estimate the long-term effects of parental incarceration. Finally, our instrumental variables
results are only valid for children whose parents are on the margin of incarceration. It is plausible
that the effects of parental incarceration are very different for children whose parents are either
never incarcerated or always incarcerated by the judges in our sample. Given these concerns, we
are unable to determine the full welfare consequences of parental incarceration using our research
design.



                                                  References

 [1] Adda, Jerome, Anders Björklund, and Helena Holmlund. 2011. “The Role of Mothers and
          Fathers in Providing Skills: Evidence from Parental Deaths.” IZA Discussion Paper No.
          5425.

 [2] Aebi, Marcelo F., Mélanie M. Tiago, and Christine Burkhardt. 2015. “SPACE Prison Popula-
          tions Survey 2014.” Council of Europe Annual Penal Statistics.

 [3] Aebi, Marcelo F., Mélanie M. Tiago, and Christine Burkhardt. 2017. “SPACE Prison Popula-
          tions Survey 2015.” Council of Europe Annual Penal Statistics.

 [4] Aizer, Anna, and Joseph J. Doyle Jr. 2015. “Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and Fu-
          ture Crime: Evidence from Randomly-Assigned Judges.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
          130(2): 759-803.
  26
     We caution that these social cost calculations are speculative for at least two reasons. First, the correlation
between early-life outcomes and long-term earnings may either under or overstate the causal impact of parental
incarceration on long-term outcomes. Second, many of our two-stage least squares estimates are imprecise and, as a
result, the confidence interval surrounding our long-term cost calculation is large.


                                                        28
 [5] Anderson, D. Mark. 2014. “In School and Out of Trouble? The Minimum Dropout Age and
        Juvenile Crime.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(2): 318-331.

 [6] Anderson, Michael L. 2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
        Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training
        Projects.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103(484): 1481-1495.

 [7] Angrist, Joshua, Guido Imbens, and Donald Rubin. 1996. “Identification of Causal Effects Using
        Instrumental Variables.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91(434): 444-455.

 [8] Anwar, Shamena, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson. “Politics in the Courtroom: Political
        Ideology and Jury Decision Making.” Forthcoming in Journal of the European Economic
        Association.

 [9] Åslund, Olof, Per-Anders Edin, Peter Fredriksson, and Hans Grönqvist. 2011. “Peers, Neighbor-
        hoods, and Immigrant Student Achievement: Evidence from a Placement Policy.” American
        Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(2): 67-95.

[10] Bäckman, Olof, Felipe Estrada, and Anders Nilsson. 2017. “Locked Up and Locked Out? The
        Impact of Imprisonment on Labour Market Attachment.” The British Journal of Criminol-
        ogy.

[11] Bayer, Patrick, Randi Hjalmarsson, and David Pozen. 2009. “Building Criminal Capital Behind
        Bars: Peer Effects in Juvenile Corrections.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1): 105-
        147.

[12] Bhuller, Manudeep, Gordon B. Dahl, Katrine V. Løken, and Magne Mogstad. 2016. “Incarcer-
        ation, Recidivism and Employment.” NBER Working Paper No. 22648.

[13] Bhuller, Manudeep, Gordon B. Dahl, Katrine V. Løken, and Magne Mogstad. “Intergenerational
        Effects of Incarceration.” Forthcoming in AEA Papers & Proceedings.

[14] Billings, Stephen B., David J. Deming, and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2013. “School Segregation, Educa-
        tional Attainment and Crime: Evidence from the End of Busing in Charlotte-Mecklenburg.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 435-476.

[15] Billings, Stephen B. 2017. “Parental Arrest, Incarceration and the Outcomes of Their Children.”
        Unpublished Working Paper.

[16] Björklund, Anders. 2006. “Does Family Policy Affect Fertility?” Journal of Population Eco-
        nomics, 19(1): 3-24.

                                                29
[17] Björklund, Anders, and Markus Jäntti. 1997. “Intergenerational Income Mobility in Sweden
        Compared to the United States.” American Economic Review, 87(5): 1009-1018.

[18] Björklund, Anders, Mikael Lindahl, and Erik Plug. 2006. “The Origins of Intergenerational As-
        sociations: Lessons from Swedish Adoption Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(3):
        999-1028.

[19] Breining, Sanni N., Joseph J. Doyle Jr, David N. Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey
        Roth. 2017. “Birth Order and Delinquency: Evidence from Denmark and Florida.” NBER
        Working Paper No. 23038.

[20] Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, and Greg J. Duncan. 1997. “The Effects of Poverty on Children.” The
        Future of Children, 7(2): 55-71.

[21] Cesarini, David, Erik Lindqvist, Robert Östling, and Björn Wallace. 2016. “Wealth, Health,
        and Child Development: Evidence from Administrative Data on Swedish Lottery Players.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2): 687-738.

[22] Chalfin, Aaron, and Justin McCrary. 2017. “Criminal Deterrence: A Review of the Literature.”
        Journal of Economic Literature, 55(1): 5-48.

[23] Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny Yagan. 2017.
        “Mobility Report Cards: The Role of Colleges in Intergenerational Mobility.” NBER Work-
        ing Paper No. 23618.

[24] Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2017. “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational
        Mobility: Childhood Exposure Effects and County-Level Estimates.” NBER Working Paper
        No. 23001.

[25] Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. “The Effects of Exposure to
        Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Exper-
        iment.” American Economic Review, 106(4): 855-902.

[26] Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where Is the
        Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1553-1623.

[27] Cho, Rosa M. 2009a. “The Impact of Maternal Imprisonment on Children’s Probability of
        Grade Retention: Results from Chicago Public Schools.” Journal of Urban Economics,
        65(1): 11-23.

                                               30
[28] Cho, Rosa M. 2009b. “The Impact of Maternal Incarceration on Children’s Educational Achieve-
        ment: Results from Chicago Public Schools.” Journal of Human Resources, 44(3): 772-797.

[29] Coelli, Michael B. 2011. “Parental Job Loss and the Education Enrollment of Youth.” Labour
        Economics, 18(1): 25-35.

[30] Cook, Philip J., and Songman Kang. 2016. “Birthdays, Schooling, and Crime: Regression-
        Discontinuity Analysis of School Performance, Delinquency, Dropout, and Crime Initiation.”
        American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(1): 33-57.

[31] Currie, Janet, and Enrico Moretti. 2003. “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational Trans-
        mission of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
        nomics, 118(4): 1495-1532.

[32] Dahl, Gordon B., and Lance Lochner. 2012. “The Impact of Family Income on Child Achieve-
        ment: Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit.” American Economic Review, 102(5):
        1927-1956.

[33] Dahl, Gordon B., Andreas Ravndal Kostøl, and Magne Mogstad. 2014. “Family Welfare Cul-
        tures.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1711-1752.

[34] Damm, Anna P., and Christian Dustmann. 2014. “Does Growing Up in a High Crime Neighbor-
        hood Affect Youth Criminal Behavior?” American Economic Review, 104(6): 1806-1832.

[35] Davis, Lois M., Robert Bozick, Jennifer L. Steele, Jessica Saunders, and Jeremy N.V. Miles.
        2013. “Evaluating the Effectiveness of Correctional Education: A Meta-analysis of Programs
        that Provide Education to Incarcerated Adults.” Rand Corporation.

[36] Deming, David J. 2011. “Better Schools, Less Crime?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4):
        2063-2115.

[37] Deming, David J., Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2014.
        “School Choice, School Quality, and Postsecondary Attainment.” American Economic Re-
        view, 104(3): 991-1013.

[38] Department of Justice. 2015. “FY 2016 Performance Budget.”

[39] Dobbie, Will, and Roland Fryer. 2015. “The Medium-Term Impacts of High-Achieving Charter
        Schools.” Journal of Political Economy, 123(5): 985-1037.

[40] Dobbie, Will, Jacob Goldin, and Crystal Yang. “The Effects of Pre-Trial Detention on Convic-
        tion, Future Crime, and Employment: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges.” Forth-

                                               31
        coming in American Economic Review.

[41] Doyle, Joseph J. 2007. “Child Protection and Child Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of Foster
        Care.” American Economic Review, 97(5): 1583-1610.

[42] Doyle, Joseph J. 2008. “Child Protection and Adult Crime: Using Investigator Assignment to
        Estimate Causal Effects of Foster Care.” Journal of Political Economy, 116(4): 746-770.

[43] Foster, Holly, and John Hagan. 2007. “Incarceration and Intergenerational Social Exclusion.”
        Social Problems, 54(4): 399-433.

[44] Gould, Eric D., Victor Lavy, and M. Daniele Paserman. 2011. “Sixty Years After the Magic
        Carpet Ride: The Long-Run Effect of the Early Childhood Environment on Social and
        Economic Outcomes.” Review of Economic Studies, 78(3): 938-973.

[45] Grönqvist, Hans, J. Peter Nilsson, and Per-Olof Robling. 2017. “Early Lead Exposure and
        Outcomes in Adulthood.” Unpublished Working Paper.

[46] Hagan, John, and Ronit Dinovitzer. 1999. “Collateral Consequences of Imprisonment for Chil-
        dren, Communities, and Prisoners.” Crime and Justice, 26: 121-162.

[47] Harding, David J. 2003. “Counterfactual Models of Neighborhood Effects: The Effect of Neigh-
        borhood Poverty on Dropping Out and Teenage Pregnancy.” American Journal of Sociology,
        109(3): 676-719.

[48] Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2006. “Gender and Performance:
        Evidence from School Assignment by Randomized Lottery.” American Economic Review,
        96(2): 232-236.

[49] Havnes, Tarjei, and Magne Mogstad. 2015. “Is Universal Child Care Leveling the Playing Field?”
        Journal of Public Economics, 127: 100-114.

[50] Heckman, James J., and Edward Vytlacil. 2005. “Structural Equations, Treatment Effects, and
        Econometric Policy Evaluation.” Econometrica, 73(3): 669-738.

[51] Hjalmarsson, Randi, Helena Holmlund, and Matthew J. Lindquist. 2015. “The Effect of Ed-
        ucation on Criminal Convictions and Incarceration: Causal Evidence from Micro-data.”
        Economic Journal, 125(587): 1290-1326.

[52] Hjalmarsson, Randi, and Matthew J. Lindquist. 2011. “The Origins of Intergenerational Asso-
        ciations in Crime: Lessons from Swedish Adoption Data.” Labour Economics, 20: 68-81.



                                                32
[53] Hjalmarsson, Randi, and Matthew J. Lindquist. 2012. “Like Godfather, Like Son: Exploring
        the Intergenerational Nature of Crime.” Journal of Human Resources, 47(2): 550-582.

[54] Holmlund, Helena, Mikael Lindahl, and Erik Plug. 2011. “The Causal Effect of Parents’ School-
        ing on Children’s Schooling: A Comparison of Estimation Methods.” Journal of Economic
        Literature, 49(3): 615-651.

[55] Hoynes, Hilary, Diane W. Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond. 2016. “Long-Run Impacts of
        Childhood Access to the Safety Net.” American Economic Review, 106(4): 903-934.

[56] Jackson, C. Kirabo. 2012. “Single-Sex Schools, Student Achievement, and Course Selection:
        Evidence from Rule-Based Student Assignments in Trinidad and Tobago.” Journal of Public
        Economics, 96(1): 173-187.

[57] Jacob, Brian A., Max Kapustin, and Jens Ludwig. 2015. “The Impact of Housing Assistance
        on Child Outcomes: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Lottery.” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 130(1): 465-506.

[58] Jacob, Brian A., and Lars Lefgren. 2009. “The Effect of Grade Retention on High School
        Completion.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(3): 33-58.

[59] Johansson, Per, Lisa Laun, and Mårten Palme. 2014. “Pathways to Retirement and the Role
        of Financial Incentives in Sweden.” NBER Working Paper No. 20123.

[60] Johnson, Rucker C. 2009. “Ever-Increasing Levels of Parental Incarceration and the Conse-
        quences for Children.” In Do Prisons Make Us Safer? The Benefits and Costs of the Prison
        Boom, eds. Steven Raphael and Michael Stoll, Russell Sage Foundation Press.

[61] Kling, Jeffrey R. 2006. “Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings.” American Economic
        Review, 96(3): 863-876.

[62] Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of
        Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica, 75(1): 83-119.

[63] Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2005. “Neighborhood Effects on Crime
        for Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1): 87-130.

[64] Kolesár, Michal, Raj Chetty, John Friedman, Edward Glaeser, and Guido Imbens. 2015. “Iden-
        tification and Inference with Many Invalid Instruments.” Journal of Business and Economic
        Statistics, 33(4): 474-484.

                                               33
[65] Kriminalvården. 2015. “Hedersrelaterat våld och förtryck: Forskning och utvärdering inom
        Kriminalvården.” Norrköping: Kriminalvården.

[66] Lavy, Victor, Olmo Silva, and Felix Weinhardt. 2012. “The Good, the Bad, and the Average:
        Evidence on Ability Peer Effects in Schools.” Journal of Labor Economics, 30(2): 367-414.

[67] Lee, Chul-In, and Gary Solon. 2009. “Trends in Intergenerational Income Mobility.” Review of
        Economics and Statistics, 91(4): 766-772.

[68] Levy, Dan M., and Greg Duncan. 2000. “Using Sibling Samples to Assess the Effect of Childhood
        Family Income on Completed Schooling.” Northwestern University/University of Chicago
        Joint Center for Poverty Research Working Paper No. 168.

[69] Lindquist, Matthew, and Torsten Santavirta. 2014. “Does Placing Children in Foster Care
        Increase their Adult Criminality?” Labour Economics, 31: 72-83.

[70] Lochner, Lance, and Enrico Moretti. 2004. “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from
        Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports.” American Economic Review, 94(1): 155-189.

[71] Lopoo, Leonard M., and Bruce Western. 2005. “Incarceration and the Formation and Stability
        of Marital Unions.” Journal of Marriage and Family, 67(3): 721-734.

[72] Lundborg, Petter, Anton Nilsson, and Dan-Olof Rooth. 2014. “Parental Education and Off-
        spring Outcomes: Evidence from the Swedish Compulsory Schooling Reform.” American
        Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(1): 253-278.

[73] Mayer, Susan E. 1997. What Money Can’t Buy: Family Income and Children’s Life Chances.
        Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

[74] Meghir, Costas, Mårten Palme, and Marieke Schnabel. 2012. “The Effect of Education Policy
        on Crime: An Intergenerational Perspective.” NBER Working Paper No. 18145.

[75] Mueller-Smith, Michael. 2015. “The Criminal and Labor Market Impacts of Incarceration.”
        Unpublished Working Paper.

[76] Murphey, David, and P. Mae Cooper. 2015. “Parents Behind Bars:                  What Hap-
        pens   to    Their    Children?”            https://www.childtrends.org/publications/
        parents-behind-bars-what-happens-to-their-children/

[77] Murray, Joseph, and David P. Farrington. 2005. “Parental Imprisonment: Effects on Boys’ An-
        tisocial Behaviour and Delinquency Through the Life-Course.” Journal of Child Psychology
        and Psychiatry, 46(12): 1269-1278.

                                               34
[78] Murray, Joseph, David P. Farrington, and Ivana Sekol. 2012. “Children’s Antisocial Behavior,
        Mental Health, Drug Use, and Educational Performance After Parental Incarceration: A
        Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.” Psychological Bulletin, 138(2): 175-210.

[79] Murray, Joseph, Carl-Gunnar Janson, and David P. Farrington. 2007. “Crime in Adult Offspring
        of Prisoners: A Cross-National Comparison of Two Longitudinal Samples.” Criminal Justice
        and Behavior, 34(1): 133-149.

[80] Murray, Joseph, Rolf Loeber, and Dustin Pardini. 2012. “Parental Involvement in the Criminal
        Justice System and the Development of Youth Theft Marijuana Use, Depression and Poor
        Academic Performance.” Criminology, 50(1): 255-302.

[81] Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2008. “The Intergenerational Effects
        of Worker Displacement.” Journal of Labor Economics, 26(3): 455-483.

[82] Pew Center. 2011. “State of Recidivism: The Revolving Door of America’s Prisons.” Washing-
        ton, DC: Pew Charitable Trusts.

[83] Sciandra, Matthew, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian, Lawrence F.
        Katz, Ronald C. Kessler, Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jens Ludwig. 2013. “Long-term Effects of
        the Moving to Opportunity Residential Mobility Experiment on Crime and Delinquency.”
        Journal of Experimental Criminology, 9(4): 451-489.

[84] Socialstyrelsen. 2013. “Barnoch ungainsatser år 2012: Vissa insatser enligt Socialtjänstlagen
        (SoL) och Lagen med Särskilda Bestämmelser för vård av Unga (LvU).”

[85] Stock, James, Jonathan H. Wright, and Motohiro Yogo. 2002. “A Survey of Weak Instruments
        and Weak Identification in Generalized Method of Moments.” Journal of Business and
        Economic Statistics, 20(4): 518-529.

[86] Vinnerljung, Bo, Knut Sundell, Cecilia Andrée Löfholm and Eva Humlesjö. 2006. “Former
        Stockholm Child Protection Cases as Young Adults: Do Outcomes Differ Between Those
        That Received Services and Those That Did Not?” Children and Youth Services Review,
        28(1): 59-77.

[87] Wildeman, Christopher. 2010. “Paternal Incarceration and Children’s Physically Aggressive
        Behaviors: Evidence from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study.” Social Forces,
        89(1): 285-309.

[88] Wildeman, Christopher. “Parental Incarceration and Child Health in the United States: A

                                               35
       Systematic Review.” Forthcoming in Epidemiologic Reviews.

[89] Wildeman, Christopher, and Lars H. Andersen. 2015. “Cumulative Risks of Paternal and Ma-
       ternal Incarceration in Denmark and the United States.” Demographic Research, 32(57):
       1567-1580.

[90] Wildeman, Christopher, and Signe Hald Andersen. 2016. “Paternal Incarceration and Chil-
       dren’s Risk of Being Charged by Early Adulthood: Evidence from a Danish Policy Shock.”
       Criminology, 55(1): 32-85.

[91] Wildeman, Christopher, Signe Hald Andersen, Hedwig Lee and Kristian Bernt Karlson. 2014.
       “Parental Incarceration and Child Mortality in Denmark.” American Journal of Public
       Health, 104(3): 428-433.

[92] Wildeman, Christopher, and Kristin Turney. 2015. “Positive, Negative, or Null? The Effects
       of Maternal Incarceration on Children’s Behavioral Problems.” Demography, 51(3): 1041-
       1068.

[93] Wildeman, Christopher, and Bruce Western. 2010. “Incarceration in Fragile Families.” The
       Future of Children, 20(2): 157-177.

[94] Wilson, William J. 1996. When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor. New
       York: Vintage Books.

[95] Wodtke, Geoffrey T., Felix Elwert, and David J. Harding. 2016. “Neighborhood Effect Het-
       erogeneity by Family Income and Developmental Period.” American Journal of Sociology,
       121(4): 1168-1222.




                                              36
                                       Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                                                      Parent            Parent Not
                                                                   Incarcerated        Incarcerated
              Panel A: Child Characteristics                            (1)                 (2)
               Male                                                    0.516               0.514
               Native born                                            0.932               0.902
               Age at trial                                           12.455              12.451
               Birth order                                             1.913               1.971

              Panel B: Child Outcomes
               Criminal conviction at ages 15-17                       0.237               0.190
               Property conviction at ages 15-17                       0.128               0.098
               Violent conviction at ages 15-17                        0.058               0.044
               Drug conviction at ages 15-17                           0.024               0.016
               Pregnancy at ages 15-17 if female                       0.030               0.023
               High school graduate at age 19                          0.387               0.462
               School enrollment at age 20                             0.401               0.429
               Employment at age 20                                    0.697               0.739
               Earnings ($1,000s) at age 20                            8.168               8.855
               Welfare use at age 20                                   0.386               0.303

              Panel C: Parent Characteristics and Baseline Outcomes
               Male                                             0.898                      0.787
               Native born                                     0.695                      0.690
               Age at trial                                    39.919                     40.739
               Number of children                              2.767                      2.874
               Below high school degree                        0.882                       0.785
               High school degree or above                      0.118                      0.215
               Criminal conviction in 3 years before crime      0.680                      0.383
               Employment in 3 years before crime              0.386                       0.589
               Earnings ($1,000s) in 3 years before crime       6.775                     13.864

              Panel D: Parent Outcomes
               Criminal conviction in 6 years after trial              0.746               0.527
               Employment in 6 years after trial                       0.325               0.549
               Earnings ($1,000s) in 6 years after trial                6.752             16.039
               Welfare use in 6 years after trial                      0.510               0.339
               Single-adult household in 6 years after trial            0.706              0.504
              Observations                                             15,536             39,788
Note: This table reports descriptive statistics for children with parents involved in a criminal trial between 1997 and
2004. Both samples are restricted to court sections with at least 50 cases each year and children aged 11-14 at the
time of the trial. Crime outcomes for children are measured over ages 15-17. Baseline outcomes for the charged
parents are measured over the three years before the trial date. Subsequent parent outcomes are measured using the
average over the six years following the trial date for the charged parent. Nominal values are deflated to 2015 and
represented in U.S. dollars using the exchange rate SEK/$ = 8. Single-adult household is an indicator for the charged
parent filing as an individual tax unit.




                                                        37
                                        Table 2: First Stage Results
                                                    Sample
                                                     Mean          Any Incarceration
                                                      (1)            (2)       (3)
                              Judge stringency       0.281         0.581∗∗∗ 0.549∗∗∗
                                                    (0.449)       (0.068)   (0.063)
                            Court x Year FE            –             Yes       Yes
                            Baseline Controls          –             No        Yes
                            Observations            55,324         55,324    55,324
Note: This table reports first stage results. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to
Table 1. Judge stringency is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a section in the same year following
the procedure described in Section III. Column 1 reports the mean and standard deviation of the dependent variable.
Column 2 reports results controlling for court-by-year fixed effects. Column 3 adds the controls listed in Table 1.
Standard errors are two-way clustered at the parent (32,455 cells) and section (604 cells) levels. *** = significant at
1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                        38
                                       Table 3: Test of Randomization
                                                                            Parent              Judge
                                                                         Incarcerated         Stringency
                                                                              (1)                 (2)
              Child is male                                                   0.00185            0.00020
                                                                             (0.00422)          (0.00037)
              Child is native born                                            0.08595∗∗∗         0.00188∗
                                                                             (0.00990)          (0.00114)
              Child age at trial                                              0.00546∗∗∗         0.00006
                                                                             (0.00150)          (0.00018)
              Child is a second child                                         0.00548          −0.00027
                                                                             (0.00420)          (0.00044)
              Child is a third child                                          0.01291∗         −0.00100
                                                                             (0.00661)          (0.00063)
              Child is a forth or higher child                                0.01503∗         −0.00035
                                                                             (0.00908)          (0.00084)
              Number of children in family                                  −0.01051∗∗∗          0.00007
                                                                             (0.00239)          (0.00021)
              Parent is male                                                  0.17497∗∗∗         0.00133∗
                                                                             (0.00727)          (0.00073)
              Parent is native born                                         −0.00613             0.00033
                                                                             (0.00616)          (0.00071)
              Parent age at trial                                           −0.00264∗∗∗        −0.00005
                                                                             (0.00045)          (0.00005)
              Parent has high school diploma                                −0.02657∗∗∗          0.00017
                                                                             (0.00822)          (0.00105)
              Parent has at least some college                              −0.03678∗∗∗        −0.00037
                                                                             (0.00782)          (0.00102)
              Parent missing education data                                 −0.01927           −0.00178
                                                                             (0.01581)          (0.00150)
              Parent employment in 3 years before crime                     −0.11077∗∗∗        −0.00063
                                                                             (0.00848)          (0.00079)
              Parent earnings ($1,000s) in 3 years before crime             −0.00093∗∗∗        −0.00002
                                                                             (0.00018)          (0.00002)
              Parent welfare use in 3 years before crime                      0.05025∗∗∗       −0.00062
                                                                             (0.00752)          (0.00089)
              Parent conviction in 3 years before crime                       0.15615∗∗∗         0.00000
                                                                             (0.00579)          (0.00058)
              Parent missing baseline data                                    0.04387            0.00216
                                                                             (0.02808)          (0.00272)
            Joint F-Test                                                     [0.00000]          [0.40140]
            Observations                                                    55,324              55,324
Note: This table reports reduced form results testing the random assignment of cases to sections. The regressions are
estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. Column 1 reports estimates from an OLS regression of
parental incarceration on the variables listed and randomization strata fixed effects. Column 2 reports estimates from
an OLS regression of judge stringency on the variables listed and court-by-year fixed effects. Both specifications also
include indicators for missing information. The p-value reported at the bottom of columns 1-2 is for a F-test of the
joint significance of the variables listed in the rows. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the parent (32,455 cells)
and section (604 cells) levels. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant
at 10 percent level.




                                                          39
                           Table 4: Parental Incarceration and Risky Behavior
                                              Incarcerated                     OLS w/ Reduced
                                                  Mean              OLS        Weights     Form           2SLS
   Panel A: Teen crime                             (1)               (2)          (3)       (4)            (5)
    Any conviction at ages 15-17                  0.237            0.015∗∗∗     0.018∗∗∗ 0.055∗∗         0.099∗
                                                 (0.425)          (0.005)      (0.007)   (0.028)        (0.052)
     Property conviction at ages 15-17            0.128            0.011∗∗∗     0.016∗∗   0.044∗∗        0.079∗
                                                 (0.334)          (0.004)      (0.007)   (0.022)        (0.041)
     Violent conviction at ages 15-17             0.058            0.004        0.005     0.043∗∗∗       0.078∗∗
                                                 (0.234)          (0.003)      (0.005)   (0.016)        (0.032)
     Drug conviction at ages 15-17                0.024            0.003∗       0.003     0.010          0.018
                                                 (0.154)          (0.002)      (0.002)   (0.011)        (0.019)

   Panel B: Teen pregnancy
    Pregnancy at ages 15-17 if female             0.030            0.002        0.000        0.032∗∗     0.060∗∗
                                                 (0.171)          (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.015)     (0.030)
   Court x Year FE                                  –                Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
   Baseline Controls                                –                Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
   Observations                                  15,536            55,324       55,324       55,324      55,324
Note: This table reports OLS, reduced form, and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of parent incar-
ceration on child crime outcomes. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table
1. Column 1 reports dependent variable means for children whose parents were incarcerated. Column 2 reports
OLS estimates of parental incarceration. Column 3 reports OLS estimates of parental incarceration using weights
proportional to the fraction of compliers in a given prior conviction by risk quartile cell. Column 4 reports reduced
form estimates of a judge stringency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a court section
in a given year. Column 5 reports two-stage least squares estimates that instrument for parental incarceration using
judge stringency. All regressions control for court-by-year fixed effects and the baseline controls described in Section
III. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the parent (32,455 cells) and section (604 cells) levels. *** = significant
at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                         40
        Table 5: Parental Incarceration and Human Capital and Labor Market Outcomes
                                           Incarcerated                  OLS w/            Reduced
                                               Mean              OLS     Weights             Form         2SLS
  Panel A: Educational attainment               (1)              (2)        (3)               (4)          (5)
   High school graduate at age 19              0.387           −0.018∗∗∗ −0.017∗∗          −0.006       −0.013
                                              (0.487)          (0.007)    (0.008)           (0.044)      (0.087)
     High school or college at age 20          0.401           −0.017∗∗ −0.017∗            −0.027       −0.060
                                              (0.490)          (0.007)    (0.009)           (0.047)      (0.107)

  Panel B: Labor market outcomes
   Employment at age 20                         0.697          −0.011∗   −0.013     −0.074∗             −0.165∗
                                               (0.460)         (0.007)    (0.009)    (0.043)             (0.096)
     Earnings ($1,000s) at age 20               8.168          −0.083    −0.264     −0.739              −1.654
                                              (10.044)         (0.147)    (0.170)    (0.920)             (2.070)
     Welfare use at age 20                      0.386           0.020∗∗∗   0.028∗∗∗   0.043               0.096
                                               (0.487)         (0.007)    (0.009)    (0.050)             (0.117)
  Court x Year FE                                 –              Yes        Yes        Yes                 Yes
  Baseline Controls                               –              Yes        Yes        Yes                 Yes
  Observations                                 15,536           55,324     55,324     55,324              55,324
Note: This table reports OLS, reduced form, and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of parent incar-
ceration on child crime outcomes. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table
1. Column 1 reports dependent variable means for children whose parents were incarcerated. Column 2 reports
OLS estimates of parental incarceration. Column 3 reports OLS estimates of parental incarceration using weights
proportional to the fraction of compliers in a given prior conviction by risk quartile cell. Column 4 reports reduced
form estimates of a judge stringency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a court section
in a given year. Column 5 reports two-stage least squares estimates that instrument for parental incarceration using
judge stringency. All regressions control for court-by-year fixed effects and the baseline controls described in Section
III. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the parent (32,455 cells) and section (604 cells) levels. *** = significant
at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                         41
                          Table 6: Parental Incarceration and Parent Outcomes
                                              Incarcerated                      OLS w/    Reduced
                                                  Mean               OLS        Weights     Form             2SLS
 Panel A: Future crime                             (1)               (2)          (3)        (4)              (5)
  Conviction in years 1-6                         0.746             0.058∗∗∗     0.068∗∗∗ −0.036           −0.066
                                                 (0.435)           (0.006)      (0.008)    (0.051)          (0.092)

 Panel B: Labor market outcomes
  Employment in years 1-6                         0.325           −0.074∗∗∗ −0.071∗∗∗ −0.086∗∗∗ −0.157∗∗∗
                                                 (0.381)          (0.004)    (0.007)   (0.031)   (0.057)
   Earnings ($1,000s) in years 1-6                6.752           −2.568∗∗∗ −2.542∗∗∗ −3.867∗∗ −7.045∗∗
                                                (13.349)          (0.178)    (0.360)   (1.560)   (2.938)
   Welfare use in years 1-6                       0.510            0.063∗∗∗   0.061∗∗∗  0.060∗∗   0.109∗∗
                                                 (0.386)          (0.005)    (0.007)   (0.028)   (0.051)

 Panel C: Family structure
  Single-adult household in years 1-6             0.706             0.091∗∗∗      0.101∗∗∗     0.107∗∗       0.195∗∗
                                                 (0.376)           (0.005)       (0.008)      (0.044)       (0.079)
 Court x Year FE                                    –                Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
 Baseline Controls                                  –                Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
 Observations                                    15,536             55,324        55,324       55,324        55,324
Note: This table reports OLS, reduced form, and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of parent incarcer-
ation on the parent’s own outcomes. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table
1. Column 1 reports dependent variable means for parents who were incarcerated. Column 2 reports OLS estimates
of parental incarceration. Column 3 reports OLS estimates of parental incarceration using weights proportional to
the fraction of compliers in a given prior conviction by risk quartile cell. Column 4 reports reduced form estimates of
a judge stringency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a court section in a given year.
Column 5 reports two-stage least squares estimates that instrument for parental incarceration using judge stringency.
All regressions are run at the child level and control for court-by-year fixed effects and the baseline controls described
in Section III. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the parent (32,455 cells) and section (604 cells) levels. *** =
significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                           42
                                  Table 7: Results by Family Disadvantage
                                                                    High           Low
                                                                  Disadv.       Disadv.
                            Panel A: Child Results                   (1)           (2)
                             Conviction at ages 15-17               0.184∗∗     −0.043
                                                                  (0.073)        (0.082)
                                                                   [0.259]       [0.145]
                              Pregnancy at ages 15-17               0.080∗        0.022
                                                                  (0.046)        (0.041)
                                                                   [0.036]       [0.013]
                              High school grad. at age 19         −0.062          0.037
                                                                  (0.113)        (0.188)
                                                                   [0.330]       [0.558]
                              Employment at age 20                −0.279∗∗        0.004
                                                                  (0.128)        (0.149)
                                                                   [0.667]       [0.791]

                            Panel B: Parent Results
                             Conviction in years 1-6              −0.070        −0.100
                                                                   (0.112)       (0.140)
                                                                   [0.757]       [0.410]
                              Employment in years 1-6             −0.082        −0.245∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.069)       (0.085)
                                                                   [0.298]       [0.682]
                              Welfare use in years 1-6              0.038         0.196∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.070)       (0.069)
                                                                   [0.535]       [0.232]
                              Single-adult HH in years 1-6        −0.027          0.458∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.090)       (0.114)
                                                                   [0.667]       [0.449]
                            Court x Year FE                          Yes           Yes
                            Baseline Controls                        Yes           Yes
                            Observations                            28,363        26,961
Note: This table reports two-stage least squares results by family disadvantage. We measure family disadvantage
using an index of standardized baseline parental education, parental employment, parental criminal history, and
history of parental drug and alcohol abuse for both biological parents. High and low disadvantage are defined using
the median of the standardized index. Dependent variable means for the incarcerated group are in brackets. See the
notes for Tables 4-6 for details on the specification and variables. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant
at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                          43
          Appendix A: Additional Results
Appendix Table A1: District Courts in the Estimation Sample
            District     Number of   Total   Sample
              Court       Sections   Cases    Cases
               (1)          (2)        (3)     (4)
          Allingsås          5        4056     669
          Ängelholm           4       1263     149
          Ångermanland       6        1460     189
          Arvika              3       1617     250
          Blekinge            6       2319     362
          Boden               2        459      33
          Bollnäs             3       2301    1252
          Borås               9       7265    1252
          Eksjö              5        2368     421
          Enköping           3        1956     328
          Eskilstuna         7        6823    1094
          Eslöv               3       1180     187
          Falköping           2        499      62
          Falu               8        5524     853
          Gävle               7       4071     640
          Gällivare           4       1297     113
          Göteborg           22      26871    4257
          Gotland            3        1781     167
          Hallsberg          2         553     35
          Halmstad            9       5175     757
          Handen              9       6140     916
          Haparanda           3       1482     209
          Hässleholm          3       2070     358
          Härnösand          3         935     129
          Hedemora            3        811     134
          Helsingborg        20      10537    1688
          Huddinge           24      10946    1530
          Hudiksvall          2       2068     268
          Jakobsberg          4        903      63
          Jönkoping           7       4802     875
          Kalmar             6        4895     750
          Karlshamn           2        553      74
          Karlskoga           2       1493     258
          Karlskrona         3         857     105
          Karlstad            7       5302     831
          Katrineholm         3       1968     311
          Klippan             3        580     109
          Köping              3        651      59
          Kristianstad        7       4342     633
          Kristinehamn        2       1482     247
          Landskrona          4       1117     175
          Leksand            2         282      18
          Lidköping           4       3482     614
          Lindesberg          2       1550     300
          Linköping          13       9072    1424
          Ljungby             3       1737     305




                            44
                                   District       Number of     Total     Sample
                                    Court          Sections     Cases      Cases
                                      (1)            (2)          (3)       (4)
                                 Ludvika               2         443         29
                                 Luleå                 7         3649       484
                                 Lund                 20         7407      1099
                                 Lycksele              3          971        83
                                 Malmö                15        20243      3134
                                 Mariestad             3         1798       228
                                 Mjölby                2         734         76
                                 Mölndal               8         4210       640
                                 Mora                  3        1569        218
                                 Motala                2         502         34
                                 Nacka                 6        3863        541
                                 Norrköping           19        9290       1465
                                 Norrtälje             3        1672        259
                                 Nyköping             4          4120       633
                                 Örebro               12        8379       1091
                                 Örnskoldsvik          2          675        69
                                 Oskarshamn            3         1880       300
                                 Östersund             6         4141       631
                                 Piteå                 3         683         84
                                 Ronneby               2         374         26
                                 Sala                  3         762         95
                                 Sölvesborg            2          321        41
                                 Sandviken             2         1336       161
                                 Simrishamn            2         341         30
                                 Skellefteå            4        1972        256
                                 Skövde                4        2707        446
                                 Södertälje            6        5628        864
                                 Södra Roslag         11        4246        477
                                 Sollentuna           15        7092        941
                                 Solna                 9        5035        710
                                 Stenungsund           4         2184       358
                                 Stockholm            45        46580      6089
                                 Strömstad             2          875       117
                                 Sundsvall             7         6043       830
                                 Sunne                 2        1201        174
                                 Tierp                 3        1422        194
                                 Trelleborg            6         2579       414
                                 Trollhättan           3         2623       442
                                 Uddevalla             5        3150        540
                                 Umeå                  7        4757        643
                                 Uppsala              23        8710       1196
                                 Vänersborg            6         3049       543
                                 Varberg               9         5252       852
                                 Värnamo               3        1984        370
                                 Västerås              8        3468        476
                                 Västervik             3        1743        282
                                 Västmanland          16         5651       948
                                 Växjo                 6        4672        706
                                 Ystad                 6        2222        427
Note: This table provides additional details on the district courts in our estimation sample. Column 2 reports the
number of sections in each district court. Column 3 reports the total number of cases that are used to calculate the
judge stringency measure. Column 4 reports the number of cases that are in our estimation sample.
                                                       45
           Appendix Table A2: Pair-Wise Correlation of Judge Stringency Over Time
                                       Stringency   Stringency   Stringency   Stringency   Stringency
                                         in t-2       in t-1         in t       in t+1       in t+2
                                           (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)
         (1)   Stringency   in   t-2      1.000
         (2)   Stringency   in   t-1      0.327       1.000
         (3)   Stringency   in   t        0.276       0.398        1.000
         (4)   Stringency   in   t+1      0.236       0.264        0.375        1.000
         (5)   Stringency   in   t+2      0.215       0.262        0.262        0.331         1.000
Note: This table reports pairwise correlations between judge stringency measures over time. The correlations are
estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. Judge stringency is estimated using data from other
cases assigned to a court section in a given year.




                                                        46
                          Appendix Table A3: Additional First Stage Results
                                                        Any Incarceration
                                      (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)                    (6)
            Stringency in t         0.549∗∗∗ 0.502∗∗∗ 0.421∗∗∗ 0.439∗∗∗ 0.513∗∗∗                   0.312∗∗∗
                                   (0.063)   (0.059)   (0.053)   (0.057)   (0.061)                (0.052)
            Stringency in t-2                 0.234∗∗∗                                             0.113∗
                                             (0.065)                                              (0.065)
            Stringency in t-1                           0.388∗∗∗                                   0.325∗∗∗
                                                       (0.058)                                    (0.060)
            Stringency in t+1                                     0.398∗∗∗                         0.328∗∗∗
                                                                 (0.060)                          (0.060)
            Stringency in t+2                                               0.262∗∗∗               0.131∗∗
                                                                           (0.062)                (0.063)
          Court x Time FE             Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes                    Yes
          Baseline Controls           Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes                    Yes
          Observations              55,324    55,324    55,324    55,324    55,324                 55,324
Note: This table reports OLS estimates of parental incarceration on residualized judge leniency measures calculated
in each year. See the notes for Table 2 for additional details. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at
5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                         47
                    Appendix Table A4: First Stage Results in Different Samples
                                                                     Sample
                                                                      Mean          Any Incarceration
            Sample Restriction                                         (1)            (2)       (3)
              Full sample                                            0.281          0.581∗∗∗ 0.549∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.449)        (0.068)   (0.063)
              Male parents                                           0.308          0.643∗∗∗ 0.619∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.462)        (0.078)   (0.071)
              Female parents                                         0.157          0.291∗∗∗ 0.279∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.363)        (0.070)   (0.068)
              Parents younger than 41                                0.301          0.564∗∗∗ 0.518∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.459)        (0.078)   (0.069)
              Parents older than 40                                  0.257          0.568∗∗∗ 0.563∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.437)        (0.077)   (0.076)
              Native born parents                                    0.282          0.438∗∗∗ 0.432∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.450)        (0.077)   (0.072)
              Foreign born parents                                   0.277          0.847∗∗∗ 0.786∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.448)        (0.089)   (0.084)
              Low education parents                                  0.305          0.560∗∗∗ 0.546∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.460)        (0.075)   (0.070)
              High education parents                                 0.176          0.675∗∗∗ 0.611∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.381)        (0.095)   (0.091)
              Parents employed at baseline                           0.175          0.465∗∗∗ 0.464∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.380)        (0.072)   (0.070)
              Parents not employed at baseline                       0.353          0.638∗∗∗ 0.591∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.478)        (0.083)   (0.075)
              Parents with prior conviction                          0.410          0.671∗∗∗ 0.633∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.492)        (0.093)   (0.088)
              Parents with no prior conviction                       0.168          0.499∗∗∗ 0.489∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.374)        (0.060)   (0.060)
              Parents charged with a violent offense                 0.339          0.087     0.077
                                                                    (0.473)        (0.145)   (0.131)
              Parents charged with a property offense                0.312          0.501∗∗∗ 0.364∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.463)        (0.108)   (0.096)
              Parents charged with a drug offense                    0.421          1.258∗∗∗ 1.150∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.494)        (0.149)   (0.140)
              Parents charged with a drunk driving offense           0.455          0.338∗∗   0.357∗∗
                                                                    (0.498)        (0.151)   (0.142)
            Court x Year FE                                             –             Yes       Yes
            Baseline Controls                                           –             No        Yes
Note: This table reports first stage results for different samples. See the notes for Table 2 for additional details. ***
= significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                         48
                                  Appendix Table A5: Subsample Results
                                                                      Age           Age          Convicted     Convicted
                                       Boy           Girl            11-12         13-14          Father        Mother
                                       (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)
  Conviction at ages 15-17            0.069         0.147∗∗          0.108        0.071            0.093∗        0.074
                                     (0.076)       (0.069)          (0.081)      (0.069)          (0.053)       (0.297)
                                     [0.307]       [0.163]          [0.242]      [0.231]          [0.231]       [0.287]
  Pregnancy at ages 15-17               –           0.060∗∗          0.047        0.066            0.037         0.338
                                                  (0.030)           (0.041)      (0.049)          (0.026)       (0.296)
                                                   [0.030]          [0.028]      [0.032]          [0.028]       [0.047]
  High school grad. at age 19       −0.031        −0.000           −0.398∗        0.098            0.021       −0.117
                                    (0.125)        (0.123)          (0.222)      (0.092)          (0.091)       (0.369)
                                     [0.362]       [0.413]          [0.385]      [0.388]          [0.395]       [0.312]
  Employment at age 20              −0.059        −0.320∗          −0.701∗∗       0.015          −0.117        −0.434
                                    (0.120)        (0.164)          (0.284)      (0.111)          (0.087)       (0.640)
                                     [0.668]       [0.726]          [0.693]      [0.699]          [0.705]       [0.624]
Court x Year FE                        Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes
Baseline Controls                      Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes
Observations                          28,479        26,845           28,633       26,691          45,255        10,069
Note: This table reports two-stage least squares results by child characteristics. Dependent variable means for the
children of incarcerated parents are in brackets. See the notes for Table 4 for details on the specification and variables.
*** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                          49
       Appendix Table A6: Robustness to Sample Restrictions and Instrument Definition
                                            Sample Selection Restrictions               Instrument Calculation
                                        25+ Cases 75+ Cases First Time                    Split     Reverse
                                        Per Judge Per Judge          Cases               Sample     Sample
   Panel A: Child Results                   (1)         (2)           (3)                  (4)         (5)
    Conviction at ages 15-17               0.099∗      0.077         0.092                0.113       0.085∗
                                          (0.052)     (0.049)       (0.087)              (0.074)     (0.051)
     Pregnancy at ages 15-17               0.060∗∗     0.056∗      −0.034                 0.044       0.061∗∗
                                          (0.030)     (0.031)       (0.040)              (0.038)     (0.029)
     High school grad. at age 19         −0.013      −0.023        −0.077                 0.086     −0.007
                                          (0.087)     (0.085)       (0.137)              (0.110)     (0.085)
     Employment at age 20                −0.165∗     −0.154          0.010              −0.059      −0.134
                                          (0.096)     (0.097)       (0.148)              (0.116)     (0.093)

   Panel B: Parent Results
    Convicted in years 1-6               −0.066         −0.040         −0.102           −0.169∗         −0.054
                                         (0.092)         (0.096)        (0.145)          (0.099)         (0.090)
     Employment in years 1-6             −0.157∗∗∗      −0.120∗∗       −0.229∗∗         −0.224∗∗∗       −0.184∗∗∗
                                         (0.057)         (0.056)        (0.096)          (0.079)         (0.059)
     Welfare use in years 1-6             0.109∗∗         0.061          0.101            0.109∗          0.129∗∗
                                         (0.051)         (0.051)        (0.076)          (0.064)         (0.052)
     Single-adult HH in years 1-6         0.195∗∗         0.193∗∗        0.273∗∗          0.193∗∗         0.213∗∗∗
                                         (0.079)         (0.081)        (0.117)          (0.094)         (0.078)
   Court x Year FE                        Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
   Baseline Controls                      Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
   Observations                          55,324         49,356         14,400             41,598        52,275
Note: This table reports robustness results of our two-stage least squares results. Column 1 restricts the sample to
sections who handle at least 25 criminal cases in a given year. Column 2 restricts the sample to sections who handle
at least 75 criminal cases in a given year. Column 3 restricts the sample to first time cases. Column 4 calculates
judge stringency using a random subset of the data and estimates the treatment effects in the opposing subset of
data. Column 5 calculates judge stringency in two equal-sized and mutually exclusive sub-samples and estimates
results by stacking the two subsamples. All regressions control for court by year fixed effects and the baseline controls
described in Section III. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the parent (32,455 cells) and section (604 cells)
levels. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                         50
                                       Appendix Table A7: Robustness to Subgroup-Specific Instrument Calculation
                                                                                    Instrument Calculated Separately By:
                                                           Parent        Adults        Parent     Parent       Parent     Parent                Parent
                                                           Gender         in HH         Age     Nationality    Educ.       Emp.                  Priors
                      Panel A: Child Results                 (1)            (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)                   (7)
                       Conviction at ages 15-17             0.190∗        0.145        0.225∗∗      0.141      0.194∗∗     0.050                 0.084
                                                           (0.102)       (0.090)      (0.104)      (0.091)    (0.095)     (0.070)               (0.076)
                        Pregnancy at ages 15-17             0.096∗        0.078        0.090∗       0.094∗     0.081∗      0.076∗                0.106∗∗
                                                           (0.058)       (0.051)      (0.051)      (0.048)    (0.048)     (0.040)               (0.047)
                        High school grad. at age 19         0.057         0.028        0.048      −0.038     −0.073        0.019               −0.061
                                                           (0.157)       (0.130)      (0.163)      (0.130)    (0.144)     (0.121)               (0.125)
                        Employment at age 20              −0.142        −0.187       −0.072       −0.196     −0.106      −0.215                −0.412∗∗
                                                           (0.186)       (0.157)      (0.211)      (0.158)    (0.187)     (0.135)               (0.176)

                      Panel B: Parent Results




51
                       Conviction in years 1-6            −0.066        −0.239∗       −0.069          −0.214∗      −0.123        −0.059        −0.139
                                                           (0.144)       (0.136)       (0.150)         (0.122)      (0.138)       (0.114)       (0.109)
                        Employment in years 1-6           −0.156∗       −0.096        −0.176∗         −0.139∗      −0.170∗       −0.148∗       −0.136∗
                                                           (0.090)       (0.091)       (0.106)         (0.078)      (0.093)       (0.076)       (0.079)
                        Welfare use in years 1-6            0.027         0.034         0.068           0.125        0.103         0.095         0.148∗
                                                           (0.085)       (0.082)       (0.092)         (0.080)      (0.089)       (0.070)       (0.077)
                        Single-parent in years 1-6          0.274∗∗       0.080         0.227∗          0.196∗       0.262∗∗       0.105         0.170∗
                                                           (0.125)       (0.140)       (0.136)         (0.105)      (0.129)       (0.099)       (0.101)
                      Court x Year FE                        Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
                      Baseline Controls                      Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
                      Observations                          55,324        55,324        55,324        55,324         55,324        55,324        55,324
     Note: This table reports robustness results of our two-stage least squares results. Each column allows judge leniency to vary across the listed crime or defendant
     characteristic. All regressions control for court by year fixed effects and the baseline controls described in Section III. Standard errors are two-way clustered at
     the parent (32,455 cells) and section (604 cells) levels. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
                             Appendix Table A8: Additional Parent Results
                                               Incarcerated                      OLS w/    Reduced
                                                   Mean               OLS        Weights     Form       2SLS
Panel A: Future crime by type                       (1)               (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)
 Property conviction in years 1-6                  0.374             0.062∗∗∗     0.058∗∗∗ −0.085∗    −0.156∗
                                                  (0.484)           (0.006)      (0.008)    (0.044)    (0.080)
  Violent conviction in years 1-6                  0.191             0.038∗∗∗     0.041∗∗∗   0.076∗∗∗   0.139∗∗
                                                  (0.393)           (0.005)      (0.006)    (0.029)    (0.056)
  Drug conviction in years 1-6                     0.298             0.068∗∗∗     0.067∗∗∗   0.055      0.099∗
                                                  (0.457)           (0.006)      (0.008)    (0.033)    (0.060)
  Drunk driving conviction in years 1-6            0.149             0.041∗∗∗     0.051∗∗∗   0.035      0.064
                                                  (0.356)           (0.004)      (0.007)    (0.031)    (0.058)
  Reincarcerated in years 1-6                      0.539             0.199∗∗∗     0.206∗∗∗   0.047      0.086
                                                  (0.498)           (0.006)      (0.008)    (0.040)    (0.069)

Panel B: Income net of government transfers
 Disposable income in years 1-6            14.290                  −3.283∗∗∗ −3.485∗∗∗ −1.444               −2.632
                                          (10.717)                  (0.188)   (0.413)   (2.296)              (4.170)
Court x Year FE                               –                       Yes       Yes       Yes                  Yes
Baseline Controls                            –                        Yes       Yes       Yes                  Yes
Observations                               15,536                    55,324    55,324    55,324               55,324
Note: This table reports OLS, reduced form, and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of parent incarcera-
tion on parent outcomes. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. Column
1 reports dependent variable means for parents who were incarcerated. Column 2 reports OLS estimates of parental
incarceration. Column 3 reports OLS estimates of parental incarceration using weights proportional to the fraction
of compliers in a given prior conviction by risk quartile cell. Column 4 reports reduced form estimates of a judge
stringency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a court section in a given year. Column
5 reports two-stage least squares estimates that instrument for parental incarceration using judge stringency. All
regressions are run at the child level and control for court by year fixed effects and the baseline controls described in
Section III. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the parent (32,455 cells) and section (604 cells) levels. *** =
significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                         52
             Appendix Table A9: Parent and Non-Parent Results in Different Samples
                                                   All            Sample   Non-Sample            Non-
                                                  Adults         Parents     Parents           Parents
                                                   (1)              (2)        (3)                (4)
            Conviction in years 1-6              −0.084∗∗∗       −0.066      −0.087∗∗          −0.095∗∗
                                                 (0.030)          (0.092)     (0.043)           (0.037)
            Employment in years 1-6              −0.122∗∗∗       −0.157∗∗∗   −0.086            −0.138∗∗∗
                                                 (0.036)          (0.057)     (0.052)           (0.047)
            Earnings ($1,000s) in years 1-6      −5.281∗∗∗       −7.045∗∗    −5.033∗∗          −4.892∗∗∗
                                                 (1.340)          (2.938)     (1.972)           (1.299)
            Welfare use in years 1-6              0.029            0.109∗      0.028             0.010
                                                 (0.031)          (0.051)     (0.044)           (0.033)
            Single-adult HH in years 1-6          0.043            0.195∗∗     0.121∗∗         −0.032
                                                 (0.038)          (0.079)     (0.050)           (0.041)
          Court x Year FE                          Yes              Yes        Yes                Yes
          Baseline Controls                        Yes              Yes        Yes                Yes
          Observations                           340,047           55,324    119,325            165,398
Note: This table reports two-stage least squares results in different samples. The dependent variable is the average
over the first six years following the trial. The sample for Column 1 is all adult defendants during our sample period,
including those with no children or with children who are excluded from our estimation sample. The sample for
Column 2 is the estimation sample of adult defendants described in the notes to Table 1. The sample for Column
3 is the sample of adult defendants with children who are excluded from our estimation sample. The sample for
Column 4 is the sample adult defendants with no children. All regressions control for court by year fixed effects and
the baseline controls described in Section III. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the adult and section levels.
*** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                        53
                   Appendix Table A10: Parent Results in Different Time Periods
                                             Incarcerated                   OLS w/     Reduced
                                                 Mean               OLS     Weights      Form     2SLS
 Panel A: Years 1-3 after conviction              (1)               (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)
  Conviction in years 1-3                        0.574             0.083∗∗∗   0.089∗∗∗ −0.099∗∗ −0.180∗∗
                                                (0.495)           (0.006)    (0.009)    (0.047)  (0.089)
   Employment in years 1-3                       0.302            −0.094∗∗∗ −0.090∗∗∗ −0.090∗∗∗ −0.165∗∗∗
                                                (0.419)           (0.005)    (0.007)    (0.034)  (0.059)
   Earnings ($1,000s) in years 1-3               5.423            −2.800∗∗∗ −2.805∗∗∗ −3.443∗∗ −6.273∗∗
                                               (12.553)           (0.174)    (0.370)    (1.419)  (2.597)
   Welfare use in years 1-3                      0.573             0.078∗∗∗   0.080∗∗∗   0.039    0.071
                                                (0.441)           (0.005)    (0.007)    (0.032)  (0.057)
   Single-adult HH in years 1-3                  0.720             0.089∗∗∗   0.099∗∗∗   0.098∗   0.178∗
                                                (0.418)           (0.006)    (0.009)    (0.052)  (0.094)

 Panel B: Years 4-6 after conviction
  Conviction in years 4-6                         0.646            0.073∗∗∗   0.081∗∗∗ −0.034              −0.062
                                                 (0.478)          (0.006)    (0.008)    (0.049)             (0.087)
   Employment in years 4-6                        0.341           −0.064∗∗∗ −0.061∗∗∗ −0.082∗∗             −0.153∗∗
                                                 (0.410)          (0.005)    (0.008)    (0.035)             (0.067)
   Earnings ($1,000s) in years 4-6                7.485           −2.467∗∗∗ −2.424∗∗∗ −4.004∗∗             −7.424∗∗
                                                (14.822)          (0.206)    (0.376)    (1.777)             (3.429)
   Welfare use in years 4-6                       0.474            0.054∗∗∗   0.050∗∗∗   0.068∗∗             0.125∗∗
                                                 (0.407)          (0.005)    (0.007)    (0.030)             (0.058)
   Single-adult HH in years 4-6                   0.696            0.091∗∗∗   0.103∗∗∗   0.111∗∗             0.207∗∗
                                                 (0.402)          (0.006)    (0.009)    (0.044)             (0.081)
 Court x Year FE                                    –               Yes        Yes        Yes                 Yes
 Baseline Controls                                  –               Yes        Yes        Yes                 Yes
 Observations                                    15,536            55,324     55,324     55,324              55,324
Note: This table reports OLS, reduced form, and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of parent incarcer-
ation on the parent’s own outcomes. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table
1. Column 1 reports dependent variable means for parents who were incarcerated. Column 2 reports OLS estimates
of parental incarceration. Column 3 reports OLS estimates of parental incarceration using weights proportional to
the fraction of compliers in a given prior conviction by risk quartile cell. Column 4 reports reduced form estimates of
a judge stringency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a court section in a given year.
Column 5 reports two-stage least squares estimates that instrument for parental incarceration using judge stringency.
All regressions are run at the child level and control for court-by-year fixed effects and the baseline controls described
in Section III. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the parent (32,455 cells) and section (604 cells) levels. *** =
significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                           54
                 Appendix Table A11: Additional Results by Family Disadvantage
                                                  Convicted Parent           Non-Convicted Parent
                                                  High        Low              High       Low
                                                Disadv.     Disadv.           Disadv.    Disadv.
            Panel A: Child Results                 (1)        (2)               (3)        (4)
             Conviction at ages 15-17             0.170∗∗ −0.028               0.253∗∗∗ −0.047
                                                (0.071)     (0.094)           (0.083)    (0.074)
                                                 [0.247]    [0.157]           [0.256]    [0.151]
              Pregnancy at ages 15-17             0.120∗∗ −0.018               0.064      0.032
                                                (0.051)     (0.040)           (0.044)    (0.042)
                                                 [0.033]    [0.015]           [0.035]    [0.014]
              High school grad. at age 19         0.041    −0.090            −0.151       0.120
                                                (0.104)     (0.180)           (0.124)    (0.146)
                                                 [0.362]    [0.527]           [0.334]    [0.547]
              Employment at age 20              −0.204∗    −0.125            −0.389∗∗     0.072
                                                (0.116)     (0.181)           (0.152)    (0.137)
                                                 [0.688]    [0.771]           [0.661]    [0.795]

            Panel B: Parent Results
             Conviction in years 1-6            −0.002       −0.163            0.015       −0.156
                                                (0.097)       (0.147)         (0.130)       (0.117)
                                                 [0.777]      [0.383]         [0.670]       [0.506]
              Employment in years 1-6           −0.056       −0.306∗∗∗       −0.244∗∗∗     −0.053
                                                (0.064)       (0.098)         (0.093)       (0.079)
                                                 [0.301]      [0.685]         [0.378]       [0.595]
              Welfare use in years 1-6            0.070        0.155∗          0.085         0.112
                                                (0.066)       (0.083)         (0.070)       (0.069)
                                                 [0.528]      [0.235]         [0.491]       [0.282]
              Single-adult HH in years 1-6        0.014        0.484∗∗∗        0.094         0.289∗∗∗
                                                (0.076)       (0.138)         (0.098)       (0.101)
                                                 [0.694]      [0.417]         [0.594]       [0.527]
            Court x Year FE                        Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes
            Baseline Controls                      Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes
            Observations                          28,767       26,557          27,792       27,532
Note: This table reports additional two-stage least squares results by family disadvantage. We measure family
disadvantage using an index of standardized baseline parental education, parental employment, parental criminal
history, and history of parental drug and alcohol abuse for both biological parents. High and low disadvantage are
defined using the median of the standardized index. Dependent variable means for the incarcerated group are in
brackets. See the notes for Tables 4-6 for details on the specification and variables. *** = significant at 1 percent
level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                       55
                                            Appendix Table A12: Results by Convicted Parent Characteristics
                                           Criminal No Criminal             Low Edu.     High Edu.         Parent        Parent           Subs.      No Subs.
                                            History   History                Parent       Parent          Not Emp.      Employed          Abuse        Abuse
        Panel A: Child Results                (1)       (2)                    (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)             (7)          (8)
         Conviction at ages 15-17            0.116∗∗  −0.014                  0.115∗      −0.005            0.139∗∗     −0.037            0.220∗∗    −0.019
                                           (0.058)     (0.165)               (0.059)      (0.110)          (0.063)       (0.103)         (0.092)      (0.073)
                                            [0.249]    [0.149]               [0.240]       [0.178]         [0.256]       [0.180]         [0.253]      [0.209]
          Pregnancy at ages 15-17            0.103∗∗∗ −0.109∗∗                0.067∗        0.020           0.082∗∗     −0.005            0.125∗       0.012
                                            (0.036)    (0.055)               (0.038)      (0.026)          (0.040)       (0.053)         (0.067)      (0.034)
                                            [0.032]    [0.016]               [0.032]       [0.007]         [0.034]       [0.019]         [0.030]      [0.030]
          High school grad. at age 19      −0.007       0.023               −0.071          0.264∗        −0.031          0.012           0.035      −0.002
                                            (0.065)    (0.205)               (0.071)      (0.143)          (0.077)       (0.136)         (0.103)      (0.088)
                                            [0.325]    [0.434]               [0.330]       [0.449]         [0.313]       [0.416]         [0.328]      [0.356]
          Employment at age 20             −0.189∗    −0.139                −0.191∗       −0.079          −0.115        −0.276          −0.192       −0.167
                                            (0.102)    (0.299)               (0.107)      (0.247)          (0.111)       (0.178)         (0.153)      (0.137)
                                            [0.687]    [0.769]               [0.699]       [0.730]         [0.674]       [0.773]         [0.696]      [0.697]

        Panel B: Parent Results
         Conviction in years 1-6           −0.019           −0.285          −0.057        −0.163           −0.081         0.032           0.043      −0.169




56
                                            (0.092)          (0.228)         (0.096)       (0.180)          (0.101)      (0.168)         (0.105)      (0.127)
                                            [0.807]          [0.312]         [0.775]       [0.548]          [0.821]      [0.534]         [0.860]      [0.540]
          Employment in years 1-6          −0.123∗∗         −0.268          −0.087        −0.412∗∗∗        −0.083       −0.329∗∗∗       −0.006       −0.254∗∗∗
                                            (0.056)          (0.163)         (0.061)       (0.117)          (0.066)      (0.101)         (0.079)      (0.080)
                                            [0.284]          [0.611]         [0.308]       [0.489]          [0.213]      [0.649]         [0.240]      [0.478]
          Welfare use in years 1-6           0.090∗           0.228∗          0.119∗        0.238∗∗          0.097        0.161∗          0.056        0.134∗∗
                                            (0.054)          (0.136)         (0.063)      (0.105)           (0.066)      (0.086)         (0.084)      (0.064)
                                            [0.541]          [0.296]         [0.527]       [0.359]          [0.579]      [0.308]         [0.575]      [0.395]
          Single-adult HH in years 1-6       0.104            0.599∗∗∗        0.076         0.580∗∗∗         0.021        0.569∗∗∗        0.036        0.323∗∗∗
                                            (0.075)          (0.218)         (0.081)      (0.161)           (0.078)      (0.157)         (0.086)      (0.115)
                                            [0.735]          [0.499]         [0.718]       [0.624]          [0.737]      [0.617]         [0.768]      [0.595]
        Court x Year FE                       Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes
        Baseline Controls                     Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes
        Observations                         40,417         14,907           43,337        10,014           32,523       22,298           24,228       31,096
     Note: This table reports two-stage least squares results by the convicted parent characteristics. We measure family disadvantage using an index of standardized
     baseline parental education, parental employment, parental criminal history, and history of parental drug and alcohol abuse. High and low disadvantage are
     defined using the median of the standardized index. Dependent variable means for the incarcerated group are in brackets. See the notes for Tables 4-6 for details
     on the specification and variables. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                         Appendix Table A13: Results by Non-Convicted Parent Characteristics
                                            Criminal No Criminal             Low Edu.     High Edu.         Parent     Parent               Subs.      No Subs.
                                             History   History                Parent       Parent          Not Emp. Employed                Abuse        Abuse
        Panel A: Child Results                 (1)       (2)                    (3)           (4)             (5)        (6)                 (7)          (8)
         Conviction at ages 15-17             0.306∗∗∗ −0.010                  0.102         0.085           0.256∗∗∗ −0.020                0.396∗∗      0.044
                                            (0.102)     (0.063)               (0.073)       (0.111)         (0.094)    (0.083)             (0.197)      (0.058)
                                             [0.296]    [0.191]               [0.249]       [0.178]         [0.276]    [0.202]             [0.296]      [0.222]
          Pregnancy at ages 15-17             0.088      0.025                 0.041         0.039           0.043      0.031               0.065        0.050
                                            (0.063)     (0.033)               (0.041)       (0.047)         (0.050)    (0.036)             (0.094)      (0.033)
                                             [0.044]    [0.019]               [0.034]       [0.016]         [0.044]    [0.019]             [0.037]      [0.028]
          High school grad. at age 19       −0.172∗      0.093               −0.147∗         0.334∗∗       −0.082       0.047             −0.300∗        0.061
                                            (0.100)     (0.093)               (0.083)       (0.154)         (0.101)    (0.085)             (0.176)      (0.075)
                                             [0.272]    [0.389]               [0.320]       [0.471]         [0.267]    [0.419]             [0.267]      [0.356]
          Employment at age 20              −0.456∗∗     0.005               −0.196        −0.069          −0.367∗∗     0.005             −0.544∗      −0.078
                                            (0.210)     (0.128)               (0.137)       (0.170)         (0.170)    (0.134)             (0.305)      (0.107)
                                             [0.636]    [0.743]               [0.693]       [0.768]         [0.625]    [0.770]             [0.652]      [0.708]

        Panel B: Parent Results
         Conviction in years 1-6              0.008         −0.130           −0.056        −0.177           −0.055        −0.134          −0.057       −0.062




57
                                            (0.130)          (0.103)          (0.121)       (0.155)          (0.126)       (0.122)         (0.174)      (0.098)
                                             [0.840]         [0.674]          [0.768]       [0.677]          [0.789]       [0.711]         [0.881]      [0.713]
          Employment in years 1-6           −0.195∗∗        −0.135∗          −0.107        −0.059           −0.174        −0.058          −0.188       −0.143∗∗
                                            (0.091)          (0.073)          (0.078)      (0.095)           (0.108)       (0.074)         (0.139)      (0.064)
                                             [0.228]         [0.399]          [0.311]       [0.395]          [0.265]       [0.381]         [0.199]      [0.356]
          Welfare use in years 1-6            0.082           0.104∗           0.131∗        0.065            0.054         0.122∗          0.134        0.095∗
                                             (0.078)         (0.061)          (0.071)      (0.095)           (0.076)       (0.068)         (0.130)      (0.055)
                                             [0.588]         [0.451]          [0.522]       [0.435]          [0.567]       [0.454]         [0.634]      [0.480]
          Single-adult HH in years 1-6        0.030           0.294∗∗∗         0.132         0.300∗∗          0.212         0.185∗∗         0.057        0.221∗∗∗
                                             (0.106)         (0.100)          (0.104)      (0.138)           (0.130)       (0.094)         (0.124)      (0.084)
                                             [0.727]         [0.690]          [0.714]       [0.709]          [0.697]       [0.720]         [0.748]      [0.695]
        Court x Year FE                        Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
        Baseline Controls                      Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
        Observations                          20,547        34,777            37,419        12,588           21,704        30,359           8,621        46,703
     Note: This table reports two-stage least squares results by the non-convicted parent characteristics. We measure family disadvantage using an index of standardized
     baseline parental education, parental employment, parental criminal history, and history of parental drug and alcohol abuse. High and low disadvantage are defined
     using the median of the standardized index. Dependent variable means for the incarcerated group are in brackets. See the notes for Tables 4-6 for details on the
     specification and variables. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
 Appendix Table A14: Results by Both Convicted and Non-Convicted Parent Characteristics
                                        Convicted High Disadvantage            Convicted Low Disadvantage
                                         Non-Conv.      Non-Conv.               Non-Conv.     Non-Conv.
                                        High Disadv.   Low Disadv.             High Disadv. Low Disadv.
    Panel A: Child Results                  (1)             (2)                    (3)            (4)
     Conviction at ages 15-17                0.218∗∗         0.109                  0.302∗       −0.290∗∗
                                            (0.099)         (0.094)                (0.162)        (0.132)
                                            [0.281]         [0.190]                [0.210]        [0.126]
      Pregnancy at ages 15-17                0.160∗∗       −0.012                 −0.085           0.055
                                            (0.074)         (0.051)                (0.053)        (0.055)
                                            [0.041]         [0.020]                [0.025]        [0.010]
      High school grad. at age 19          −0.061            0.106                −0.419           0.110
                                            (0.136)         (0.172)                (0.294)        (0.222)
                                            [0.298]         [0.467]                [0.402]        [0.600]
      Employment at age 20                 −0.435∗∗          0.090                −0.313           0.215
                                            (0.194)         (0.154)                (0.254)        (0.265)
                                            [0.637]         [0.772]                [0.704]        [0.810]

    Panel B: Parent Results
     Conviction in years 1-6                  0.050           −0.096               −0.053           −0.219
                                             (0.133)           (0.115)              (0.232)          (0.194)
                                             [0.800]           [0.739]              [0.431]          [0.356]
      Employment in years 1-6               −0.138              0.064              −0.521∗∗∗        −0.173
                                             (0.104)           (0.086)              (0.166)          (0.128)
                                             [0.260]           [0.371]              [0.594]          [0.737]
      Welfare use in years 1-6                0.009             0.132                0.187            0.120
                                             (0.082)           (0.091)              (0.131)          (0.108)
                                             [0.574]           [0.452]              [0.340]          [0.173]
      Single-adult HH in years 1-6            0.004             0.058                0.188            0.647∗∗∗
                                             (0.099)           (0.115)              (0.180)          (0.192)
                                             [0.686]           [0.708]              [0.427]          [0.411]
    Court x Year FE                          Yes              Yes                   Yes              Yes
    Baseline Controls                        Yes              Yes                   Yes              Yes
    Observations                            18,004           10,763                9,788            16,769
Note: This table reports two-stage least squares results by both convicted and non-convicted parent characteristics.
We measure family disadvantage for both biological parents separately using an index of standardized baseline parental
education, parental employment, parental criminal history, and history of parental drug and alcohol abuse. High
and low disadvantage are defined using the median of the standardized index. Dependent variable means for the
incarcerated group are in brackets. See the notes for Tables 4-6 for details on the specification and variables. *** =
significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                        58
                        Appendix Figure A1: Criminal Case Process in Sweden


                                                                                                  Fines (37%)
                                                                                                Probation (24%)
                                                                                                  Other (10%)




 Suspect Identified               Charged (43%)                 Court Trial (77%)             Incarceration (23%)




                                 Dismissed (46%)              No Prosecution (8%)
                                                                                                Not Guilty (6%)
                                   Other (11%)                  Confession (15%)



Note: This figure illustrates the criminal case process in Sweden. The figure reports percentages for 2004.




                                                       59
                                                   Appendix Figure A2: Trends in Incarceration Rates




                         800
           Incarceration rate per 100,000
              200       400
                         0         600




                                            1980     1985     1990       1995           2000      2005         2010   2015
                                                                                 Year

                                                                     Sweden                    United States
                                                                     OECD Avg.

Note: This figure plots incarceration rates per 100,000 individuals. Prior to 2000, the OECD average does not include
Germany and Switzerland. The OECD average is not population weighted. Canadian estimates are lagged one year
due to differences in reporting. Source: Institute for Criminal Policy Research.




                                                                              60
                                        Appendix Figure A3: Incarceration Costs by Country


           $160,000

           $140,000

           $120,000

           $100,000

            $80,000

            $60,000

            $40,000

            $20,000

                $0
                      Sweden
                               Norway
                                        Netherlands
                                                      Luxembourg
                                                                   Denmark
                                                                             Ireland
                                                                                       Finland
                                                                                                 Iceland
                                                                                                           Canada
                                                                                                                    Italy
                                                                                                                            Belgium
                                                                                                                                      Germany
                                                                                                                                                United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                 Austria
                                                                                                                                                                           France
                                                                                                                                                                                    United States
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Czech Republic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Slovak Republic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Estonia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Hungary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Latvia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mexico
Note: This figure plots annual per inmate costs for the most recent year available. Estimates for Mexico are based on
entire judicial budget rather than prison estimates and thus most likely overestimate cost per year. Sources: Institute
of Public Affairs and Descifrando el Gasto Publico en Seguridad-Ethos laboratorio de Politicals Publicas.




                                                                                                                                                61
                         Appendix Figure A4: Distribution of Judge Stringency and First Stage




                                 .06




                                                                                                  Residualized Pr(Incarceration)
                                                                                                .4
            Fraction of Sample
                                 .04




                                                                                                .35
                                                                                                .3
                                 .02




                                                                                                .25
                                                                                                .2
                                 0




                                       -.15   -.1   -.05      0           .05   .1        .15
                                                       Judge Stringency


Note: This figure reports the distribution of the judge stringency measure that is estimated using data from other
cases assigned to a judge in the same year following the procedure described in Section III. The solid line shows a
local linear regression of incarceration on judge stringency. The dashed lines show 90 percent confidence intervals.




                                                             62
              Appendix Figure A5: Probability of Child and Parent Earnings Above Threshold
    .4        Panel A: Child Earnings ($) at Age 20                         Panel B: Parent Earnings ($) in Years 1-6




                                                                      .4
    .2




                                                                      .2
    0




                                                                      0
    -.2




                                                                      -.2
    -.4




                                                                      -.4
          0        10000   20000         30000   40000   50000              0      10000   20000         30000   40000   50000
                              Earnings Cutoff                                                 Earnings Cutoff



Note: This figure reports two-stage least squares estimates and corresponding 90 percent confidence intervals for the
impact of parental incarceration on the probability of having earnings above each income threshold. See the text for
additional details.




                                                                 63
                            Appendix B: Interpreting our LATE

This section includes additional details on how we calculate the number and characteristics of those
who are always takers, never takers, and compliers in our sample. As described in the main text,
we then use the share of compliers relative to the share of the estimation sample as weights when
estimating our OLS specifications.

Overview: Following Dahl et al. (2014), we define compliers as children whose parents incarceration
decision would have been different had their case been assigned to the most strict instead of the
least strict judge:

     πc = P r(P risoni = 1|Zi = z) − P r(P risoni = 1|Zi = z) = P r(P risoni (z) > P risoni (z))

where z represents the maximum value of our judge instrument (the most stringent judge) and z
represents the minimum value of our instrument (the least stringent judge).
   Always takers are children whose parents would always be incarcerated regardless of the judge
assigned to their case. Because of the monotonicity and independence assumptions, the fraction of
always takers is given by the probability of a parent being incarcerated for the least stringent judge:

                 πa = P r(P risoni = 1|Zi = z) = P r(P risoni (z) = P risoni (z) = 1)

Finally, never takers are children whose parents would never be incarcerated, with the fraction of
never takers given by the probability of not being incarcerated by the most stringent judge:

                 πn = P r(P risoni = 0|Zi = z) = P r(P risoni (z) = P risoni (z) = 0)


Number of Compliers: We calculate the shares of children in each category by looking at the rates
of parental incarceration for the “most lenient” and “most strict” judges. In Table B1, we estimate
our linear specification of the first stage of incarceration on our residualized measure of judge
stringency controlling for our exhaustive court-by-time fixed effects, under different definitions of
the most lenient and most stringent judges. Under our preferred specification where we define most
lenient judge as the bottom 1 percentile of judge stringency and the most strict judge as the top 1
percentile of judge stringency, we find that 16 percent of our sample are compliers, 64 percent are
never takers, and 20 percent are always takers.

Characteristics of Compliers: We also characterize our population of compliers by observable char-
acteristics, which can be recovered by calculating the fraction of compliers in different subsamples
(Abadie 2003, Dahl et al. 2014). We find that compliers are significantly more likely to be of high
socioeconomic status and have a drunk driving offense. Compliers are also somewhat less likely to
be a first-time offender.



                                                  64
                               Appendix B References

[1] Abadie, Alberto. 2003. “Semiparametric Instrumental Variable Estimation of Treatment Re-
      sponse Models.” Journal of Econometrics, 113(2): 231-263.
[2] Dahl, Gordon B., Andreas Ravndal Kostøl, and Magne Mogstad. 2014. “Family Welfare Cul-
      tures.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1711-1752.




                                             65
                       Appendix Table B1: Sample Share by Compliance Type
                                                 1 percent     1.5 percent    2 percent
                              Compliers            0.162          0.147         0.131
                              Never takers         0.646          0.651         0.657
                              Always takers        0.192          0.202         0.212
Note: This table reports the the share of always takers, never takers, and compliers in our sample. Compliers are
defined as convicted parents whose prison sentences decision would have been different had their case been assigned
to the most lenient instead of the most strict judge. Always takers are instead parents who would never be released
regardless of the judge assigned to their case. Finally, never takers are parents who would never be incarcerated
regardless of the stringency of the judge. Following Dahl et al. (2014) we calculate the shares of parents in each
category by looking at the prison rates for parents assigned to the most lenient and most strict judges. We define the
most lenient judge as the bottom 1/1.5/2 percentile of judge stringency and the most strict judge as the top 1/1.5/2
percentile of judge stringency. We estimate our linear specification of the first stage to recover compliers as the share
of parents predicted to get incarcerated at the top percentile minus the share of parents predicted to get incarcerated
at the bottom percentile, always takers as the share of parents predicted to be sentenced to prison at the bottom
percentile and never takers as the share of parents who are predicted to be released at the top percentile.




                                                         66
        Appendix Table B2: Characteristics of Marginal Defendants and Their Children
                                                                                              P [X=x|complier]
                                                         P [X = x]     P [X = x|complier]         P [X=x]
    Child is native born                                    0.911             0.911                1.000
                                                          (0.001)            (0.016)              (0.017)
    Child is foreign born                                   0.089             0.089                0.999
                                                          (0.001)            (0.016)              (0.176)
    Low education parent                                    0.815             0.786                0.965
                                                          (0.002)            (0.023)              (0.028)
    High education parent                                   0.185             0.214                1.154
                                                          (0.002)            (0.023)              (0.125)
    Parent with prior conviction                            0.466             0.540                1.159
                                                          (0.002)            (0.030)              (0.064)
    Parent with no prior conviction                         0.534             0.460                0.861
                                                          (0.002)            (0.030)              (0.056)
    Parent employed at baseline                             0.407             0.333                0.819
                                                          (0.002)            (0.030)              (0.074)
    Parent not employed at baseline                         0.593             0.667                1.124
                                                          (0.002)            (0.030)              (0.051)
    Parent charged with violent offense                     0.150             0.023                0.156
                                                          (0.002)            (0.033)              (0.220)
    Parent charged with non-violent offense                 0.850             0.977                1.149
                                                          (0.002)            (0.033)              (0.039)
    Parent charged with drug offense                        0.070             0.158                2.274
                                                          (0.001)            (0.018)              (0.250)
    Parent charged with non-drug offense                    0.930             0.842                0.905
                                                          (0.001)            (0.018)              (0.019)
    Parent charged with property offense                    0.192             0.161                0.841
                                                          (0.002)            (0.022)              (0.115)
    Parent charged with non-property offense                0.808             0.839                1.038
                                                          (0.002)            (0.022)              (0.027)
    Parent charged with drunk driving offense               0.126             0.074                0.586
                                                          (0.001)            (0.024)              (0.187)
    Parent charged with non-drunk driving offense           0.874             0.926                1.060
                                                          (0.001)            (0.024)              (0.027)
Note: This table presents the sample distribution, complier distribution, and relative likelihood for different sub-
groups. Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses are obtained using 500 replications.




                                                       67
                             Appendix C: Social Cost Calculations

This section includes additional details on the long-run social cost calculations described in the main
text. We caution that these long-run calculations are speculative for at least two reasons. First, the
correlation between early-life outcomes and long-term earnings may either under or overstate the
causal impact of parental incarceration on long-term earnings. Second, many of our two-stage least
squares estimates are imprecise and, as a result, the confidence interval surrounding our long-term
cost calculation is large.

                                        A. Parent Outcomes

Lost Parental Earnings: In Table 6, we estimate that incarceration decreases annual formal sector
earnings over the first six years by $7,045 for the marginally incarcerated parent. Following Chetty,
Hendren, and Katz (2016), we assume this effect is constant over the rest of the lifetime and discount
future earnings through age 64 back to age 40, the mean age in our sample, using a discount rate
of 3 percent. These calculations imply incarcerated parents earn $126,356 less in present value over
their remaining years in the labor force.

Social Cost of New Parental Crime: We estimate the social cost of future parental crime using our
crime-specific estimates in Table A8. These estimates show that the marginally incarcerated parent
is 13.9 percentage points more likely to be convicted of a violent crime, 9.9 percentage points more
likely to be convicted of a drug crime, and 6.4 percentage points more likely to be convicted of a
drunk driving crime. Incarcerated parents are also 15.6 percentage points less likely to be convicted
of a property crime. We then multiply each crime-specific two-stage least squares estimate by the
lower and upper bound cost of crime estimates from Mueller-Smith (2015). To be conservative in
our social cost estimates, we assume violent crimes are assaults and property crimes are larceny,
the two crimes in their category with the lowest estimated social costs. Aggregating across these
measures, we find a lower bound social cost of crime of $6,114 and an upper bound of $15,626.

Social Cost of New Parental Welfare Payments: We estimate the social cost of future welfare pay-
ments using the two-stage least squares estimate from Table 6. These results show that incarcerated
parents are 10.9 percentage points more likely to receive welfare over the first six years following
their trial. Following our earnings calculation, we assume this effect is constant over the rest of the
lifetime and discount future welfare use through age 64 back to age 40, the mean age in our sample,
using a discount rate of 3 percent. We also assume that average welfare payments over the lifetime
are $10,968, as reported in OECD statistics. These calculations suggest that the total increase in
welfare payments for an incarcerated parent are equal to $21,442 in present value.
   However, the social costs of these additional social assistance payments are restricted to the tax-
induced distortions of financing the social welfare system. We estimate the costs of these distortions
using information from Kleven and Kreiner (2003), who calculate the marginal cost of public funds
(MCF) in Sweden to be approximately 1.74 after accounting for labor supply responses on both


                                                  68
the intensive and extensive margin. This estimate implies that the social cost of the new welfare
payments is 74% of the monetary cost of any social assistance payments, or $15,867 in present value.

                                        B. Child Outcomes

Lost Child Earnings: In Table 5, we estimate that parental incarceration decreases earnings at
age 20 by $1,654. Early-life earnings are only weakly correlated with lifetime earnings, however,
making it difficult to accurately measure the impact of parental incarceration over all years in the
labor market using only this estimate. We therefore impute earnings effects at longer time horizons
using the correlation between earnings at 25, 30, and 35, and several of our early-life outcomes (see
Appendix Table C1). Specifically, we multiply each correlation with its corresponding two-stage
least square estimate from Tables 4 and 5 to generate the imputed impact of parental incarceration
at each age.
   We then use the observed effect of parental incarceration at age 20 and the imputed effects at
ages 25, 30, and 35 to calculate the impact of parental incarceration on lifetime earnings. Following
our calculation for lost parental earnings, we assume a constant treatment effect after age 35 and
discount future earnings through age 64 using a discount rate of 3 percent. These calculations imply
that the children of incarcerated parents earn $36,471 less in present value over their years in the
labor force.

Social Cost of New Child Crime: We estimate the social costs of future child crime using our
crime-specific estimates from Table 4 and the social costs by crime type compiled by Mueller-Smith
(2015). We again use the lowest cost estimate for each major crime type (e.g., the costs of assaults
for violent crime) to provide a conservative estimate of these costs. Table C2 presents these crime-
specific estimates and the upper and lower bound cost estimates by crime type used to calculate
social costs. Aggregating across all crime types, we find that the social cost of new child crime is
between $4,005 and $9,406.

Social Cost of New Child Welfare Payments: We estimate the social cost of future welfare payments
for children using the two-stage least squares estimate from Table 5. These results show that
parental incarceration increases welfare use at age 20 by 9.6 percentage points. Unlike our earnings
calculation, we assume this effect is constant over the rest of the lifetime and discount future
welfare use through age 64 using a discount rate of 3 percent. We again assume that average
welfare payments over the lifetime are $10,968 and that there are no tax-induced distortions to the
economy. These calculations imply that the total increase in welfare payments is equal to $22,269
per child in present value. Following the calculations outlined above, the social cost of these new
welfare payments is equal to $16,479 per child.

Social Cost of New Child Pregnancy: We estimate the social cost of teenage pregnancy for children
using the two-stage least squares estimate from Table 4. These results show that parental incar-
ceration increases teen pregnancy by 6.0 percentage points. Using the estimated cost of a teenage


                                                  69
pregnancy of $21,804 from Chaaban and Cunningham (2011), this implies an additional social cost
of $1,308 for the parents of female children.

                                 C. Total Social Cost Calculations

We combine our social cost estimates for lost earnings, increased social assistance usage, new crime,
and new pregnancy to estimate the total social cost of parental incarceration. Based on our above
assumptions, social costs for the incarcerated parent ranges from $148,337 to $157,849 and social
costs for each child ranges from $58,265 to $63,665. If we multiply the social cost per child by the
average number of children for families in our sample (2.767), this implies that the total social cost
of parental incarceration is between $309,556 and $334,010 per family.



                                   Appendix C References

 [1] Chaaban, Jad, and Wendy Cunningham. 2011. “Measuring the Economic Gain of Investing in
        Girls.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5753.
 [2] Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. “The Effects of Exposure to
        Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Exper-
        iment.” American Economic Review, 106(4): 855-902.
 [3] Kleven, Henrik J., and Claus Kreiner. 2003. “The Marginal Cost of Public Funds in OECD
        Countries: Hours of Work Versus Labor Force Participation.” CESifo Working Paper 935.
 [4] Mueller-Smith, Michael. 2015. “The Criminal and Labor Market Impacts of Incarceration.”
        Unpublished Working Paper.




                                                 70
    Appendix Table C1: Correlation Between Early-Life Outcomes and Long-Run Earnings
                                                        Earnings Earnings Earnings
                                                        at age 25 at age 30 at age 35
                                                           (1)       (2)       (3)
                       Convicted at ages 15-17          −1.860∗∗∗ −4.172∗∗∗ −5.067∗∗∗
                                                         (0.129)   (0.164)   (0.213)
                       Pregnancy at ages 15-17          −1.991∗∗∗ −1.773∗∗∗ −1.700∗∗∗
                                                         (0.317)   (0.408)   (0.527)
                       High school graduate at 19         2.978∗∗∗  6.933∗∗∗  8.792∗∗∗
                                                         (0.089)   (0.116)   (0.159)
                       Employed at age 20                 6.268∗∗∗  5.964∗∗∗  7.132∗∗∗
                                                         (0.100)   (0.132)   (0.176)
                     Dep. Variable Mean                   17.358    24.317    31.639
Note: This table reports correlations between early-life outcomes and earnings at different ages. *** = significant at
1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                        71
                       Appendix Table C2: Details of Social Cost Calculations
                                                                2SLS        Lower      Upper
                                                              Estimate     Bound       Bound
                   Panel A: Child crime                          (1)         (2)        (3)
                    Violent crime                               0.078      $41,046    $109,903
                                                               (0.032)
                      Property crime                            0.079      $9,598      $9,974
                                                               (0.041)
                      Drug crime                                0.018      $2,544      $2,544
                                                               (0.019)
                   Panel B: Parental crime
                    Violent crime                                0.139     $41,046    $109,903
                                                               (0.056)
                      Property crime                            -0.156     $9,598      $9,974
                                                               (0.080)
                      Drug crime                                 0.099     $2,544      $2,544
                                                               (0.060)
                      Drunk driving crime                       0.064      $25,842     $25,842
                                                               (0.058)
                   Panel C: Child social assistance and pregnancy
                    Pregnancy                              0.060           $21,804     $21,804
                                                          (0.030)
                    Welfare usage                          0.096           $10,968     $10,968
                                                          (0.117)
                   Panel D: Parental social assistance
                    Welfare usage                               0.109      $10,968     $10,968
                                                               (0.051)
Note: This table reports two-stage least squares coefficients and upper and lower bound social cost of crime estimates.
For cost of crime estimates, we use the values presented in Mueller-Smith (2015). To be conservative in our cost
estimates, we assume violent crime are assaults, property crime are larceny, and drug crimes are possession.




                                                        72
