                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      QUALITY OF PUBLIC GOVERNANCE AND THE CAPITAL STRUCTURE OF
                          NATIONS AND FIRMS

                                         Shang-Jin Wei
                                           Jing Zhou

                                      Working Paper 24184
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24184


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2018




We thank Patrick Bolton, Jun Qian, Neng Wang, Yinxi Xie, and participants at the Geneva
Institute of International Studies conference, FISF workshop and CFA Annual Meeting for
helpful comments. All errors are the authors’ responsibilities. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Shang-Jin Wei and Jing Zhou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Quality of Public Governance and the Capital Structure of Nations and Firms
Shang-Jin Wei and Jing Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 24184
January 2018
JEL No. F3,G15,G32

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper examines the role of public governance quality in determining the composition of a
country’s external liabilities and the capital structure of firms. In our theory, better institutional
quality tends to promote a higher share of foreign direct investment and equity investment in total
foreign liabilities, and a higher share of long-term debt within the debt/loan category. Similar
prediction holds for the capital structure of firms. We conduct extensive empirical investigation
by exploring both firm level data and country level data and find supportive evidence for these
predictions.

Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu

Jing Zhou
Economics Department
Columbia University
jz2480@columbia.edu
1       Introduction

The composition of capital flows matters for economic efficiency (for instance, Levchenko and Mauro
(2007), Contessi, De Pace and Francis (2013), Evans and Hnatkovska (2014)) and financial stability.
For example, in the immediate aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis of 2008-2009, countries
that rely more on external debt exhibit a stronger liquidity shock at home than countries that rely
more on foreign direct investment,      1   and long-term debt plays an important role in credit risk and
business cycle dynamics.2
        In this paper, we study the role of the quality of domestic institutions in determining the
composition of external liabilities as well as domestic funding structure of investment. In our theory,
different degrees of investor patience together with the strength of property rights protection will
determine who invest in equity and who invest in bonds/loans. Productivity (or future payoff)
differs across projects. This, together with the strength of contract enforcement, will determine the
share of long-term debt in total debt. The key mechanism is that as institutional quality strengthens,
it reduces the expropriation risk faced by the equity investors and thus promotes equity financing.
In the meantime, high institutional quality enhances the protection of property rights and the
enforcement of contracts, therefore it stimulates long-term debt financing. Overall, high institutional
quality leads to both larger equity share in total financing and larger share of long-term debt in
total debt financing.
        We take these predictions to data in two ways. First, we examine the structure of a country’s
external liabilities. We find that countries with stronger institutions tend to have more equity
investment (especially foreign direct investment) as a share of their total external liabilities, and
more long-term debt as a share of their external debt. These patterns are consistent with the model
predictions. Second, we examine the patterns of capital structure of publicly listed firms across
countries and find interesting systematic differences across countries. In particular, firms in countries
with stronger public institutions tend to have a higher share of equity and to issue more long-term
debt relative to short-term debt. These patterns are also consistent with the model predictions.
        This paper builds on the two strands of literature - optimal capital structure and governance
quality and extends the existing literature on both empirical and theoretical aspects. First, the
    1
        Tong and Wei (2010), Claessens, Tong and Wei (2012))
    2
        Gomes, Jermann and Schmid (2016) and Miao and Wang (2010)




                                                       2
paper is related to a growing literature on the impacts of governance quality and financial decisions.
Gelos and Wei (2002) documents that the quality of a country’s domestic institutions in the area of
transparency appears to be a significant risk factor in international mutual funds’ portfolio holdings.
In particular, countries with more opaque institutions tend to attract less equity investment relative
to the prediction of a standard international capital asset pricing model (where a country’s share
of global equity investment should be proportional to its investable assets as a share of the total
international equity market). The paper does not examine the determination of relative size of
equity versus debt, or the maturity structure of debt. Fratzscher (2012) analyzes the determinants
of the volume of capital inflows. It does not explore determinants of the ratio of equity and debt and
maturity structure of debt. Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan and Volosovych (2008) looks into the positive
impact of institutional quality in attracting one specific type of inflow - foreign direct investment -
but not on the other capital types. Our work sheds further light on not only FDI but also debt
and equity, and it incorporates the trade-offs among different types of capital flow. Kalemli-Ozcan,
Sorensen and Yesiltas (2012) documents changes in the leverage ratios by firms and banks across
countries before and after the recent global financial crisis. One interesting finding is that countries
with better institutions exhibit less de-leveraging by their banks during the crisis. The paper is
meant to be descriptive and does not propose or test any formal theory of capital structure of
nations. Klein (2005) documents a non-monotonic interaction between the responsiveness of growth
to capital account liberalization and institutional quality, and our work provides complementary
evidence on how institutional quality affects capital structure, which is an important aspect of
financial development and growth. Forbes, Reinhardt and Wieladek (2017) uses UK’s Funding for
Lending Scheme as a natural experiment and finds that in response to higher capital requirements,
UK banks cut lending more to countries with weaker institutions. Qian and Strahan (2007) finds
that creditor rights index and effectiveness of contract enforcement are important determinants
of bank loan contracts. Our finding confirms that institutional quality is crucial in affecting the
quantity of debt flow, and it particularly points out the importance of governance quality in shaping
the maturity of external debt.
   Second, this paper contributes to a large literature on capital structure determination both on
corporate finance and nation’s aggregate finance. For instance, Bolton and Scharfstein (1996) builds
the insight that banks and bondholders differ in their degree of flexibility in times of financial distress,



                                                     3
and Shleifer and Vishny (1997) survey the classic theories in the literature of corporate financing
decisions. More recent studies include De Fiore and Uhlig (2015) highlighting the asymmetric
information between loan finance intermediary and bond finance intermediary. Crouzet (2014)
endogenizes capital structure in a model with banks and market lenders differing in their ability to
deal with financial distress. The closest one to our work is Brunnermeier and Oehmke (2013) . They
explain the prevailing short-term debt by inability to commit to a maturity structure by borrowers.
In particular, borrowers have an incentive to shorten the maturity of an individual creditor’s debt
contract because borrowers can effectively gain from diluting other creditors’ claims in the event of
a bankruptcy. In response, all creditors would opt for short term debt contracts. Brunnermeier
and Oehmke (2013) does not discuss the debt-equity ratio within a common framework with debt
maturity, and does not engage in empirical investigation. In comparison, we will incorporate the risk
of dilution of rights that long-term creditors face as a key element of our model. On the other hand,
we will engage in extensive empirical investigations connecting institutional quality and equity/debt
ratio and maturity structure of debt for both external liabilities across nations and capital structure
of firms across countries.
   On the nation’s aggregate capital structure, there is also a growing literature. Razin, Sadka and
Yuen (1998) develops a pecking order of international capital flows with a model of asymmetric
information. Goldstein and Razin (2006) extends asymmetric information to a model foreign direct
investments and foreign portfolio investments. Bolton and Huang (2016) takes a corporate finance
approach to analyze debt and currency financing of a nation’s investments. Chang, Fernández and
Gulan (2017) develops a dynamic model to study the a rebalancing from bank loans towards bond
of emerging economy’s external financing. The existing papers have provided frameworks to analyze
the capital structure in terms of equity (including FDI) and debt, yet the maturity structure is not
included in the theoretical consideration. Therefore, one contribution of this paper is to endogenize
debt financing with multiple maturities and embed it in a model that simultaneously determines
equity/debt ratio. Our theory is a succinct and simple one. Future research can enrich the model
with more details, such as the distinction between FDI versus investment in the stock market by
foreign investors, or the distinction between bonds and bank loans.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a simple theoretical model that
connects public governance to the capital structure of nations. Section 3 describes the data. Section



                                                  4
4 supplies the empirical evidence based on balance-of-payments data. Section 5 examines firm-level
capital structure and relates it to country-level quality of governance. Finally, Section 6 provides
concluding remarks.


2   The Model

Consider a three-period model of financing choice. A production project starts in period 0 and
needs a start-up funding that is normalized to one and has to come entirely from external financing.
After the project is initiated, the payoff will materialize in period 2. The payoff takes two values 1
and 2, where the probability of resulting in a high payoff (θ) is a random variable with a uniform
distribution on [0, 1]. There is a large number of potential investors who differ in the probability (λ)
of being hit by a liquidity shock in period 1, and λ is uniformly distributed on [0, 1].
    There are three channels via which an investor can fund a project: equity (including FDI),
long-term debt, and short-term debt. Each investor has an identical outside option as that pays an
interest rate of r∗ . We adopt the framework of Goldstein and Razin (2006): if investors choose to
finance a project as equity holders, they become the full owner of the project. If investors choose
debt financing, regardless of the maturity, then there needs to be an outsider to managing the
project. With these simplifying assumptions, the model does not discuss a split between internal and
external financing. Instead, it focuses on the determination of the structure of external financing.
All investors and entrepreneurs are assumed to be risk neutral.
    The time line of the model goes as follows. In period 0, investors choose among three forms
of financing: equity, long-term debt, or short-term debt investment. Payoff shock (θ) is realized
in the same period right after the investment takes place, but its value is only accessible by the
entrepreneurs. In period 1, the liquidity shock to investors arrives, upon which the investors need
to sell the projects to ease the liquidity shortage. At the time of fire-sale and after the realization of
liquidity shock, θ becomes known to debt investors, and the short-term debt investors can make use
of the new information to determine the face value of the short-term debt maturing in period 2.
In period 2, when the project’s payoff materializes, the debt repayment are remitted to the debt
investors, and the equity investors enjoy the whole payoff of the project.




                                                    5
                   investors choose

                   equity, or long-term

                   debt, or short-term     liquidity shock

                   debt                    realizes                  project completes

                  0                       1                             2
                      θ realizes                  fire-sale; θ reveals to

                                                  the investors


   Investor heterogeneity is described by the probability of a liquidity shock, λ, which is known to
the investors before they make their investment decisions, whereas project heterogeneity is described
by project productivity θ (or the probability of a high payoff in period 2), which is known to the
entrepreneurs but not to any investor in period 0. Project productivity θ becomes known to all
investors in period 1. Investors who hold a one-period bond in t=1 can choose to buy a new rollover
one-period bond at t=1 or sit on the sidelines. Investors who hold a long term bond can choose
to sell their bond in the secondary market at t=1 or do nothing at t=1 and wait for the bond to
mature at t=2.
   Institutional quality or quality of public governance can affect the economy in two ways.
First, high quality institutions constrain expropriation risk faced by equity investors. Severity of
expropriation risk can be represented by a tax on the payoff of equity: an equity investor’s net gain
in period 2 will be the gross payoff of the project net of the expropriation tax. Unlike a formal
tax, an expropriation tax does not generate revenue for the government. Therefore, we model the
expropriation risk as a dead weight loss that is algebraically similar to a proportional tax on the
project’s payoff to the investors.
   Second, high quality institutions lead to better enforcement of contracts. In the context of
financial contract, the ability to protect long-term creditors’ seniority can be linked to quality of
institutions. When a borrower issues a long-term debt, it may promise to make the long-term debt
senior to all future short-term debt. But when it comes time to roll-over short-term debt, the
borrower can obtain a better price on the short-term borrowing if it can promise equal seniority for
the short-term debt as the long-term debt in the event of a default. The likelihood for the borrowers
to deviate from the promise to the long-term debt without punishment represents an expropriation
risk for long-term debt holders.
   Both dimensions of institutional quality capture a wide range of instances including control of

                                                      6
corruption, strength of law enforcement, and government efficiency. However, these two emphasize
different aspects of institutional quality, hence, they can be separated from each other. For this
reason, we use two different parameters to represent them in our theoretical model. In practice,
the two are highly correlated: countries with a high expropriation risks on equity investors are also
likely to have weak contract enforcement environment that protects the rights of long-term debt
holders relative to those of short-term debt holders. In subsequent empirical work, we use proxies
for measure them jointly.
   Since the agents in the model make decisions sequentially, we solve the model backwards by
deriving the expected profits in investment strategies one by one. Comparing the expected profits
of all strategies, we obtain the equilibrium capital structure.
   Before presenting the detailed solution, it might be useful to discuss the assumptions that we
specify in the model. First, the size of each project is set to be one. With this assumption, we
abstract away from the intensive margin of investment and focus on the trade-off among different
forms of financing arrangements. Second, investors are assumed to have an informational advantage
relative to the public - they know the true probability θ of a high state (high payoff of the project)
in fire-sale, whereas the public would have no access to this information in period one. Third, the
model features two kinds of heterogeneity: heterogeneous probability θ of high payoff across projects,
and heterogeneous probability λ of a liquidity shock across investors. The first can be viewed as
different productivity, and the second can represent different patience levels or strength of financial
status of investors. They will collectively determine interior solutions to the financing arrangement.
   For the rest of the session, we will illustrate the investment strategies’ expected payoff in the
order of equity, short-term, and long-term debt with the backward approach. We then combine the
results and discuss the overall capital structure.


2.1   Equity

Considering the equity investment, in period 2, if the project is not sold, since the equity investor is
the owner of the project and the project is materialized, her expected payoff is


                                              π =1+θ


   In period 1, some investors are hit by a liquidity shock and are forced to sell the project. There

                                                     7
are sufficiently large amount of potential buyers whose outside option is a risk-free investment with
return rate r∗ , therefore the fire-sale price of the project will be 1 + r∗ . Upon the realization of
liquidity shocks, the equity investors who are hit by the liquidity shock sell their projects and obtain
1 + r∗ , while the rest will hold their equities until the end of the projects.
   Therefore, the expected return of equity investment is determined by the following condition.

                                                                Z    1                    
                             E                         ∗ 2
                           V (λ) = λ (1 + r ) +(1 − λ)                    (1 + θ)dθ                 (1)
                                                                 |0
                                          |       {z     }
                                          f ire−sale                        {z         }
                                                                 hold to maturity


   The first term is the return if fire-sale, which happens with probability λ. The second term is
the return if holding the projects to maturity, which is equal to the expected value of the project’s
return. Because equity investors differ from each other in terms of the liquidity shock probability,
the expected return of equity investment depends on the liquidity shock probability λ. The lower
the λ is, the higher probability of avoiding fire-sale and receiving the return rate of mature projects.
   To consider the role of institutional quality in equity financing, we assume that the government
expropriates τ E proportion of the equity payoff. As a result, the after-tax expected payoff is

                                                                          Z    1               
                        V E (λ) = (1 − τ E ) λ(1 + r∗ )2 + (1 − λ)                  (1 + θ)dθ       (2)
                                                                            0


2.2    Debt

Debt investors differ from equity investors in terms of the return rate of holding the project
investment to maturity. Equity investors essentially owns the project and are entitled to the overall
value of the projects when they are materialized. In contrast, debt investors will be paid the face
value of the debt contract if no default, and will only be able to seize the residual value of the
projects if default. As a result, entrepreneurs’ profit maximization problem does not align with debt
investors’, and they have an incentive to minimize the cost of issuing debt. Given a large number of
potential investors, entrepreneurs will only sign the debt contracts if the expected cost of debt is
equal to the reservation level of potential investors: 1 + r∗ .
   There are two types of debt contracts that an entrepreneur can offer to debt investors: a
long-term debt with face value d02 in the second period (and no payoff in the first period), and a
short-term debt with face value d01 at the end of period 1. If a project only receives a one-period


                                                             8
loan, by necessity, it has to be financed by another short-term (rollover) debt in period 1. We denote
the face value of the rollover debt as d12 in period 1. Because of the abundance of potential investors,
the return rate on debt per period will be the same as deposit rate r∗ to make the investors exactly
indifferent between taking the outside option and investing in the project.
   Similar to equity investors, debt investors are also subject to a liquidity shock, which, for holders
of a two-period debt, would trigger a fire-sale of their debt contracts. When debt investors are
forced to sell in period 1, for both the entrepreneurs and the investors, it is essentially equivalent
to roll-over short-term debt. Therefore, the fire-sale price will be evaluated in the same way as
the roll-over return rate. Note that, entrepreneurs will only offer the roll-over return rate at the
reservation level of potential investors (1 + r∗ ), therefore, the debt contracts’ fire-sale also yields the
same price as equity fire-sale.
   We solve for the maturity structure by guess-and-verify. Since there are two types of debt
contracts, if they are offered by firms with different productivity levels (probability of a high payoff),
then investors will be able to update the expectation of the payoff when the debt matures. Therefore,
we conjecture that there is a threshold value of the probability of a high project payoff, θ∗ , below
which the entrepreneur would offer a long-term debt contract and above which he would offer a
short-term debt contract.
   Consider the case where only long-term debt is feasible: the corresponding break-even condition
will be
                                  1
                                       Z   θ∗   h                i
                                                    1 − θ + θd02 dθ = (1 + r∗ )2                        (3)
                                  θ∗   0

   The first term (1 − θ) on the left-hand side is the payoff to a long-term debt in default, and the
second is the non-default case where debt is paid at full face value. To see whether the case of only
long-term debt is sustainable or not, we investigate whether the entrepreneur has an incentive to
deviate on the margin. Since short-term creditors will be informed of the true value of θ in period 1,
the break-even condition for her will be

                                                        d12 
                                   (1 − θ∗ )τ D               + θ∗ d12 = 1 + r∗                         (4)
                                                        d02

   The first term in equation (4) indicates the payoff in the case of default, which happens with




                                                             9
probability (1 − θ∗ ).3 The second term represents the payoff in the case of repayment, which is
associated with probability θ∗ , and debt investors receive the face value set in the debt contract.
       Compared to the long-term counterpart, there are two differences. First, since the true value of
productivity is available to the short-term creditor when deciding on the face value of short-term
debt rollover, the rollover debt value d12 will be determined according to the true value of θ instead
of the ex-ante expectation. Second, it is not always true that the short-term creditor will be able
to seize the residual value of the project in default, and it is reflected in the first term on the
left-hand-side of the break-even condition. Given default, a short-term creditor is able to seize
residual values of the project only when the seniority of a long-term creditor is not well-defended
(with probability τ D ), which means that the short-term creditor has the same priority to seize the
value of the project.
       With these differences, the long-term debt face value will only depend on the threshold produc-
tivity θ∗ , while the short-term rollover face value will be a function of the true productivity θ. After
comparing the face values of the long-term (d02 ) and short-term (d12 ) debts, the entrepreneur will
choose the lower face value to finance the project.
       To determine the threshold productivity θ∗ , we note that at that threshold, the entrepreneur
should be indifferent between offering a short-term and a long-term debt, which translates to the
following condition:
                                                   d02 (θ∗ ) = d12 (θ∗ )                                                (5)

Plugging the indifference condition to the two break-even conditions yields the value of θ∗ .

Proposition 1. The entrepreneur will propose a debt contract based on the project’s productivity.
If θ < θ∗ , the borrowing will be in long-term debt. If θ > θ∗ , the borrowing will be in short-term
debt. If θ = θ∗ , the entrepreneur will be indifferent between the two forms of debt contracts. θ∗ is
determined by (3), (4), and (5).

       It can be verified that the entrepreneurs whose project’s productivity is lower than θ∗ have no
incentive to deviate from long-term debt contract, and so with the entrepreneurs whose project’s
   3
    Here, since we consider the first potential short-term creditor, whose measure is zero, the overall debt d¯ =
αd12 + (1 − α)d02 is equal to d02 . Also, since the expected payoff is larger than one, low productivity directly leads
to default. Under the current assumption, the high productivity is large enough to pay back the debt while the low
productivity is not enough to pay back the debt (expected return rate is r∗ ), therefore the default probability is 1 − θ∗ .




                                                            10
productivity is higher than θ∗ .4 The intuition is that since the short-term creditors will be able to
work out the true value of θ when choosing the rollover face value, they will demand a high face
value if the productivity is low.
       Those projects with a relatively low productivity will find the long-term face value (without the
knowledge of true productivity on the creditors’ side) to be lower than the short-term rollover face
value. In contrast, projects with a sufficiently high probability of a high payoff can benefit from
a chance to update the creditor about the true productivity in period 1 and obtain a relatively
favorable (i.e., low) rollover face value, which would increase the payoff to the entrepreneur.


2.3       Capital Structure

Combining the results, we can determine the capital structure in two steps. In the first step, since
the debt contract always yields the payoff of (1 + r∗ )2 , a comparison between the equity investment
expected payoff V E (λ) and (1 + r∗ )2 determines the threshold λE below which the equity investment
will be implemented. In the second step, Proposition 1 solves for the composition of long-term and
short-term debt contracts.
       As discussed before, the equity investment payoff is negatively related to the expropriation
risk τ E , therefore the lower the expropriation risk (higher institutional quality), the larger is the
proportion of projects financed by equity investment. This relationship is formally summarized in
Proposition 2.

Proposition 2. The share of equity investment in total investment increases with institutional
quality.

       The proof of Proposition 2 is straightforward. As the net payoff of equity investment is
negatively correlated with the expropriation tax and positively correlated with institutional quality,
the threshold λ which makes potential investors indifferent between equity financing and debt
financing increases with institutional quality.
       With regard to the debt maturity, poorer institutional quality translates into poorer protection
of long-term debt holders’ seniority (i.e., higher τ D ), reducing the amount of long-term debt in
equilibrium. This suggests a positive relationship between the amount of long-term debt as a share
of total debt and institutional quality, which can be stated by Proposition 3.
   4
       Proof is provided in Appendix A.


                                                    11
Proposition 3. The share of long-term debt in total debt increases with institutional quality.

   The proof of Proposition 3 follows that the higher the chance to be granted the equal seniority
as long-term debt investors, the lower roll-over face value the short-term debt investors will ask. In
the meantime, given a higher probability to have to share the residual value of the projects with
short-term debt investors in the case of default, long-term debt investors will demand a higher
expected return which leads to a higher threshold of productivity.
   Based on Proposition 2 and 3, for a given level of institutional quality, the capital structure
can be described by a partition of the (λ, θ) space. Those investors with a relatively low λ ≤ λ∗ -
relatively patient investors - would choose to provide equity financing, and those with a relatively
high λ > λ∗ would choose to provide debt financing. On the other hand, entrepreneurs with a
high project productivity (θ ≥ θ∗ ) would choose to ask for short-term debt financing (in hope of
obtaining an attractive rollover bond price at t=1), and those with a low project productivity
(θ < θ∗ ) would ask for long-term debt financing. This defines the equilibrium capital structure for
given institutional quality. As a graphic example, patterns of equilibrium capital structure for the
case of τ E = τ D = 0.2 and r∗ = 0.05 are summarized by the left graph of Figure 1. With a relatively
low risk of expropriation, equity financing is the most important source of funding for investment.
   As institutional quality deteriorates, the area for equity financing shrinks, and among debt
financing, the share of long-term debt financing also declines. The calibration results for the case of
worse institutions, τ E = τ D = 0.8 (and still r∗ = 0.05) are summarized by the right graph of Figure
1. With a relatively high risk of expropriation, short-term debt becomes the dominant source of
funding for investment.
   As another way to illustrate Propositions 2 and 3, we plot the share of equity in total investment,
and the share of long-term debt in total debt, respectively, as a function of the severity of expropriation
risk (under the assumption of τ E = τ D and r∗ = 0.05). The results are in Figure 2. The simulation
demonstrates that equity investment declines with deterioration of institutional quality and so does
the share of long-term debt. When the institutional quality is sufficiently poor (e.g., τ E = τ D > 0.9),
then the only available form of financing would be short-term debt.




                                                    12
3   The Data

In this section, we introduces the datasets that we employ for the empirical analysis on the
relationship between capital structure and institutional quality. Our empirical exercise will start
with the composition of a nation’s external liabilities from balance-of-payments data: the share of
equity (including FDI) in total external financing, and the share of long-term debt in total external
debt.
    We combine two primary data sources: the External Wealth of Nations (EWN) Dataset data
from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007), and the Quarterly External Debt (QED) Statistics maintained
jointly by BIS, IMF, and the World Bank. The EWN Dataset provides a detailed break-down of
international investment positions by investment type at an annual frequency for most IMF member
countries. We define the share of equity in the total financing of each country i at year t by:


                                      FDI liabilitiesit + portfolio equity liabilitiesit
                         equityit =
                                                      total liabilitiesit

    Since the EWN Dataset does not contain information on the maturity structure of loans and
deposits, we make use of the relatively new QED Statistics, which collects the external debt of
each country by maturity at a quarterly frequency starting from 1998. We calculate the share of
long-term debt in total debt as follows:



                        long-term debt of commercial banksit + long-term debt of other sectorsit
        long-termit =
                                   total debt of commercial banks and other sectorsit

    The final data set includes an unbalanced panel of the equity shares for 123 countries with a
maximum time span from 1998 to 2011, and an unbalanced panel of the long-term debt shares for
93 countries with a maximum span from 1998 to 2014.
    Other macro statistics such as real GDP per capita, private sector debt as a share of GDP (a
proxy for level of the financial development), and trade volume as a share of GDP (a proxy for the
trade openness), are relatively standard and come from the World Development Indicators (WDI)
database of the World Bank.
    The institutional quality data is compiled from the World Bank Institute (WBI). Each year, the
WBI uses of all available data on institutional quality and proposes a set of six measures: control


                                                       13
of corruption, government efficiency, political stability, regulatory quality, rule of law, and voice
and accountability. All the indices are constructed in such a way that each is bound between (-2,
+2), and a higher value means a higher quality of institution. Note, while the six dimensions can in
principle capture different aspects of a country’s public institutions and governance, the pairwise
correlations among them are all positive and in excess of 70%. The exact pairwise correlations are
reported in Table 1. Therefore, out of practical considerations, we will use the simple average of the
six measures as a composite measure of the quality of institutions. The summary statistics of the
variables on the nation’s external financing are reported in Table 2.
    On the domestic side, aggregate measures of capital structure are relatively scarce5 , so we turn
to firm-level micro data. There are two data samples that we constructed: a world-wide sample
of listed firms from Worldscope and an European firms sample (both listed and private) from
Amadeus of Bureau van Dijk.6 Both of them have their own merits as the former one provides a
comprehensive picture of the listed firms from different types of countries and the latter one offers a
close look at both the listed and the private firms. For each firm in the sample, we define the share
of equity financing and the share of long-term debt as follows:

                                                    shareholders fundsf t
                                      equityf t =
                                                      total liabilityf t

                                                        long-term debtf t
                                      long-termf t =
                                                           total debtf t

After excluding the financial sector and public administration sector along with outliers, the
Worldscope sample contains 130,167 firms from 2003 to 2015, and the Amadeus sample yields over
3 million observations from 2004 to 2015. The country composition and summary statistics can be
found in Table 3, Table 4, Table 15, and Table 16, respectively.


4    Capital Structure of External Financing

Based on the theoretical results, there are two hypotheses that we would like to test the relationship
between capital structure and institutional quality.
   5
     The World Financial Development dataset from the World Bank contains the information on the measures of
financing, but the data is only available for major emerging countries. Also, the measures are based on firm survey
whose sample is relatively small compared to the existing firm-level datasets.
   6
     The results of Amadeus sample is in Appendix C.



                                                        14
 Hypothesis 1:      The share of equity financing is positively correlated with institutional
                    quality.


 Hypothesis 2:      The share of long-term debt financing is positively correlated with
                   institutional quality.
As we discussed before, the underlying mechanism of the first hypothesis is that the improvement in
institutional quality reduces expropriation risk and motivates investors to pursue ownership of target
firm’s equity, and the second hypothesis is the channel that better institutional quality enhances
the seniority of long-term debt and eases the investor’s concern of debt dilution.
   To begin with, we plot the unconditional relationship between capital structure and institutional
quality in Figure 3. As one may expect, it is unclear how to draw the relationship between the two
in an unconditional way as there are factors such as economic development that may affect both.
Therefore, we conduct a simple cross-sectional OLS (with the cross-section data of the average value
across years of each country) controlling for real GDP per capita, trade, and financial development
to see the conditional relationship. The results are presented in the first and fourth columns of Table
5. The conditional relationship indicates a positive correlation between long-term debt financing
and institutional quality while insignificant regarding equity financing. OLS regression could be
contaminated by unobservable country specific characteristics, therefore we utilize the cross-time
variation within each country and estimate a country fixed-effect panel model as well. The third
and last columns in Table 5 reveal the significant positively correlation of both equity financing and
long-term debt financing with institutional quality, which means that along with the improvement
of institutional quality within a country, the foreign investors becomes more willing to hold equity
shares and extend a longer maturity of debt.
   Although we control for real GDP per capital, trade, and financial development, there can
still exist unobservables that potentially contaminate the estimates. To address the endogeneity
issue, we employ an instrumental variable (IV) approach. Alesina and Zhuravskaya (2011) suggest
that linguistically more segregated countries, i.e., those where different linguistic groups live more
spatially separated, have a lower quality of government. We use language segregation as an IV for
institutional quality. As constructed by Alesina and Zhuravskaya (2011), the index of segregation is
a population-weighted average of homogeneity across groups within country based on historical data.


                                                  15
As the index of segregation does not allow across-time variation, we run 2SLS on the cross-section
sample.
    The second and the fifth columns in Table 5 present the 2SLS results. Firstly, consistent
with Alesina and Zhuravskaya (2011), the significant correlation between institutional quality and
language segregation supports the strongly negative relationship between linguistic segregation
and institutional quality. Secondly, the weak IV test validates language segregation as a strong
instrument for institutional quality. Thirdly, the IV estimates indicate strongly positive impact of
institutional quality on boosting cross-border equity financing and long-term external debt. An
improvement in institutional quality by one standard deviation (about 0.85) would increase the
share of equity in total liability by 35% (more than two standard deviations) and raise the share
of long-term debt in total debt by 15% (about 0.7 standard deviation). These effects are both
economically significant and statistically significant.
    One concern about the cross-sectional analysis is that different countries enter the sample in
different years due to data availability, therefore the effect of institutional quality on external capital
structure may be driven by the difference in the development stage across countries. To address
this issue, we take a balanced panel from 2002 to 2014 and redo the IV regressions. As shown in
Table 6, the effects of institutional quality in promoting equity and long-term debt financing remain
significant.


5   Structure of Domestic Financing and Institutional Quality

While the previous section examines the structure of the external liabilities of nations, we now
turn attention to capital structure at the firm level. While firms can obtain financing from both
domestic and international sources, domestic financing would be the more important source in
most cases. For a given country (and therefore a given national level governance), there will be a
distribution of capital structure across firms. Our research question is whether and how different
levels of national institutional quality across different countries and over time shift the distribution
of firm-level capital structure.
    We undertake three types of exercises. First, using data on all listed firms in 61 countries
covered by Worldscope, we investigate the relationship between firm-level capital structure and
national level institutional quality for listed firms. Second, since the change in institutional quality


                                                    16
given a short horizon is usually less significant than firm-level financial characteristics, we take a
long-difference perspective and analyze the relationship between change in capital structure and
change in institutional quality. Third, as internal fund is a part of the funding sources, we investigate
how the share of internal funding is affected by institutional quality by utilizing the Compustat
executives’ compensation data. In appendix C, using data on both listed and unlisted European
firms available from Amadeus, we also investigate if the relationship holds for both listed and
non-listed firms and if there is any difference between the two types of firms.


5.1      The Capital Structure of Listed Firms

We begin with all listed firms in 61 countries covered by the Worldscope database. Using detailed
balance sheet information of the these firms, we construct the share of equity in total liabilities and
the share of long-term debt in total debt. We relate each to country-level institutional quality in
two bin scatter plots reported in Figure 4. We observe a positive slope in both plots. On average,
both shares rise as a country’s institutional quality improves.
      We now turn to regression analysis where we can control for other variables, especially firm-level
characteristics deemed important by the existing literature. For instance, Opler et al. (1999)
suggest book-to-market ratio, size, cash flow, working capital, leverage7 as determinants of the
capital structure (in terms of liquidity holdings), whereas Frank and Goyal (2003), and Frank and
Goyal (2009) also add fixed assets and sales as possible determinants. Rajan and Zingales (1995)
consider tangible asset, book-to-market ratio, sales, and profitability, and they are all included in
our regressions.
      We present the results in Table 7 for equity and long-term debt. In Table 7, we first estimate
the baseline specification with firm, country, and time fixed effects, and this exercise is intended to
estimate how firm-level capital structure evolves in different time points as national institutional
quality changes. Including year fixed effect is to ease the concern that the relationship between long-
term debt and institutional quality may be simultaneously driven by some underlying global trends;
therefore year fixed effect is able to purge the effects of common global trends. All standard errors
are clustered at the country level (which is more general than the country-year level). As shown in
the first column, the coefficient of institutional quality on equity financing is positive and statistically
  7
      Leverage is not included in the regression as it is highly correlated with the left-hand variable of capital structure.




                                                             17
significant at the 5% level, consistent with the notion that better public institutions are associated
with more equity financing. Based on the point estimate, with an improvement in institutional quality
by one standard deviation, the share of equity financing increases by 5(0.062 × 0.802) percentage
points. For the firm characteristics, liquidity, profit, and revenue promote equity financing and
long-term debt financing because they indicate optimistic perspective on future cash flow. Total
asset and especially fixed asset increase particularly strengthens debt financing as more tangible
assets can be used as pledgeable collateral.
   In the second column, we lag all regressors by one year to ensure that they are all pre-determined
relative to the dependent variable. This exercise is to exclude the possibility of reverse causality. The
lagged control variables’ change makes very little difference to the point estimate and the statistical
significance of the coefficient on institutional quality: with an improvement in institutional quality
by one standard deviation, the share of equity financing increases by 6.4 (0.080 × 0.802) percentage
points.
   In the third column, we control for global industry-specific patterns in the equity financing. This
is to allow for different capital structure in different industries due to technological or industrial
organizational reasons. The new regressor is added on top of controlling for firm fixed effects and
global time trends. Unsurprisingly, firm level equity financing share is positively correlated with
average equity financing across all firms in the same industry in the world. Although, with this
additional control, the coefficient on national institutional quality becomes smaller, it is still positive
and statistically significant and also close to the baseline estimate in the first column.
   In the last three columns of Table 7, we present a similar set of analysis for long-term financing
as a share of total debt financing. Same as the case for long-term debt financing, in the fourth
columns, we include firm, country, and year fixed effects. The coefficient on institutional quality
are both positive and statistically significant at the 10% level. The point estimate indicates that
with an improvement in public institutional quality by one standard deviation, the equity share in
total external financing tends to go up by 0.802 × 0.124 = 9.9 percentage points. The alternative
specifications with lagged control variables and industry-specific long-term debt financing, in the
last two columns, respectively, confirm the significant positive relationship between institutional
quality and long-term debt financing. The results also provide a strong support for the baseline
regression as the point estimate for the relationship between institutional quality and long-term



                                                    18
debt financing stays around 0.12 in all three specifications.
   We can obtain more precise information on corporate bonds at issuance from FISD database.
FISD reports issuing date, amount, spread, and maturity. A given firm can of course issue multiple
bonds in a year. Therefore, for a given firm in a given year, we can compute the average maturity
of its bonds weighted by the proceeds of each bond. We investigate the relationship between the
average bond maturity (at the firm level) and institutional quality (at the national level). We use
firm characteristics from Worldscope (after matching the firms in the two databases) as controls,
and we cluster all standard errors at the country level.
   The results are reported in Table 8. We see that the average maturity of corporate bonds is
significantly positive correlated with institutional quality, and the estimates in all three specifications
are positive and significant at 5% level. Generally speaking, with a standard deviation improvement
in institutional quality, the average maturity of corporate bonds would go up by 0.72 (0.24 × 3.0)
years.
   To conclude, with better public governance, both equity share in total financing and the maturity
of debt would go up. The magnitude of the correlation is both statistically and economically
significant. These patterns are consistent with the theory presented in Section 2 that high institutional
quality is associated with external financing tilting toward equity and long maturity debt.
   Next, we further inspect the aspect of institutional quality that is the most important in
influencing capital structure. So far, our measure of institutional quality is the average of six
indicators from the World Bank’s World Governance Indicators: corruption control, government
efficiency, political stability, regulation quality, rule of law, and voice accountability. While the
pairwise correlations among the six indicators are all in excess of 70% (see Table 1), it might be
useful nonetheless to see which subset of governance indicators may be the most relevant for the
capital structure question.
   We re-run the regressions on the share equity financing, where quality of governance is measured
by each of the six indicators individually, and report the results in Table 9. Note that the specification
includes firm and year fixed effects, and the standard errors are clustered at the country level.
We see that corruption control, government efficiency, rule of law, and voice of accountability are
the important ones in explaining the share of equity financing. Of the which, the share of equity
financing appears to be most responsive to variations in the strength of control of corruption and



                                                    19
voice of accountability. In comparison, political stability and regulation quality are not statistically
different from zero. These results are perhaps not too surprising in light of our theory in which the
relevant institutions are those that minimize the expropriation risk of equity holders (e.g., tax on
their equity returns).
   We do a similar exercise for the share of long-term debt financing in total debt, and report
the results in Table 10. In this case, the most significant relationship is between maturity of debt
(measured in both share of long-term debt financing and the maturity of corporate bond) and rule
of law. This result is intuitive as the most relevant institutional quality for long-term debt holders
is how their long-term debt holding are well protected without debt dilution, and rule of law plays a
crucial role in protecting the right of long-term debt holders against the dilution risk.


5.2   Internal versus External Financing

The previous empirical evidence has shown that external financing, by means of both equity financing
and long-term debt financing, is positively correlated with the improvement of institutional quality.
However, besides external financing, firms also make use of internatl financing, and the share of
internal financing is affected by institutional quality too. In the literature, Myers and Majluf (1984)
among many others, show that - driven by different costs of financing - firm’s financing pecking
order starts with internal financing (the cheapest source of funding), followed by external debt or
equity. Suppose the marginal costs of using either internal or external financing are increasing and
concave, the share of internal financing is determined by where the marginal costs of the internal
and external funding sources are equalized. If improved institutional quality effectively reduces the
borrowing cost of external financing, then the share of internal financing is expected to be negatively
correlated with institutional quality. Appendix B provides an extension to the basic model which
allows for internal financing for a project. In that model, the share of internal financing tends to
decline as the institutional quality improves.
   To analyze this relationship between internal financing and institutional quality, we employ
the data of Compustat firms. The Compustat executive compensation data is collected directly
from each company’s annual proxy (DEF14A SEC form), and we use the executives’ shareholding
relative to total outstanding shares as a proxy for internal financing. Table 11 reports the summary
statistics: the final sample contains over 10,000 observations from 1995 -2015 with a majority of US



                                                  20
firms. Using the same regression specification as external financing, we analyze the relationship
between internal financing and institutional quality, and the estimation results are reported in
Table 12.8 The fixed effect estimate shows a significant negative correlation between institutional
quality and the share of internal financing: one standard deviation increase in institutional quality
is associated with 0.25 (0.009 × 0.109/0.004) standard deviation decrease in the share of internal
financing.
       Given that executives’ shares represent a part of internal financing, our estimates might be
a lower bound for the relationship between internal financing and institutional quality. Firm
characteristics also matters. For instance, when liquidity, growth, or profit grows, or when financial
development deepens, our estimates show that they tend to simultaneously increase the share of
external financing and reduce the share of internal financing.


5.3       Long-difference Analysis

Because institutional quality is a slow-moving variable, variations at the annual frequency analysis
might contain much noise. One way to reduce noises and check for robustness of the conclusion
is to perform long differencing. To include as many firms as possible, we choose the Worldscope
subsample of year 2003 and 2015 and investigate the relationship between the change in capital
structure and that in institutional quality.
       In this span of time over a decade, there is a significant change in institutional quality across the
world. As can be observed in Figure 5, the change spreads out away from zero. For instance (from
Table 13), Indonesia improved institutional quality by 0.71, a 76% increase from the level in 2003,
and Colombia’s institutional quality rose by 62% from -0.66 to -0.23. On the contrary, Greece’s
institutional quality dropped by 71% from 0.74 to 0.21, and similarly in Hungary who experienced
a deterioration of 47% from 0.96 to 0.45.
       These large movements in institutional quality provide significant variations for analyzing the
relationship between institutional quality and capital structure. In Figure 6, we plot the bin-scatter
of the change in capital structure against that in institutional quality, and the figure shows a solid
positive relationship between the two.
   8
    As a majority of the firms in the sample are US firms, each US firm is assigned a weight based on firm characteristics
matching propensity score with the non-US firms, and the weight is then adjusted to keep each country’s weighted
sample size equal.



                                                           21
    To compare the long-difference results with the short-run estimates before, we adopt the same
specification with firm and year fixed effects. From the results shown in Table 14, we find that the
long-run relationship between institutional quality and capital structure is consistently significant.
Moreover, the point estimates are both larger in magnitude compared to the short-run estimates.
The significance and magnitude in the long-run relationship provides more validity of our baseline
short-run analysis, as it is highly likely that the short-run effect that we estimate is the lower bound
of the long-run effect.
    Setting the long-difference span as 2003 to 2015 allows us to fully utilize the large change in
institutional quality, however, one concern is that the global financial crisis might induce changes in
the relationship between institutional quality and capital structure. Therefore, we separate the long-
difference into two segments: 2003 to 2007, and 2007 to 2015. From the last four columns of Table
14, we can observe that the relationship between equity financing and institutional quality is stronger
in pre-crisis period, while the relationship between long-term debt financing and institutional quality
is prominent in post-crisis. This difference may come from debt financing experienced the most
adverse shock in crisis, so given the improvement in institutional quality would be of great help in
enhancing debt financing.


6   Conclusion

It is important to understand the determinants of the capital structure for nations and firms. The
paper examines the role of public governance in the capital structure of both nations and firms. We
propose a simple theory in which the equity debt ratio, and the share of long-term debt in total
debt, are determined by institutional quality, heterogeneity across investors in terms of liquidity risk,
and heterogeneity across firms (projects) in terms of underlying productivity. The key prediction is
that as institutions improve, equity financing as a share of total financing should rise, and long-term
debt as a share of total debt should also rise.
    We take these predictions to data on the structure of external liabilities (from balance of
payments) across countries, and find clear supportive evidence. We also take the predictions to
firm level data from Worldscope and Amadeus. We find cross-country differences in the financing
structure of firms depend on a country’s institutional quality in ways that are consistent with the
theory.


                                                   22
   This paper documents the role of national institutions as an important common determinant
of the capital structure for all firms in a country and for the composition of external liabilities
of a country. Many extensions can be pursued. For example, within debt, it might be useful to
distinguish between loans from banks versus bonds from the capital market. These are left for
future research.




                                                23
References

Alesina, Alberto, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2011. “Segregation and the Quality of Gov-
  ernment in a Cross Section of Countries.” The American Economic Review, 101(5): 1872–1911.

Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych. 2008. “Why doesn’t capital
  flow from rich to poor countries? An empirical investigation.” The Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 90(2): 347–368.

Bolton, Patrick, and David S Scharfstein. 1996. “Optimal debt structure and the number of
  creditors.” Journal of Political Economy, 104(1): 1–25.

Bolton, Patrick, and Haizhou Huang. 2016. “The capital structure of nations.” Mimeo.

Brunnermeier, Markus K, and Martin Oehmke. 2013. “The maturity rat race.” The Journal
  of Finance, 68(2): 483–521.

Chang, Roberto, Andrés Fernández, and Adam Gulan. 2017. “Bond finance, bank credit,
  and aggregate fluctuations in an open economy.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 85: 90–109.

Claessens, Stijn, Hui Tong, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2012. “From the financial crisis to the real
  economy: Using firm-level data to identify transmission channels.” Journal of International
  Economics, 88(2): 375–387.

Contessi, Silvio, Pierangelo De Pace, and Johanna L Francis. 2013. “The cyclical properties
  of disaggregated capital flows.” Journal of International Money and Finance, 32: 528–555.

Crouzet, Nicolas. 2014. “Aggregate implications of corporate debt choices.” Mimeo.

De Fiore, Fiorella, and Harald Uhlig. 2015. “Corporate debt structure and the financial crisis.”
  Journal of Money, credit and Banking, 47(8): 1571–1598.

Evans, Martin, and Viktoria V Hnatkovska. 2014. “International capital flows, returns and
  world financial integration.” Journal of International Economics, 92(1): 14–33.

Forbes, Kristin, Dennis Reinhardt, and Tomasz Wieladek. 2017. “The spillovers, interac-
  tions, and (un) intended consequences of monetary and regulatory policies.” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 85: 1–22.

                                                24
Frank, Murray Z, and Vidhan K Goyal. 2003. “Testing the pecking order theory of capital
  structure.” Journal of financial economics, 67(2): 217–248.

Frank, Murray Z, and Vidhan K Goyal. 2009. “Capital structure decisions: which factors are
  reliably important?” Financial management, 38(1): 1–37.

Fratzscher, Marcel. 2012. “Capital flows, push versus pull factors and the global financial crisis.”
  Journal of International Economics, 88(2): 341–356.

Gelos, R Gaston, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2002. “Transparency and international investor behavior.”
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Goldstein, Itay, and Assaf Razin. 2006. “An information-based trade off between foreign direct
  investment and foreign portfolio investment.” Journal of International Economics, 70(1): 271–295.

Gomes, Joao, Urban Jermann, and Lukas Schmid. 2016. “Sticky leverage.” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 106(12): 3800–3828.

Hennessy, Christopher A, and Toni M Whited. 2007. “How costly is external financing?
  Evidence from a structural estimation.” The Journal of Finance, 62(4): 1705–1745.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent Sorensen, and Sevcan Yesiltas. 2012. “Leverage across firms,
  banks, and countries.” Journal of international Economics, 88(2): 284–298.

Kaplan, Steven N, and Luigi Zingales. 1997. “Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide
  useful measures of financing constraints?” The quarterly journal of economics, 112(1): 169–215.

Klein, Michael W. 2005. “Capital account liberalization, institutional quality and economic
  growth: theory and evidence.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Levchenko, Andrei A, and Paolo Mauro. 2007. “Do some forms of financial flows help protect
  against âĂĲsudden stopsâĂİ?” The World Bank Economic Review, 21(3): 389–411.

Lyandres, Evgeny. 2007. “Costly external financing, investment timing, and investment–cash flow
  sensitivity.” Journal of Corporate Finance, 13(5): 959–980.

Miao, Jianjun, and Pengfei Wang. 2010. “Credit risk and business cycles.” working paper.


                                                25
Myers, Stewart C, and Nicholas S Majluf. 1984. “Corporate financing and investment decisions
  when firms have information that investors do not have.” Journal of financial economics, 13(2): 187–
  221.

Opler, Tim, Lee Pinkowitz, René Stulz, and Rohan Williamson. 1999. “The determinants
  and implications of corporate cash holdings.” Journal of financial economics, 52(1): 3–46.

Qian, Jun, and Philip E Strahan. 2007. “How laws and institutions shape financial contracts:
  The case of bank loans.” The Journal of Finance, 62(6): 2803–2834.

Rajan, Raghuram G, and Luigi Zingales. 1995. “What do we know about capital structure?
  Some evidence from international data.” The journal of Finance, 50(5): 1421–1460.

Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Chi-Wa Yuen. 1998. “A pecking order of capital inflows
  and international tax principles.” Journal of International Economics, 44(1): 45–68.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W Vishny. 1997. “A survey of corporate governance.” The journal
 of finance, 52(2): 737–783.

Tong, Hui, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2010. “The composition matters: capital inflows and liquidity
  crunch during a global economic crisis.” The Review of Financial Studies, 24(6): 2023–2052.




                                                 26
Appendix A         Proofs

Proposition 1. The entrepreneur will propose debt contract based on the project’s productivity.
If θ < θ∗ , long-term debt will be implemented. If θ > θ∗ , short-term debt will be implemented. If
θ = θ∗ , the entrepreneur will be indifferent between the two contracts. θ∗ is determined by (3), (4),
and (5).

Proof. The no deviation condition for the entrepreneurs who choose long-term debt is proved in the
main context by equation (4). What remains is the no deviation condition for the entrepreneurs who
engage in short-term, and it boils down to show that the face value of the rollover short-term debt
is lower than the long-term debt. Intuitively, the long-term debt ends up with the low productivity
firms so that the creditors demand high face value. Since the short-term financing entrepreneurs
have high productivity projects, the creditor will be willing to sign up for a lower face value given
the same return of return (1 + r∗ )2 . Therefore, to maximize their profit, the entrepreneurs will
choose the lower face value, i.e. the short-term debt.
   Formatting the intuition, we can show that d02 (θ∗ ) > d12 for any θ > θ∗ based on the definition
of d02 (θ∗ ), d12 in the following equations.

                                1
                                     Z   θ∗
                                              1 − θ + θd02 (θ∗ ) dθ = (1 + r∗ )2
                                                               
                                θ∗   0

                                                   (1 − θ) + θd12 = (1 + r∗ )




Appendix B         Internal Financing and External Financing

The benchmark model in Section 2 can be extended to incorporate internal financing, following
Kaplan and Zingales (1997). The entrepreneurs now have two options in financing the project:
internal fund I whose maximal amount is I¯ and external fund E. Suppose that the payoff is a
function of total financing (including both internal and external fund) and project productivity θ,
denoted by F (I, θ), where I = I + E. Also, we assume that the marginal product of investment
increases with productivity. External financing is associated with extra financing cost which is
well-justified by the literature such as Hennessy and Whited (2007) and Lyandres (2007). We assume


                                                         27
that the cost C(E, g) increases with the amount of external financing E, decreases with institutional
quality g, and the marginal cost of external financing decreases with institutional quality g but
increases with the amount of external financing E. The opportunity cost of internal financing is the
same as external financing, which is equal to r∗ . Therefore, the profit maximization problem can be
specified as follows.


                                 max    F (I, θ) − C(E, g) − (1 + r∗ )I

                                 s.t.   I =I +E
                                            ¯ E≥0
                                        I ≤ I,


The first order conditions are


                                              F1 (I, θ) = 1 + r∗ + ζI                             (6)

                                 F1 (I, θ) + ζE = 1 + r∗ + C1 (E, g)                              (7)


where ζI , ζE ≥ 0 are the Lagrangian multipliers of the constraint I ≤ I¯ and E ≥ 0, respectively.
Since the marginal product of investment increases with productivity, i.e. F12 (I, θ) > 0, from (6),
we can see higher productivity projects will use up internal financing and continue investing with
external financing. Furthermore, note that the marginal cost of external financing is higher with
lower institutional quality g, (7) leads to the result that the amount of external financing increases
with institutional quality. Formally,

                                        ∂E   −C12 (E, g)
                                           =             >0
                                        ∂g   C11 (E, g)

Appendix C         Going Beyond Listed Firms

In all countries, firms that are not listed on a stock exchange outnumber those that are. We now
make an attempt to compare the role of governance quality in determining the capital structure of
these two types of firms. Data on non-listed firms are generally harder to come by since they do
not face the same type of reporting requirements as their listed counterparts. For many European
countries, Amadeus database provides information on both listed and private firms. The firm-level
information of Amadeus comes from various resources, for instance, Creditreform, national statistic

                                                  28
agencies such as Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Romania and National Bank of Belgium.
The criteria of firm selection vary country by country, and the sorts of criterion involves firm size,
types of firm, etc. For instance, Bulgaria firm sample requires ”All companies, which match 2 of the
following 3 criteria: at least 50 persons staff, total assets at least euro 500,000, turnover at least
euro 1,000,000”, while Hungary solicits ”Private and public limited liability companies, general and
limited partnerships, cooperatives have to file accounts to the State Authorities”.
   We employ a specification that includes both firm fixed effects and year fixed effects, and cluster
all standard errors at the country level. Table 17 reports the regression results. The baseline
estimates, as presented in the first and third columns, suggest a strong positive relationship between
capital structure and institutional quality, and the magnitude is close that of Worldscope.
   In the second and fourth columns, we add a dummy for listed firms in order to account for
possible differences between listed and non-listed firms. The estimates show that high institutional
quality benefits the listed firms more in terms of raising equity and long-term debt. The consistency
between the Worldscope sample and the Amadeus sample provides strong support for the robustness
of the close relationship between institutional quality and capital structure regardless of the firm’s
advantage in access to the financial markets.




                                                 29
                                                         Figure 1: Capital Structure: High Institutional Quality vs. Low Institutional Quality

                                                               High Institution Quality,                            =0.2                                                              Low Institution Quality,                             =0.8
                                                          1                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                   Short-term Debt
                                                         0.9                                                                                                                    0.9                               Short-term Debt
                                                         0.8                                                                                                                    0.8

                                                         0.7                                                                                                                    0.7
                                        (productivity)




                                                                                                                                                               (productivity)
                                                         0.6                                                                                                                    0.6

                                                         0.5       Equity                                                                                                       0.5       Equity
                                                         0.4                                                                                                                    0.4

                                                         0.3                                                                                                                    0.3

                                                         0.2                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                   Long-term Debt
                                                         0.1                                                                                                                    0.1                               Long-term Debt
                                                          0                                                                                                                      0
                                                               0         0.2          0.4         0.6         0.8        1                                                            0           0.2            0.4         0.6     0.8         1

                                                                               (liquidity shock probility)                                                                                              (liquidity shock probility)




                                                                                      Figure 2: Capital Structure and Institutional Quality

                                    % Equity Investment in Total Investment                                                                                                           % Long-Term Debt in Total Debt
                                   1                                                                                                                           0.9

                                  0.9                                                                                                                          0.8

                                  0.8
                                                                                                                                                               0.7
% of equity investment in total




                                                                                                                              % long-term debt in total debt




                                  0.7
                                                                                                                                                               0.6
                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                               0.4
                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                               0.3
                                  0.3
                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                  0.2

                                  0.1                                                                                                                          0.1

                                   0                                                                                                                              0
                                        0                          0.2          0.4         0.6         0.8          1                                                  0                   0.2            0.4         0.6         0.8       1




                                                                                                                             30
                             Figure 3: Capital Structure of External Financing and Institutional Quality

                                     Equity                                                                                             Long-term Debt
                                .4                                                                                                .5
                                                                                                                                                                                      BHS
                                                                                         MUS                                                                               BLZ                LCA
                                                                              ZAF                                                                                                               MUS
                                                                                                                                                                                        PNG
                                                                 BRA
                                                                   LUX                           CHL                                                                        HRV                                MDG
                                                                                 CAN                                                                                                SVN
                                .2                             THA
                                                                           MAR CZE                                                                                                  NIC
                                                                  MEX
                                                                                                                                                   KAZ              SUR GTM MNG                         CHL
                                                                       EGY  JOR              IND                                             RUS                       MEX               NLD
                                                                        KORBOL
                                                                      HKG    BGR HUN CRI                                                                     ECU                         HUN
% to total liability




                                          RUS                                                                                                                           LUX    MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                IRL
                                                                                                                                                                      BRA




                                                                                                                % to total debt
                                                               COL                                                                                                              BOL
                                                KAZ            ISR
                                                                             CHE
                                                                             TUN
                                                                            MKD  SVK AUS GEO
                                                                                         EST                                                                       COL
                                                                                                                                                                         ESP ROU
                                                                                                                                                                              SLV NOR AUS   AUT URY
                                                                                                                                                                                            ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                         UGA
                                                                        PER                                                                                                   IDN            POL
                                                                     JPN IDNIRL
                                                                                        POL                                                                       CYP
                                                                                                                                                                   THA UKR            CAN
                                                                                                                                                                            KOR MLTDNK SLB      GEO IND
                                                                                          SWE                                                                                                  EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                 CRI
                                0                                        ROU                      FIN                              0                           ITA TURUSAPER           CZEDEU
                                                                                                                                                                                     PHL         SWE
                                                                           ALBBEL                                                                                      SYCHKG       PRT
                                                         ECU        USA
                                                                    ESPHRV                                                                                                  EGY TUN KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                          MYS
                                                            ARG                 NOR  NLD
                                                                                    ARM                                                                                       ZAF FRA                    FIN
                                                                                  DNK LTU                                                                                       MKD  SVK
                                                                          SLVFRAPHL
                                                                                NIC                                                                                            ALB     LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                      MDA
                                                                                       AUT                                                                                DOMSGPBGR
                                                                 TUR            PRT DEU                                                                                          LKA ARM
                                                                   UKR SGP SVN   MDA
                                                                                GBR         URY                                                                    ISR
                                                                                                                                                                  GRC                            NPL
                                                BLR        ITA                    LVA                                                                                        PAK CHE
                                                              CYP       PAK
                             -.2                                                                                                                                ARG PAN
                                                             GRC                                                                                   BLR                             BEL
                                                                                      ISL                                                                                            GBRBGD
                                                                              MLT                                                                                        JPN
                                                                                   KGZ                                                                             PRY                     LTU
                                                                                                                                                          DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                      JOR
                                                               PRY
                             -.4                                                                                                  -.5
                                     -1                 -.5                0             .5                1                            -1                  -.5                  0             .5                1
                                                                 institution quality                                                                                   institution quality
                                     slope=0.064, pvalue=0.048                                                                          slope=0.104, pvalue=0.057




                                          Figure 4: Capital Structure and Institutional Quality (Worldscope)

                       Equity                                                                                  Long-term Debt
  .47
                                                                                                         .53


  .46
                                                                                                         .52


  .45
                                                                                                         .51


  .44
                                                                                                          .5


  .43
                                                                                                         .49
                        .6                 .7                  .8                   .9          1              .6                                  .7                            .8                 .9
                                                      institutional quality                                                                              institutional quality




                                                                                                    31
                       Figure 5: Density of Institutional Quality Long-Difference

                                          Density of ∆Institutional Quality
                                      3




                                      2
                            density




                                      1




                                      0
                                           -.5                0                             .5                1
                                                                  ∆ institutional quality


                              Note: ∆ institutional quality is the long-difference between
                              2003 and 2015.




             Figure 6: Capital Structure of Domestic Financing and Institutional Quality

       ∆Equity                                                                     ∆Long-term Debt
  .1                                                                          .1




.05
                                                                             .05




  0
                                                                               0




-.05
                                                                            -.05
       -.4       -.2       0              .2            .4            .6           -.4           -.2      0              .2      .4   .6
                        ∆ institutional quality                                                        ∆ institutional quality


   Note: ∆ institutional quality is the long-difference between 2003 and 2015.




                                                                       32
                                     Table 1: Cross-correlation table

       Variables          corruption    rule of   political       voice             regulation   government
                            control      law      stability   accountability          quality     efficiency
 corruption control          1.00

 rule of law                 0.82        1.00
                            (0.00)
 political stability         0.94        0.77       1.00
                            (0.00)      (0.00)
 voice accountability        0.78        0.63       0.75            1.00
                            (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)
 regulation quality          0.96        0.81       0.92            0.83              1.00
                            (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)          (0.00)
 gov efficiency              0.96        0.81       0.93            0.73               0.95         1.00
                            (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)          (0.00)             (0.00)
 Note: This table examines the correlation among different measures of institutional quality. The significant
level is shown in parenthesess.




                         Table 2: Summary Statistics for External Financing

                                                  mean       sd     min     max         N
                   equity/total liability         0.43      0.16   0.06     0.80      1331
                   long-term debt/total debt      0.55      0.22    0.00     1.00      885
                   institution quality            0.50      0.85   -1.18     1.99     1331
                   real GDP per capita            9.38      1.20   6.01     11.61     1331
                   private credit/GDP             0.74      0.51   0.04     2.62      1331
                   trade/GDP                      0.99      0.72   0.19      4.46     1331


                                                     33
          Table 3: Summary Statistics of Worldscope firms

          Variable            N       mean        sd      min      max
equity/total liability      121795      .458    .186       0        .932
long-term debt/total debt   121795     .511    .329        0          1
institutional quality       121795     .763    .802     -1.477     1.985
corruption control          121795     .887    .985     -1.412     2.557
government efficiency       121795     1.078    .764     -1.36    2.431
political stability         121795      .275    .801    -2.806      1.66
regulation quality          121795      .899   .767     -1.923    2.263
rule of law                 121795      .908    .851    -1.777      2.12
voice accountability        121795      .533     .98    -1.863    1.826
liquidity                   121795     3.843   7.719     -.142    53.084
size                        121795    19.002   2.494    12.072    26.064
growth                      121795      .145    .325     -.642     4.818
fixed asset                 121795     3.228   2.151       0       9.301
profit                      121795     1.893   3.585   -149.126   24.137




                                 34
Table 4: Country Composition of Worldscope Sample
        country name         Percent   Cum.
        Argentina            0.38      0.38
        Australia            2.35      2.73
        Austria              0.37      3.1
        Bahamas              0.02      3.12
        Bahrain              0.02      3.14
        Bangladesh           0.05      3.2
        Barbados             0.02      3.21
        Belgium              0.47      3.69
        Brazil               1.43      5.16
        Bulgaria             0.3       5.46
        Canada               2.18      7.65
        Chile                0.16      7.8
        China                11.46     19.26
        Croatia              0.19      19.47
        Cyprus               0.13      19.6
        Czech Republic       0.06      19.67
        Denmark              0.58      20.24
        Egypt                0.28      20.52
        Estonia              0.05      20.58
        Fiji                 0.03      20.61
        Finland              0.71      21.31
        France               3         24.31
        Germany              2.3       26.62
        Greece               0.89      27.52
        Hong Kong            3.12      30.64
        Hungary              0.09      30.73
        Iceland              0.05      30.78
        India                6.84      37.62
        Indonesia            0.02      37.64
        Ireland              0.36      38
        Israel               0.94      38.94
        Italy                1.13      40.07
        Jamaica              0.02      40.09
        Japan                20.73     60.82
        Jordan               0.16      60.98
        Korea (South)        0.1       61.16
        Kuwait               0.12      61.28
        Latvia               0.04      61.32
        Lithuania            0.06      61.39
        Luxembourg           0.2       61.59
        Macedonia            0.05      61.64
        Malaysia             3.85      65.49
        Malta                0.03      65.51
        Mauritius            0.04      65.56
        Mexico               0.81      66.36
        Morocco              0.15      66.52
        Netherlands          0.84      67.36
        New Zealand          0.33      67.69
        Nigeria              0.07      67.76
        Norway               0.55      68.32
        Peru                 0.51      69.51
        Philippines          0.5       70.01
        Poland               1.23      71.24
        Portugal             0.24      71.49
        Russian Federation   1.34      72.88
        Saudi Arabia         0.33      73.22
        Serbia               0.07      73.28
        Singapore            2.25      75.53
        Slovakia             0.02      75.56
        Slovenia             0.11      75.67
        South Africa         1.47      77.13
        Spain                0.7       77.83
        Sri Lanka            0.35      78.18
        Sweden               1.2       79.38
        Switzerland          1         80.38
        Thailand             1.85      82.23
        Tunisia              0.09      82.32
        Turkey               0.73      83.05
        Ukraine              0.05      83.1
        United Kingdom       4.23      87.33
        United States        12.67     100
        Total                121795




                              35
              Table 5: External Capital Structure and Institutional Quality

                                          equity                        long-term debt
                               ols         IV         panel        ols         IV      panel
 institutional quality       -0.015     0.413∗∗      0.087∗∗     0.093∗∗     0.172∗∗   0.136∗
                            (0.033)      (0.127)     (0.039)     (0.014)     (0.060) (0.079)
 ln GDP per capita            0.013    -0.149∗∗∗      0.110      -0.071∗    -0.088∗∗   0.021
                            (0.007)      (0.028)     (0.072)     (0.018)     (0.043) (0.135)
 private credit/GDP          -0.023     -0.244∗∗    -0.159∗∗∗   -0.124∗∗ -0.252∗∗∗     0.054
                            (0.102)      (0.113)     (0.041)     (0.011)     (0.011) (0.035)
 trade/GDP                    0.045       0.011       0.040     -0.108∗∗ -0.205∗∗∗ -0.053
                            (0.016)      (0.080)     (0.037)     (0.022)     (0.045) (0.076)
 N                             123         79         1331          92          58      885
 First stage regression
 language segregation                  -0.318∗∗                             -0.447∗∗
                                        (0.193)                              (0.247)
 First stage F                            6.61                                 13.9
 DW pvalue                               0.083                                0.064
 Note: This table examines the relationship between external capital structure and institutional
quality. The first three columns are for the share of equity portfolio investment, and the last
three are for the share of long-term debt (relative to total debt). Column (1) and (4) are the
OLS regression on the cross-section sample, column (2) and (5) are the IV 2SLS results of
language segmentation on the cross-section sample, and (3) and (6) are the panel fixed effect
results. Standard error clustered at country level for OLS and IV, at country-year level for panel,
reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance level 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.




                                               36
Table 6: External Capital Structure and Institutional Quality -
Balanced Sample

                                  equity            long-term debt
                              ols         IV         ols         IV
 institutional quality       0.007      0.054∗    0.195 ∗∗∗  0.569∗∗∗
                           (0.043) (0.021)        (0.058)     (0.135)
 ln GDP per capita          -0.006      -0.040     0.069     -0.267∗∗
                           (0.065) (0.028)        (0.045)     (0.082)
 private credit/GDP         -0.051     -0.151∗     0.050     -0.482∗∗
                           (0.088) (0.044)        (0.089)     (0.218)
 trade/GDP                   0.059 -0.112∗∗        0.130∗   -0.335∗∗∗
                           (0.036) (0.020)        (0.070)     (0.091)
 N                            66          66         51          51
 language segregation                 -0.413∗∗               -0.401∗∗
                                       (0.171)                (0.203)
 First stage F                           7.61                   13.7
 DW pvalue                               0.083                 0.064
 Note: This table examines the relationship between external capital
structure and institutional quality using a balance sample from 2002
to 2014. The first two columns are for the share of equity portfolio
investment, and the last two are for the share of long-term debt (relative
to total debt). Column (1) and (3) are the OLS regression on the cross-
section sample, column (2) and (4) are the IV 2SLS results of language
segmentation on the cross-section sample. Standard error clustered at
country level for OLS and IV, at country-year level for panel, reported
in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance level 10%, 5%, and
1%, respectively.




                                   37
                         Table 7: Institutional Quality and Capital Structure

                                      (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                                    equity      equity        equity      longdt      longdt       longdt
 institutional quality            0.062∗∗       0.080∗∗      0.059∗∗      0.124∗      0.119∗       0.124∗
                                   (0.020)      (0.026)      (0.020)     (0.071)     (0.070)      (0.070)
 liquidity                        0.002∗∗∗     0.002∗∗∗     0.002∗∗∗       0.001       0.000        0.001
                                   (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)
 revenue                            -0.001     0.004∗∗∗       -0.001     0.016∗∗∗    0.008∗∗∗     0.015∗∗∗
                                   (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)
 growth                          -0.009∗∗∗    -0.011∗∗∗    -0.009∗∗∗     0.028∗∗∗    0.031∗∗∗     0.028∗∗∗
                                   (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)
 fixed asset                       -0.003∗    -0.005∗∗∗      -0.003∗     0.019∗∗∗    0.011∗∗∗     0.018∗∗∗
                                   (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.002)      (0.003)
 profit                          0.004∗∗∗      0.003∗∗∗     0.004∗∗∗    -0.002∗∗∗   -0.003∗∗∗    -0.002∗∗∗
                                   (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.000)      (0.001)
 ln GDP per capita               -0.058∗∗∗    -0.074∗∗∗    -0.056∗∗∗      -0.053      -0.045       -0.051
                                   (0.009)      (0.010)      (0.009)     (0.096)     (0.094)      (0.095)
 inflation                           0.000        0.001        0.000      -0.001      -0.001       -0.001
                                   (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)
 financial development            -0.032∗∗     -0.032∗∗     -0.031∗∗       0.019       0.017        0.017
                                   (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.014)     (0.025)     (0.025)      (0.025)
 tax rate                           -0.000       -0.000       -0.000      -0.001      -0.000       -0.001
                                   (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)
 equity (industry)                                          0.372∗∗∗
                                                             (0.057)
 long-term debt (industry)                                                                        0.294∗∗∗
                                                                                                  (0.046)
 N                                121795       121795       121795       121795      121795       121795
 CountryFE                          Y            Y            Y            Y           Y             Y
 FirmFE                             Y            Y            Y            Y           Y             Y
 YearFE                             Y            Y            Y            Y           Y             Y
 IndTimeTrend                       N            N            Y            N           N             Y
 Note: This table examines the relationship between equity financing/long-term debt financing and
institutional quality with different fixed effects and controls. The first three columns are for equity
financing, and the last three are for long-term debt financing. Column (1) and (4) contain firm fixed effects
and year fixed effects. Column (2) and (5) replace the control variables with their lagged values. Column
(3) and (6) control industry-level financing. Standard errors are clustered at country level and reported in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance level 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.




                                                     38
Table 8: Institutional Quality and Corporate Bond Maturity

                                 (1)          (2)          (3)
                             maturity     maturity     maturity
 institutional quality        3.032∗∗      3.014∗∗      2.902∗∗
                              (1.081)      (1.085)      (1.169)
 liquidity                   5.308∗∗∗     3.475∗∗∗     4.467∗∗∗
                              (0.549)      (0.764)      (0.542)
 revenue                     -0.158∗∗       -0.048       -0.114
                              (0.053)      (0.062)      (0.083)
 growth                      -0.315∗∗     -0.331∗∗       -0.034
                              (0.147)      (0.138)      (0.127)
 fixed asset                 0.396∗∗∗     0.436∗∗∗      0.227∗∗
                              (0.069)      (0.041)      (0.098)
 profit                      3.409∗∗∗     3.312∗∗∗        0.981
                              (0.364)      (0.709)      (0.676)
 ln GDP per capita             -4.078       -6.957      -12.824
                             (21.672)     (20.890)     (21.772)
 inflation                     0.042        -0.051       -0.257
                              (0.888)      (0.904)      (0.802)
 financial development          1.722        1.700        4.928
                              (3.753)      (3.826)      (3.254)
 tax rate                      -0.044       -0.052       -0.130
                              (0.304)      (0.305)      (0.304)
 maturity (industry)                                   0.686∗∗∗
                                                        (0.014)
 N                              2302         2302         2302
 CountryFE                       Y            Y             Y
 FirmFE                          Y            Y             Y
 YearFE                          Y            Y             Y
 IndTimeTrend                    N            N             Y
 Note: This table examines the relationship between corporate
bond maturity and institutional quality with different fixed effects
and controls. Column (1) contains firm fixed effects and year
fixed effects. Column (2) replaces the control variables with
their lagged values. Column (3) controls industry-level financing.
Standard errors are clustered at country level and reported in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance level 10%, 5%,
and 1%, respectively.




                                39
                      Table 9: Equity and Different Measures of Institutional Quality

                                   (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)             (6)
                             corruption    government           rule    political    regulation           voice
                                control     efficiency        of law    stability       quality     accountability
 institutional quality         0.033∗∗∗        0.027         0.024∗∗       -0.016       0.037∗∗         0.051∗∗
                                (0.009)       (0.017)        (0.011)      (0.013)       (0.018)         (0.021)
 revenue                         -0.001        -0.002         -0.002       -0.002        -0.002          -0.002
                                (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)
 growth                       -0.009∗∗∗     -0.009∗∗∗      -0.009∗∗∗    -0.009∗∗∗     -0.009∗∗∗       -0.009∗∗∗
                                (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)
 fixed asset                   -0.004∗∗      -0.004∗∗       -0.004∗∗     -0.004∗∗      -0.004∗∗        -0.004∗∗
                                (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)
 profit                       0.004∗∗∗       0.004∗∗∗       0.004∗∗∗     0.004∗∗∗      0.004∗∗∗        0.004∗∗∗
                                (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)
 ln GDP per capita            -0.062∗∗∗     -0.053∗∗∗      -0.051∗∗∗    -0.045∗∗∗     -0.054∗∗∗       -0.060∗∗∗
                                (0.009)       (0.010)        (0.010)      (0.011)       (0.009)         (0.009)
 inflation                        0.001         0.000          0.001        0.001         0.001           0.001
                                (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)
 financial development          -0.024∗      -0.032∗∗       -0.038∗∗     -0.039∗∗      -0.042∗∗        -0.034∗∗
                                (0.014)       (0.014)        (0.016)      (0.015)       (0.014)         (0.014)
 tax rate                        -0.000        -0.000         -0.000       -0.000        -0.000          -0.000
                                (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)
 N                              121795        121795         121795       121795        121795          121795
 CountryFE                          Y             Y               Y           Y             Y               Y
 FirmFE                             Y             Y               Y           Y             Y               Y
 YearFE                             Y             Y               Y           Y             Y               Y
 Note: This table examines the relationship between equity financing and different measures of institutional quality.
From column (1) to (6), the institutional quality is corruption control, government efficiency, rule of law, political
stability, regulation quality, and voice accountability. Standard errors are clustered at country level and reported
in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance level 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.




                                                      40
                Table 10: Long-term Debt and Different Measures of Institutional Quality

                                 (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)
                            corruption     government          rule     political    regulation         voice
                              control       efficiency       of law     stability      quality     accountability
 institutional quality         0.034∗         0.060∗         0.103∗       -0.001         0.049          0.049
                              (0.020)        (0.034)        (0.052)      (0.008)       (0.037)        (0.043)
 revenue                      0.016∗∗∗       0.016∗∗∗       0.016∗∗∗     0.015∗∗∗      0.015∗∗∗       0.015∗∗∗
                              (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)
 growth                       0.029∗∗∗       0.029∗∗∗       0.028∗∗∗     0.029∗∗∗      0.029∗∗∗       0.029∗∗∗
                              (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)
 fixed asset                  0.018∗∗∗       0.018∗∗∗       0.018∗∗∗     0.018∗∗∗      0.018∗∗∗       0.018∗∗∗
                              (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)
 profit                      -0.002∗∗∗      -0.002∗∗∗      -0.002∗∗∗    -0.002∗∗∗     -0.002∗∗∗      -0.002∗∗∗
                              (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)
 ln GDP per capita             -0.042         -0.038         -0.037       -0.029        -0.036         -0.040
                              (0.094)        (0.091)        (0.081)      (0.096)       (0.101)        (0.100)
 inflation                     -0.001         -0.002         -0.002       -0.000        -0.001         -0.001
                              (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)
 financial development          0.019          0.017          0.006        0.005         0.000          0.009
                              (0.025)        (0.025)        (0.022)      (0.020)       (0.020)        (0.023)
 tax rate                      -0.000         -0.000         -0.001       -0.000        -0.000         -0.000
                              (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)
 N                            121795         121795         121795       121795        121795         121795
 CountryFE                        Y              Y               Y           Y             Y              Y
 FirmFE                           Y              Y               Y           Y             Y              Y
 YearFE                           Y              Y               Y           Y             Y              Y
 Note: This table examines the relationship between long-term debt financing and different measures of institutional
quality. From column (1) to (6), the institutional quality is corruption control, government efficiency, rule of law,
political stability, regulation quality, and voice accountability. Standard errors are clustered at country level and
reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance level 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.




                                                      41
          Table 11: Summary Statistics of Compustat firms

Variable                          mean      sd      min     max       N
external equity/total liability    0.43   0.166   -0.493     0.76   11134
long-term debt/total debt         0.868   0.208      0         1    11134
internal equity/total liability   0.003   0.004   -0.011    0.082   11134
institutional quality             1.287   0.109    -1.01    1.852   11134
liquidity                         0.085   0.086      0      0.686   11134
size                              7.751   1.512   2.417    13.089   11134
growth                            0.061   0.147   -0.789    0.581   11134
fixed asset                       0.782    0.2     0.127       1    11134
profit                            0.088   0.067   -0.282    0.339   11134
Country                                                       N       %
Canada                                                        40     0.36
Chile                                                         37     0.33
UK                                                            89     0.80
Israel                                                       111     1.00
Singapore                                                      7     0.06
USA                                                        10,850   97.45




                                    42
                  Table 12: External/Internal Financing and Institutional Quality

                              external equity financing      longdt       internal equity financing
                                   total financing         total debt          total financing
    institutional quality               0.145∗∗             0.234∗∗               -0.009∗∗∗
                                        (0.060)              (0.082)                (0.001)
    liquidity                          0.308∗∗∗                0.145                -0.002∗
                                        (0.079)              (0.208)                (0.001)
    size                              -0.083∗∗∗              -0.055∗                  0.000
                                        (0.015)              (0.032)                (0.000)
    growth                               -0.012                0.066               -0.001∗∗
                                        (0.029)              (0.051)                (0.000)
    fixed asset                        -0.156∗∗             -0.411∗∗                  0.000
                                        (0.069)              (0.143)                (0.001)
    profit                             0.629∗∗∗               -0.465               -0.005∗∗
                                        (0.106)              (0.355)                (0.002)
    ln GDP per capita                  0.450∗∗∗               -0.198                 -0.001
                                        (0.122)              (0.269)                (0.002)
    inflation                            -0.001               -0.007                  0.000
                                        (0.002)              (0.005)                (0.000)
    financial development               0.034∗∗                0.054               0.002∗∗∗
                                        (0.017)              (0.045)                (0.000)
    tax rate                             0.002                 0.001                  0.000
                                        (0.002)              (0.003)                (0.000)
    N                                    11134                11134                  11134
    CountryFE                              Y                     Y                      Y
    FirmFE                                 Y                     Y                      Y
    Note: This table examines the relationship between capital structure (both internal and external
   financing) and institutional quality. Column (1), (2), and (3) are for external equity financing,
   long-term debt financing, and internal equity financing, respectively. Robust standard errors are
   reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance level 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


Table 13: Top Ten and Bottom Ten Countries in the Change of Institutional Quality (2003 vs. 2015)

                         bottom 10       ∆govq     top 10         ∆govq
                         Greece          -0.53     Indonesia      0.71
                         Hungary         -0.45     Colombia       0.41
                         Thailand        -0.41     Japan          0.27
                         Egypt           -0.41     Poland         0.26
                         Spain           -0.40     Philippines    0.23
                         Portugal        -0.29     Singapore      0.19
                         Mexico          -0.29     Germany        0.18
                         Italy           -0.28     Switzerland    0.15
                         South Africa    -0.17     Israel         0.13


                                                  43
                                          Table 14: Long Difference

                               ∆equity       ∆longdt        ∆equity        ∆longdt      ∆equity       ∆longdt
                              2003-2015     2003-2015      2003-2007      2003-2007    2007-2015     2007-2015
 ∆institutional quality        0.240∗∗∗       0.036∗∗∗       0.072∗          0.122∗      0.083∗∗       0.565∗∗∗
                               (0.055)         (0.010)       (0.038)         (0.066)      (0.028)       (0.156)
 ∆liquidity                    0.003∗∗∗      -0.001∗∗∗      0.001∗∗∗       -0.001∗∗∗     0.004∗∗∗       0.001∗∗
                               (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.001)       (0.001)
 ∆size                          -0.000        0.019∗∗          0.003        0.018∗∗        -0.005       0.022∗∗
                               (0.006)         (0.005)       (0.008)         (0.008)      (0.003)       (0.006)
 ∆growth                        -0.007          0.016       -0.014∗∗        0.063∗∗∗    -0.038∗∗∗       0.046∗∗
                               (0.011)         (0.020)       (0.006)         (0.016)      (0.010)       (0.013)
 ∆fixed asset                   -0.001        0.011∗∗          0.002       0.019∗∗∗         0.002      0.018∗∗
                               (0.003)         (0.005)       (0.004)         (0.005)      (0.002)       (0.006)
 ∆profit                       0.006∗∗∗      -0.003∗∗∗      0.005∗∗∗        -0.003∗∗     0.005∗∗∗     -0.009∗∗∗
                               (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.002)
 ∆ln GDP per capita             -0.013        0.285∗∗∗         0.155          -0.113     -0.079∗∗      -0.238∗∗
                               (0.058)         (0.074)       (0.126)         (0.126)      (0.024)       (0.102)
 ∆inflation                     -0.007          0.011         -0.001          -0.009        0.002      -0.026∗∗
                               (0.006)         (0.010)       (0.008)         (0.009)      (0.002)       (0.010)
 ∆financial development        0.082∗∗          0.018         -0.039           0.059       0.028∗        0.022
                               (0.033)         (0.045)       (0.029)         (0.041)      (0.014)       (0.050)
 ∆tax rate                      -0.001        -0.006∗∗        -0.002          -0.001      -0.001∗       -0.004∗
                               (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.003)      (0.001)       (0.003)
 N                               7501           7501           7501            7501         7501         7501
 Note: This table examines the relationship between capital structure and institutional quality in long difference
as 2003 vs. 2015. The first column is equity, and the second one is long-term debt. Standard errors are clustered
at country level and reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance level 10%, 5%, and 1%,
respectively.



                           Table 15: Summary Statistics of Amadeus Firms

                                                 mean       sd     min    max        N
                 equity/total liability           0.25     0.26   -0.85    1.00   3218433
                 long-term debt/total debt       0.65      0.30    0.00    1.00   3218433
                 institutional quality           0.82      0.57   -0.81    1.99   3218433
                 liquidity                       0.08      0.12   0.00     1.00   3218433
                 size                            14.24     2.17    6.91   19.83   3218433
                 growth                          0.22      1.24   -1.00   21.16   3218433
                 fixed asset                     0.46      0.31   0.00     1.00   3218433
                 profit                          0.04      0.12   -3.06    1.34   3218433
                 long-term debt (industry)       0.75      0.07    0.00    1.00   3218433
                 equity (industry)                0.22     0.05    0.02   15.93   3218433



                                                      44
           Table 16: Country Composition of Amadeus Sample

                 total share          private firm share   list firm share
Belarus          0.01                 100                  0
Belgium          0.38                 96.2                 3.8
Bulgaria         0.78                 92.2                 7.8
Switzerland      0.3                  97                   3
Cyprus           5.12                 48.8                 51.2
Czech Republic   0.03                 99.7                 0.3
Denmark          0.47                 95.3                 4.7
Estonia          0.18                 98.2                 1.8
Finland          0.65                 93.5                 6.5
France           0.58                 94.2                 5.8
Germany          0.38                 96.2                 3.8
Greece           2.76                 72.4                 27.6
Italy            0.01                 99.9                 0.1
Hungary          0.16                 98.4                 1.6
Iceland          0.5                  95                   5
Ireland          0.3                  97                   3
Lithuania        0.17                 98.3                 1.7
Latvia           0.26                 97.4                 2.6
Liechtenstein    0.31                 96.9                 3.1
Luxembourg       0                    100                  0
Macedonia        0.53                 94.7                 5.3
Malta            5.73                 42.7                 57.3
Netherlands      0.66                 93.4                 6.6
Norway           0.1                  99                   1
Poland           0.34                 96.6                 3.4
Portugal         2.38                 76.2                 23.8
Serbia           0.19                 98.1                 1.9
Slovakia         4.83                 51.7                 48.3
Slovenia         0.27                 97.3                 2.7
Spain            0.26                 97.4                 2.6
Sweden           0.39                 96.1                 3.9
Switzerland      1.18                 88.2                 11.8
Turkey           2.21                 77.9                 22.1
Ukraine          1.38                 86.2                 13.8
United Kingdom   0.67                 93.3                 6.7
Total            100 (3218433 obs)




                                     45
          Table 17: Capital Structure of Domestic Financing and Institutional Quality

                                                equity                            long-term debt
                                    baseline    +listed interaction       baseline +listed interaction
 institutional quality              0.020∗∗∗          0.015∗∗∗            0.111∗∗∗           -0.019
                                    (0.006)           (0.005)             (0.030)           (0.019)
 listed (dummy)                                       0.223∗∗∗                             0.051∗∗∗
                                                      (0.097)                               (0.024)
 listed× institutional quality                        0.024∗∗∗                             0.062∗∗∗
                                                      (0.010)                               (0.029)
 liquidity                          0.113∗∗∗          0.096∗∗∗            0.024 ∗∗∗        0.022∗∗∗
                                     (0.022)          (0.019)             (0.005)           (0.004)
 size                                 0.000            -0.001             0.008 ∗∗∗        0.012∗∗∗
                                     (0.000)          (0.000)             (0.001)           (0.002)
 growth                             -0.005∗∗∗        -0.007∗∗∗            0.001∗∗∗          0.003∗
                                     (0.001)          (0.001)             (0.000)           (0.002)
 fixed asset                        0.057∗∗∗          0.039∗∗∗            0.155∗∗∗         0.190∗∗∗
                                     (0.008)          (0.031)             (0.038)           (0.007)
 profit                             0.413∗∗∗          0.449∗∗∗           -0.022 ∗∗∗        -0.119∗∗
                                     (0.083)          (0.090)             (0.004)           (0.024)
 ln GDP per capita                    0.005           0.002∗∗             0.108 ∗∗∗           0.006
                                     (0.004)          (0.000)             (0.022)           (0.006)
 inflation                           0.000∗∗∗         0.000∗∗∗           -0.000∗∗∗          0.000∗∗
                                     (0.005)          (0.000)             (0.012)           (0.006)
 financial development                -1.448            0.427              -0.984             0.522
                                     (1.046)          (0.218)             (0.845)           (0.322)
 tax rate                             0.000            0.003               -0.000             0.000
                                     (0.003)          (0.004)             (0.000)           (0.006)
 equity (industry)                  0.210∗∗∗          0.150∗∗
                                     (0.042)          (0.038)
 long-term debt (industry)                                               0.281∗∗∗          0.122∗∗∗
                                                                         (0.056)           (0.024)
 N                                  3218433           3218433            3218433           3218433
 CountryFE                             Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
 FirmFE                                Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
 YearFE                                Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
 IndTimeTrend                          Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
 Note: This table examines the relationship between firm-level capital structure and institutional quality.
The first three columns are for equity financing, and the last three are regarding long-term debt financing.
Column (1) and (3) are the baseline fixed effect regression with controlling the industry capital structure’s
time trend, and column (2) and (4) add the listed firm dummy and its interaction with institutional
quality. Standard errors are clustered at country level and reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
significance level 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.




                                                     46
