                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ON THE MEASUREMENT OF UPSTREAMNESS AND DOWNSTREAMNESS IN
                       GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS

                                          Pol Antràs
                                          Davin Chor

                                      Working Paper 24185
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24185


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2018




We are grateful to Lorenzo Caliendo, Thibault Fally, Gene Grossman, Lili Yan Ing, and John
Romalis for helpful comments, as well as to Jiacheng (Jack) Feng for extremely valuable research
assistance. Antràs acknowledges support from the NSF (proposal #1628852). Chor acknowledges
support from the Global Production Networks Center at the National University of Singapore
(GPN@NUS). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Pol Antràs and Davin Chor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
On the Measurement of Upstreamness and Downstreamness in Global Value Chains
Pol Antràs and Davin Chor
NBER Working Paper No. 24185
January 2018
JEL No. D5,F1,F2

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper offers four contributions to the empirical literature on global value chains (GVCs).
First, we provide a succinct overview of several measures developed to capture the upstreamness
or downstreamness of industries and countries in GVCs. Second, we employ data from the World
Input-Output Database (WIOD) to document the empirical evolution of these measures over the
period 1995-2011; in doing so, we highlight salient patterns related to countries’ GVC
positioning – as well as some puzzling correlations – that emerge from the data. Third, we
develop a theoretical framework – which builds on Caliendo and Parro’s (2015) variant of the
Eaton and Kortum (2002) model – that provides a structural interpretation of all the entries of the
WIOD in a given year. Fourth, we resort to a calibrated version of the model to perform
counterfactual exercises that: (i) sharpen our understanding of the independent effect of several
factors in explaining the observed empirical patterns in the period 1995-2011; and (ii) provide
guidance for how future changes in the world economy are likely to shape the positioning of
countries in GVCs.


Pol Antràs
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge Street
Littauer Center 207
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
pantras@fas.harvard.edu

Davin Chor
Department of Economics
National University of Singapore
1 Arts Link
Singapore 117570
davinchor@nus.edu.sg




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24185
1        Introduction
In 2017, international trade economists celebrated the two hundredth anniversary of the birth of
their field, as marked by the publication of David Ricardo’s Principles of Political Economy and
Taxation. This treatise is widely recognized to contain the first lucid exposition of the concept of
comparative advantage. Although the notion of comparative advantage is as relevant today as it
was two hundred years ago, the nature of international trade flows has dramatically changed in
recent decades. Technological, institutional and political developments in the last 30 years have led
to a sharp disintegration of production processes across borders, as firms found it more and more
profitable to organize production on a global scale. Countries are no longer exchanging “cloth for
wine”, to quote Ricardo’s famous example. Instead, world production is now structured into global
value chains (GVCs, hereafter) in which firms source parts, components or services from producers
in several countries, and in turn sell their output to firms and consumers worldwide.
        By dramatically altering the international organization of production, the rise of GVCs has
placed the specialization of countries within GVCs at center stage. Where in GVCs are different
countries specializing? What are the determinants of a country’s positioning in GVCs? What are
the real income implications of moving up or down GVCs? Although we still lack definitive answers
to these questions, a recent body of work in international trade has contributed to our understand-
ing by developing measures of the positioning of countries and industries in GVCs (see Fally, 2012,
Antràs et al., 2012, Antràs and Chor, 2013, Fally and Hillberry, 2015, Alfaro et al., 2017, Miller
and Temurshoev, 2017, Wang et al., 2017).1 The intellectual foundation and computation of these
measures is based on Input-Output (I-O) analysis. The application of Input-Output techniques by
trade economists has in turn been reciprocated by an increased interest by Input-Output practi-
tioners on the global dimension of inter-industry linkages. Indeed, a big contributing factor to the
popularization of the literature on GVC positioning has been the construction and widespread avail-
ability of global Input-Output tables, which provide a detailed picture of inter-industry commodity
flows both within and across countries.
        A key limitation of existing approaches to measuring the positioning of countries in GVCs is
that they lack a theoretical foundation within the realm of modern general equilibrium models
of international trade. With information on the various entries of a global Input-Output table,
a researcher can compute the implied upstreamness or downstreamness of specific industries and
countries. But without knowledge of what shapes these I-O entries, a researcher cannot tease out the
primitive determinants of GVC positioning or elucidate how changes in the economic environment
(e.g., changes in trade costs) are likely to affect the specialization of countries within GVCs. To be
clear, we do not mean to imply that the literature on GVCs has been atheoretical in nature. On
the contrary, in recent years, various theoretical frameworks have been developed highlighting the
implications of the rise of GVCs for the workings and implications of general equilibrium models
    1
    These contributions relate to a parallel body of work, starting with the seminal piece of Johnson and Noguera
(2012), that has been concerned with tracing the value-added content of trade flows and the participation of various
countries in GVCs (see Koopman et al., 2014, Johnson, 2014, Timmer et al., 2014, de Gortari, 2017).



                                                         1
of international trade.2 Nevertheless, the vast majority of theoretical models developed to date are
too stylized to easily map to global Input-Output tables.3
    This paper makes four contributions to the literature on GVCs. First, we provide a succinct
overview of various measures developed in the literature to capture the upstreamness or down-
streamness of industries and countries in GVCs. Second, we employ data from the World Input-
Output Database (WIOD) to document the empirical evolution of these measures over the period
1995-2011. Third, we develop a theoretical framework – which builds on Caliendo and Parro (2015)
– that provides a structural interpretation of all the entries of the WIOD in a given year. Fourth,
we then resort to a calibrated version of the model to perform counterfactual exercises that: (i)
sharpen our understanding of the independent effect of several factors in explaining the observed
empirical patterns between 1995-2011; and (ii) provide guidance for how future changes in the
world economy are likely to shape the positioning of countries in GVCs.
    The key measures of upstreamness explored in this paper are introduced in Section 2. These
measures envision a world in which production in GVCs features some element of sequentiality.4
We first consider a measure of distance or upstreamness of a production sector from final demand
which was developed independently by Fally (2012) and Antràs and Chor (2013), and consolidated
in Antràs et al. (2012). This measure (which we label U ) aggregates information on the extent
to which an industry in a given country produces goods that are sold directly to final consumers
or that are sold to other sectors that themselves sell disproportionately to final consumers. A
relatively upstream sector is thus one that sells a small share of its output to final consumers,
and instead sells disproportionately to other sectors that themselves sell relatively little to final
consumers. A second related measure, originally proposed by Fally (2012), captures the distance
or downstreamness of a given sector from the economy’s primary factors of production (or sources
of value-added). According to this measure (which we denote by D), an industry in a given
country will appear to be downstream if its production process uses little value-added relative to
intermediate inputs, and particularly so when it purchases intermediate inputs from industries that
themselves use intermediate inputs intensively. In addition, we also discuss simpler versions of
these two measures of GVC positioning: the first reduces the measure in Antràs et al. (2012) to
simply the share of a country-industry’s output that is sold directly to final consumers (denoted by
F/GO), while the second reduces the Fally (2012) measure of distance from value-added to simply
   2
     See, among others, Harms et al. (2012), Baldwin and Venables (2013), Costinot et al. (2013), Antràs and Chor
(2013), Fally and Hillberry (2015), Kikuchi et al. (2017), and Tyazhelnikov (2017). This literature is in turn inspired
by earlier contributions to modeling multi-stage production, such as Dixit and Grossman (1982), Sanyal and Jones
(1982), Kremer (1993), Yi (2003, 2010), and Kohler (2004).
   3
     Two recent exceptions are the work of Antràs and de Gortari (2017) and de Gortari (2017), who develop multi-
country models that emphasize the sequential nature of trade flows in GVCs. Their frameworks provide a structural
interpretation of global Input-Output tables, but the calibration of those models requires a much more cumbersome
estimation procedure than is required for the model developed in this paper.
   4
     Baldwin and Venables (2013) famously introduced the term ‘snakes’ to refer to purely sequential value chains,
in which each production stage obtains its inputs from a unique upstream stage. They distinguished ‘snakes’ from
‘spiders’, which are flatter GVCs in which each production stage sources from several upstream suppliers simultane-
ously. The measures of GVC positioning that we review in Section 2 are defined in a general way, so that they can
be computed for production processes that have both ‘snake’-like as well as ‘spider’-like features.



                                                          2
the share of a country-industry’s payments accounted for by payments to primary factors (denoted
by V A/GO).
   Although these measures were initially developed at the industry-level with national Input-
Output tables in mind, we show that it is straightforward to define them and compute them at the
country-industry level with data from global Input-Output tables, as in the recent work of Fally
and Hillberry (2015) and Miller and Temurshoev (2017). Similarly, taking weighted averages of
these indices across sectors, one can easily compute the average upstreamness or downstreamness of
specific countries in GVCs, which we will adopt as summary measures of countries’ GVC positioning.
   With these definitions in hand, in Section 3 we use data from the WIOD to compute these
measures for the period 1995-2011. We unveil two systematic and somewhat surprising facts. First,
countries that appear to be upstream according to their production-staging distance from final
demand (U ) are at the same time recorded to be downstream according to their production-staging
distance from primary factors (D). This puzzling finding is also observed when working with the
simpler F/GO and V A/GO measures. More specifically, countries that sell a disproportionate share
of their output directly to final consumers (thus appearing to be downstream in GVCs according
to U ) tend to also feature high value-added over gross output ratios, reflecting a limited amount
of intermediate inputs embodied in their production (thus appearing to be upstream in GVCs
according to D). Our second main empirical finding relates to the evolution of these measures.
Not only is the puzzling positive correlation between U and D (and between F/GO and V A/GO)
present in all the years in our sample, but it actually appears to have intensified between 1995-2011.
While we first illustrate these results using the GVC measures aggregated at the country level, we
further show that these positive correlations (as well as their increase over time) are also observed
in the GVC measures as originally computed at the country-industry level.
   In Section 4, we provide a tentative investigation of the possible causes behind these salient and
puzzling facts from the data. We first explore the role of trade costs. Note that in a closed economy,
value-added coincides with final consumption as a national accounting identity; thus, in a cross-
section of closed economies that differ in their value-added intensity in production, one would expect
to record a perfect positive correlation between F/GO and V A/GO. This suggests that the observed
positive correlation between these indices (and between U and D) might reflect the persistence of
large trade barriers across countries. When applying the Head and Ries (2001) approach to back
out implied trade costs, we indeed find these costs to be substantially high, even towards the
end of our sample. Nevertheless, we also find that average trade barriers fell significantly in the
period 1995-2011 (especially prior to the Global Financial Crisis), while the positive correlation
between the various pairs of country-level GVC measures actually intensified. This suggests that
other mechanisms must have been in play to explain the puzzling facts unveiled in Section 3. As
a second candidate explanation, we provide evidence for the importance of compositional effects
related to the differential (and growing) importance of services. Intuitively, service sectors feature
short production chain lengths, with both a high ratio of sales to final consumers and little use of
intermediate inputs in production. The cross-country variation in our measures of upstreamness


                                                  3
(as well as the positive correlation among U and D) thus partly reflects variation in the importance
of service sectors in the production structure of different countries.5
       In order to better elucidate the quantitative importance of these alternative explanations, and
also to be able to interpret the data in a structural manner, we turn in Section 5 to develop a
theoretical model. We begin by reviewing Caliendo and Parro’s (2015) extension of the Eaton
and Kortum (2002) Ricardian model of trade. In its closed economy version, the Cobb-Douglas
structure of the demand and production sides of this model are closely related to the framework in
Acemoglu et al. (2012). As is well known, the demand and technological Cobb-Douglas parameters
of that model can easily be recovered from expenditure shares reported in national Input-Output
tables. In the type of open-economy equilibrium corresponding to a global Input-Output table,
cross-country and cross-industry expenditure shares are less straightforward to map structurally to
a model because they are the outcome of competition across potential sources, and are thus shaped
by differences in productivity and trade costs across countries. Caliendo and Parro (2015) showed,
however, that a variant of the Eaton and Kortum (2002) framework could be used to interpret
structurally the share of purchases of a given type of industry good originating from different
source countries.
       We develop in Section 5 an extension of the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model that features a
more flexible formulation of trade costs, in order to be able to fully match all entries of a World
Input-Output Table (WIOT) that relate to trade in intermediate inputs and trade in goods/services
designated for final consumption. In its original form, the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model does
not allow these “trade shares” to vary depending on the identity of the purchasing entity, that is,
depending on whether they are sold to final consumers or to different industries as inputs. Instead,
the model (implicitly) imposes certain restrictions on these entries that need not (and typically do
not) hold in the actual data. Given our objective of providing a structural interpretation of the GVC
measures described in Section 2, it is instead desirable to correctly match both the intermediate-use
and final-use trade shares, since the implied values of upstreamness and downstreamness will clearly
depend on the extent to which a sector’s output is sold to final consumers or to other industries.6
For the extension we develop, we further show – in line with Dekle et al. (2008) and Caliendo and
Parro (2015) – that in order to perform various counterfactuals, all that is required are: (i) initial
trade shares available from a WIOT; (ii) demand and technological Cobb-Douglas parameters easily
recoverable from the same WIOT; and (iii) a vector of sectoral parameters shaping the elasticity
of trade flows (across source countries) to trade barriers.
   5
     In the ongoing revision of his 2012 working paper, Fally studies the role of the growth of the service sector in
explaining the downward trend in D observed in U.S. Input-Output Tables in the period 1947 to 2002.
   6
     A recent paper by Alexander (2017) extends the Caliendo and Parro (2015) framework by allowing trade shares
to vary depending on whether goods are sold to final consumers or to other industries, but imposes a common trade
share for all intermediate input purchasing industries. Readers familiar with the construction of WIOTs will be
aware that proportionality assumptions are commonly adopted that would imply identical trade shares for all input
purchasing industries. In practice though, the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) used in this paper introduces
minor adjustments that generate some variation in input trade shares in the data. Following the lead of de Gortari
(2017), we hypothesize that future WIOTs will make better use of firm-level import and export data to generate even
larger departures from such proportionality assumptions.



                                                         4
        In Section 6, we leverage this result to undertake several counterfactual exercises. We first
attempt to trace the relative contribution of trade cost reductions and the growing share of final
consumption of services for explaining the puzzling increase in the key correlations between F/GO
and V A/GO (and between U and D) over the 1995-2011 period. Our quantitative results confirm
that declining trade costs tend only to aggravate the high-correlation puzzle. On the other hand, we
find that changes in final consumption shares did contribute – but only modestly – to the observed
increase in the correlation between these GVC measures. We next use our model to shed light on
the potential future evolution of the positioning of industries and countries in GVCs. We do so by
experimenting with possible scenarios involving different trade cost reductions, as well as further
increases in the share of countries’ spending on services. Interestingly, we find that a trade cost
reduction that is disproportionately larger for services than for goods industries can induce a further
increase in the correlation between F/GO and V A/GO (and between U and D); this is because
a change in trade costs of this nature would tend to reinforce initial patterns of specialization for
countries with comparative advantage in services.
        The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we review the empirical measures
of GVC positioning. In Section 3, we compute these measures using data from the WIOD for the
period 1995-2011 and discuss several patterns that emerge. In Section 4, we explore two possible
explanations for these patterns. In Section 5, we turn to a theoretical model to interpret the data
structurally, and in Section 6, we use the framework to perform counterfactual exercises. Finally,
in Section 7, we offer some concluding comments. (The Appendix contains some technical details
of our model.)


2        An Overview of Four Measures of GVC Positioning
In this section, we develop the main measures of GVC positioning we will work with throughout the
paper.7 Our unit of analysis is a country-industry pair such as Electrical and Optical Equipment
in Australia. The goal is to devise measures of the extent to which a country-industry is relatively
upstream or downstream in global value chains. These measures are built with the type of data
available from global Input-Output tables. We shall refer to a world Input-Output table as a
WIOT, and Figure 1 provides a schematic version of one such WIOT.
        The WIOT in Figure 1 considers a world economy with J countries (indexed by i or j) and S
sectors (indexed by r or s). In its top left J × S by J × S block, the WIOT contains information
on intermediate purchases by industry s in country j from sector r in country i. We denote these
                             rs . To the right of this block, the WIOT contains an additional J × S
intermediate input flows by Zij
by J block with information on the final-use expenditure in each country j on goods originating
from sector r in country i. We denote these final consumption flows by Fijr . The sum of the
(J × S) + J terms in each row of a WIOT represents the total use of output of sector r from
country i, and naturally coincides with gross output in that sector and country (denoted by Yir ).
    7
        See Johnson (2017) for a recent complementary overview of these and other measures of GVC activity.



                                                           5
                                                             Input use   & value added                                  Final use           Total use
                                                   Country 1              ···            Country J              Country 1 · · · Country J
                                         Industry 1 · · · Industry S      ···  Industry 1 · · · Industry S
                                              11                1S                  11               1S            1               1
                            Industry 1      Z11       ···     Z11         ···     Z1J       ···    Z1J            F11      ···    F1J          Y11
                                                       rs                                    rs
Intermediate    Country 1       ···          ···     Z11       ···        ···      ···     Z1J      ···           ···      ···    ···          ···
                                              S1                SS                  S1               SS            S               S
                            Industry S      Z11       ···     Z11         ···     Z1J       ···    Z1J            F11      ···    F1J          Y1S
                                                                           rs
   inputs            ···        ···          ···      ···      ···       Zij       ···      ···     ···           ···      Fijr   ···          Yir
                                              11                1S                  11               1S            1               1
                            Industry 1      ZJ1       ···     ZJ1         ···     ZJJ       ···    ZJJ            FJ1      ···    FJJ          YJ1
                                                       rs                                    rs
  supplied      Country J       ···          ···     ZJ1       ···        ···      ···     ZJJ      ···           ···      ···    ···          ···
                                              S1                SS                  S1               SS            S               S
                            Industry S      ZJ1       ···     ZJ1         ···     ZJJ       ···    ZJJ            FJ1      ···    FJJ          YJS
             Value added                    V A11     ···     V AS1      V Asj    V A1J     ···    V ASJ
             Gross output                    Y11      ···      Y1S        Yjs      YJ1      ···     YJS            ···


                                Figure 1: The Structure of a World Input-Output Table


 More formally, we have

                                                   S X
                                                   X J                 J
                                                                       X                S X
                                                                                        X J
                                         Yir   =              rs
                                                             Zij   +         Fijr   =              rs
                                                                                                  Zij + Fir ,                                  (1)
                                                   s=1 j=1             j=1              s=1 j=1


 where we will hereafter denote the total final use of output originating from sector r in country i
          J
 by Fir =   Fijr .
          P
               j=1
      As illustrated by the two bottom rows of the WIOT, gross output in industry s in country j is
 also equal to the sum of: (i) all intermediate purchases made from source sectors r in countries i;
 and (ii) country j’s value-added employed in the production of industry s itself (the latter denoted
 by V Asj ). More formally:
                                                                   S X
                                                                   X J
                                                        Yjs =                  rs
                                                                              Zij + V Asj .                                                    (2)
                                                                   r=1 i=1

      As described, the WIOT contains information on linkages in a full production network, where
 each country-industry could potentially be traversed in a large number of production chains. In this
 complex setting, the measures of GVC positioning described below will seek to capture the average
 position of each country-industry in the production chains in which it is involved. The first two
 measures introduced below will1take as a point of reference the sources of final demand at the end of
 each production chain, and compute the upstreamness of the country-industry relative to final use.
 The second set of measures will instead capture the downstreamness of each country-industry from
 where production processes commence, namely from sources of value-added to primary factors.

 2.1        Upstreamness from Final Use
 How upstream or downstream in GVCs is a given sector r from a given country i? A first possible
 approach to tackling this question is to consider the extent to which a country-industry pair sells its
 output for final use to consumers worldwide or instead sells intermediate inputs to other producing
 sectors in the world economy. The idea is that a sector that sells disproportionately to final
 consumers would appear to be downstream in value chains, while a sector that sells little to final


                                                                          6
consumers is more likely to be upstream in value chains. Invoking equation (1), a simple measure
of this notion of GVC positioning is the ratio Fir /Yir , which equals the share of gross output in
sector r in country i that is sold to final consumers. We will refer to this measure as F/GO. Note
that a lower value of this ratio is associated with a higher upstreamness from final use.
   An unappealing feature of the simple measure F/GO is that it does not capture variation in
the upstreamness of country-industry pairs that goes beyond the extent to which their output is
directly sold to final consumers or to other industries. In order to transition to a more satisfactory
measure, let us first define ars    rs    s
                              ij = Zij /Yj as the dollar amount of sector r’s output from country
i needed to produce one dollar worth of industry s’s output in country j. With this notation,
equation (1) becomes:
                                               S X
                                               X J
                                       Yir =                ars   s    r
                                                             ij Yj + Fi .                                (3)
                                               s=1 j=1

Iterating this identity, we can express industry r’s output in country i as an infinite sequence of
terms which reflect the use of this country-industry’s output at different positions in global value
chains, starting with its use as a final good/service, as a direct input in the production of final
goods/services in all countries and industries, as a direct input of a direct input in the production
of final goods/services in all countries and industries, and so on:

                                   S X
                                   X J                  S X
                                                        X J X
                                                            S X
                                                              J
                     Yir = Fir +             ars  s
                                              ij Fj +                       ars  st t
                                                                             ij ajk Fk + . . .           (4)
                                   s=1 j=1              s=1 j=1 t=1 k=1


   Building on this identity, Antràs and Chor (2013) suggested computing the (weighted) average
position of a country-industry’s output in global value chains by multiplying each of the terms in
(4) by its respective production-staging distance from final use plus one, and dividing by Yir , or:

                                     S P
                                       J                          S P
                                                                    J P
                                                                      S P
                                                                        J
                                               ars  s                              ars  st t
                                     P                            P
                                                ij Fj                               ij ajk Fk
                        Fr           s=1 j=1                     s=1 j=1 t=1 k=1
               Uir = 1 × ir + 2 ×                       +3×                                      + ...   (5)
                        Yi                   Yir                            Yir

It is clear that Uir ≥ 1, and that larger values are associated with relatively higher levels of
upstreamness of the output originating from sector r in country i.
   Although computing (5) might appear to require computing an infinite power series, provided
     PS PJ       rs
that   r=1  i=1 aij < 1 for all j-s pairs (a natural assumption), the numerator of the above
measure is actually equal to the ((i − 1) × S + r)-th element of the J × S by 1 column matrix
[I − A]−2 F; here, A is a J × S by J × S matrix whose ((i − 1) × S + r, (j − 1) × S + s)-th element
is ars                                     r
    ij , while F is a column matrix with Fi in its ((i − 1) × S + r)-th row. Using the fact that
the stacked column matrix of gross output also satisfies Y = [I − A]−1 F – which is easily verified
from (3) – the numerator is thus also equal to the ((i − 1) × S + r)-th element of the J × S by 1
matrix [I − A]−1 Y, where Y is a J × S by 1 column matrix with Yir in its ((i − 1) × S + r)-th row.
Because a WIOT provides direct information on A and Y, computing the upstreamness of output


                                                        7
of each sector r in each country i thus amounts to a straightforward matrix inversion.8
    Fally (2012) instead proposed a measure of upstreamness (or distance from final use) based on
the notion that industries selling a disproportionate share of their output to relatively upstream
industries should be relatively upstream themselves.9 In particular, he posited the following linear
system of equations that implicitly defines upstreamness for each industry r in country i:

                                                               S X
                                                               X J
                                                  Ũir = 1 +              brs   s
                                                                           ij Ũj ,                                 (6)
                                                               s=1 j=1

where note that     brs
                     ij   =    rs /Y r
                              Zij   i    =   ars   s
                                              ij Yj /Yi
                                                       r   is the share of total output of sector r in country i that
is purchased by industry s in country j. Again, it is clear that Ũir ≥ 1. Less obviously, one can
demonstrate using matrix algebra that Ũir and Uir are in fact equivalent; this is the key theoretical
result in Antràs et al. (2012).

2.2    Downstreamness from Primary Factors
We next turn to alternative measures of GVC positioning based on a country-industry pair’s use of
intermediate inputs and primary factors of production. These measures are based on the identity in
(2), which describes the technology for producing output in industry s in country j. Other things
equal, it seems plausible that production processes that embody a larger amount of intermediate
inputs relative to their use of primary factors of production will be relatively downstream in value
chains. Conversely, if an industry relies disproportionately on value-added from primary factors of
production, then it would appear that this industry is relatively upstream. In light of equation (2),
a simple measure to capture such GVC positioning is the ratio V Asj /Yjs , with large values of this
measure being associated with higher upstreamness or lower downstreamness. We will refer to this
measure as V A/GO.
    As in the case of the sales-based measure of F/GO, a limitation of V A/GO is that it does not
take into account potential heterogeneity in the upstreamness of the inputs used in the production
process of a country-industry pair. With that in mind, we next develop a more informative measure
of downstreamness from primary factors of production. Recall that brs    rs    r
                                                                   ij = Zij /Yi denotes the share
of sector r’s output in country i that is used in industry s in country j. Then equation (2) can be
written as:
                                                          S X
                                                          X J
                                                Yjs   =             brs   r     s
                                                                     ij Yi + V Aj .
                                                          r=1 i=1
   8
     It may be tempting heuristically to view the exercise here as one of projecting the information on production link-
ages within the WIOT into a stylized linear production chain. We should however caution against this interpretation,
since the intention of the GVC measures is not to literally arrange the country-industries in a WIOT into a unique
production sequence. To give an example, if the Mining and Quarrying industry in Australia has the next largest U
value compared to the Rubber and Plastics industry in China, it does not mean that the former is necessarily being
purchased as an input by the latter industry; instead, what this means is that the former industry tends on average
to enter production chains at a larger number of stages relative to final demand.
   9
     We should stress that although they were developed independently, Fally’s (2012) measure chronologically pre-
ceded that in Antràs and Chor (2013).



                                                                    8
Iterating this identity, we can express:

                                            S X
                                            X J                         S X
                                                                        X J X
                                                                            S X
                                                                              J
                       Yjs   =V   Asj   +             brs
                                                       ij V   Ari   +                     btr  rs    t
                                                                                           ki bij V Ak + . . .
                                            r=1 i=1                     r=1 i=1 t=1 k=1

Notice that the first term captures the direct use of primary factors in the production of industry s
in country j. The second term reflects the use of intermediate inputs that are themselves produced
directly with primary factors. The third term captures intermediate input purchases produced with
inputs produced with primary factors, and so on. The larger are the terms associated with further
iterations, the more intensive is that country-industry’s use of inputs far removed from primary
factors, and thus the more downstream is production relative to these primary factors.
    Building on Antràs and Chor (2013), Miller and Temurshoev (2017) propose the following
measure of downstreamness of a given country-industry pair from primary factors of production:

                                               S P
                                                 J                                J P
                                                                                S P   J
                                                                                    S P
                                                         brs    r                                 btr  rs    t
                                               P                                P
                             V Asj                        ij V Ai                                  ki bij V Ak
                                              r=1 i=1                           r=1 i=1 t=1 k=1
                Djs   =1×            +2×                                +3×                                      + ...   (7)
                              Yjs                       Yjs                                 Yjs

As in the case of Uir , it is clear that Djs ≥ 1, with larger values being associated with relatively
higher levels of downstreamness of industry s in country i. Given the similar structure of Uir
in (5) and Djs in (7), it should come as no surprise that one need not approximate the infinite
sum in (7) to compute Djs . By defining a matrix B analogous to the matrix A invoked in the
construction of Uir and computing [I − B]−1 Y, the various elements of the numerator of Djs are
easily retrieved. Furthermore, there is an analogous foundation for the measure Djs building on the
following recursive definition:
                                                                    J X
                                                                    X S
                                                 D̃js   =1+                   ars   r
                                                                               ij D̃i .                                  (8)
                                                                    i=1 r=1

This system of equations defining downstreamness D̃js was first suggested by Fally (2012), who
associated it with the average number of production stages embodied in a sector’s output. As
pointed out by Miller and Temurshoev (2017), D̃js in (8) and Djs in (7) are in fact mathematically
equivalent.10

2.3    Aggregation
So far we have developed measures of GVC positioning at the country-industry level, but for some
applications a researcher might be interested in the average position of countries in GVCs. An
example of such a focus on the country dimension rather than the country-industry dimension is
provided by Antràs and de Gortari (2017).
    In principle, there are two alternative ways to compute country-level measures of upstream-
  10
     Miller and Temurshoev (2017) refer to Ujs as the “output upstreamness” of sector s in country j, and Djs as the
“input downstreamness” of the same sector.



                                                                     9
ness/downstreamness. First, one can take a WIOT and simply collapse its entries at the country-
by-country level. More specifically, one can compute the total purchases of intermediate inputs by
country j from country i as Zij = Sr=1 SS=1 Zij  rs , and then generate a left J × J block matrix
                                     P     P

with elements Zij . Similarly, a J × J block matrix of aggregate final-use sales can be computed
with entries Fij = Sr=1 Fijr . With this collapsed country-level WIOT, it is then straightforward
                    P

to compute country-level variants of the measures of upstreamness and downstreamness developed
above. A second potential approach maintains the country-industry level dimension of the data
and the GVC positioning measures, but instead computes a weighted-average measure of upstream-
ness/downstreamness at the country level by averaging the industry-level values of those measures
within a country.
       For the two basic measures F/GO and V A/GO, it turns out that these two approaches deliver
the exact same country-level positioning numbers when using the shares of a country’s gross output
accounted for by different industries as weights in the second approach. To see this equivalence
result for the F/GO measure, note that:

                                                                    S
                                                                          Fir
                                                                    P
                                      S
                                      X   Fir        Yir            r=1             Fi
                                                ×               =               =      ,                        (9)
                                          Yr        S                S              Yi
                                       r=1 i              Yis             Yis
                                                    P               P
                                                    s=1             s=1

where the left-hand side is the gross-output weighted-average of final-use shares, while Fi /Yi (in
the right-hand side) is the aggregate ratio of final use to gross output in country i; the latter is
naturally the ratio F/GO that would be computed with a WIOT collapsed at the country level.
Similarly, for the measure V A/GO, we have:

                                                                    S
                                                                        V Asj
                                                                    P
                                   S
                                   X V Asj         Yjs             s=1              V Aj
                                              ×               =                 =        ,                     (10)
                                       Yjs        S                  S               Yj
                                                        Yjs               Yjs
                                   s=1
                                                  P                 P
                                                  s=1               s=1

where the right-hand side term, V Aj /Yj , would naturally be the value for the country-level value-
added over gross output ratio resulting from a WIOT collapsed at the country level.
       When considering the more involved measures U and D, such an equivalence result between
the two aggregation approaches no longer holds. In the empirical analysis to be performed in the
next section, we have nevertheless found the two approaches to deliver extremely highly correlated
country-level indices of GVC positioning (see, in particular, footnote 16).11
       Finally, one might also be interested in computing a worldwide average measure of GVC posi-
tioning. A natural way to do so would be to compute a weighted sum of the respective measures,
F/GO, V A/GO, U , and D, with weights given by gross output in each country. From simple
  11
     Our numerical results also suggest that the gross-output weighted-average of the country-industry U ’s (respec-
tively, D’s) is slightly larger than the country-level U ’s (respectively, D’s) computed from a collapsed WIOT. This
would be consistent with the matrix inverse used in the computation of these indices being a convex transformation.


                                                              10
inspection of (9) and (10), it is straightforward to see that the worldwide averages for F/GO and
V A/GO will coincide with the ratio of aggregate world final consumption to aggregate world gross
output and the ratio of aggregate world value-added to aggregate world gross output, respectively.
Furthermore, because the world as a whole is a closed economy, the aggregate world value of final-
use expenditures is necessarily equal as an accounting identity to the aggregate payments made to
primary factors. Denoting these aggregates with upper bars, we thus have F̄ /GO = V A/GO at
the level of the world economy. There is a similar though far less obvious relationship connecting
the world measures of U and D. More specifically, Proposition 1 in Miller and Temurshoev (2017)
establishes that the gross-output weighted-average Ū value across countries is in fact exactly equal
to the corresponding gross-output weighted-average D̄.12
         This suggests that one should not interpret these world averages as measures of GVC posi-
tioning. Instead, these world averages should be viewed as measures of the complexity of world
production patterns, as captured by the extent to which production processes are sliced across
industries and countries. When Ū = D̄ is large (or F̄ /GO = V A/GO is low), GVCs are more
complex in the sense that world production uses inputs far removed from final use, but also highly
processed inputs far removed from the primary factors that initiated production. Conversely, a
world with a low value of Ū = D̄ and a high value of F̄ /GO = V A/GO is a world with little
intermediate input use and short production chains.


3         The Empirical Evolution of GVC Positioning
We turn now to the annual World Input-Output Database (WIOD) to compute the four measures
of GVC positioning defined in the previous section, and document how these have evolved in recent
decades. The WIOD is well-suited for this exercise: It contains detailed information on country-
industry production linkages and final-use expenditures for a large panel of J = 41 countries
(including a rest-of-the-world aggregate), a common set of S = 35 consistently-defined industries in
each country, at an annual frequency, as described in Timmer et al. (2015). We work with the 2013
edition of the WIOD, which covers the years 1995-2011. This is in practice a very large dataset.
Looking at the entries that correspond to input purchases across country-industry pairs (i.e., the
 rs ’s in the schematic in Figure 1), there are already a total of (35 × 41)2 = 2, 059, 225 such data
Zij
points in any single year. Looking at the entries that report the value of each country’s purchases
for final-use from each country-industry source (i.e., the Fijr ’s in Figure 1), this yields an additional
35 × 412 = 58, 835 observations per year.13
     The proof relies on the fact that: (i) U can be computed from the Leontief inverse matrix, L = [I − A]−1 ; (ii) D
    12

can be computed from the Ghosh inverse matrix, G = [I − B]−1 ; and (iii) the Leontief and Ghosh inverse matrices
are closely related to each other. Facts (i) and (ii) were discussed earlier in Section 2, while (iii) is made explicit
in Miller and Temurshoev (2017). In particular, define Y to be a square matrix whose diagonal entries are equal to
gross output in each industry, and whose non-diagonal entries are all equal to zero. Then, we have: Y G = LY .
  13
     We have separately verified that similar patterns hold in the recent 2016 release of the WIOD. Relative to the
2013 edition, the 2016 WIOD includes 44 countries and 56 industries from 2000-2014. The increase in the number of
industries covered arises mainly from a more detailed breakdown of service industries. We have nevertheless based
the analysis in this paper on the 2013 WIOD, in order to trace the evolution of GVCs starting from an earlier year.


                                                          11
       In terms of practical implementation, we calculate the four GVC measures for each industry r
in each country i in each year, after first performing a “net inventory” correction. For expositional
purposes, equation (1) presented earlier had simplified the components of gross output, Yir : Apart
                                                                                      rs ’s and
from the value of that output that is purchased for intermediate and final uses (the Zij
Fijr ’s), gross output in the Input-Output accounts includes an additional third component equal to
the net value that is inventorized (which we denote by Nir ).14 To fully account for how these net
inventories affect the measurement of production staging, one would need to observe the identities
of the industries s that undertake this inventorization. However, a breakdown of Nir by the identity
of purchasing industries is not available in the WIOD. We therefore follow Antràs et al. (2012) in
applying a “net inventory” correction that apportions Nir across purchasing countries and indus-
tries, in proportion to the corresponding breakdown seen in the intermediate use entries (i.e., the
 rs ’s). This correction boils down to rescaling each Z rs and F r term by a multiplicative factor
Zij                                                    ij       ij
equal to Yir /(Yir − Nir ) before we compute the GVC measures at the country-industry level.15
       To more succinctly illustrate the broad trends in countries’ GVC positioning over time, we
will find it useful to begin by working with a collapsed version of the World Input-Output Tables
(WIOT), in which we aggregate out the industry dimension – by summing over all industry entries
for each source-by-destination country pair – to obtain a panel of country-by-country Input-Output
tables, as described in Section 2.3. From this collapsed WIOT, one can compute a set of country-
level measures of F/GO, V A/GO, U , and D (with a corresponding net inventory correction based
on country-level aggregate inventories) to summarize the GVC positioning of each country, and
more easily illustrate how this has evolved over time.16

3.1       The GVC Positioning of Countries Over Time
Figure 2 provides an overview of how GVCs have evolved for the world economy as a whole.
Here, we have taken two of the country-level measures of GVC positioning, namely F/GO and U ,
computed the gross-output weighted-average of each measure (across the 41 countries in the 2013
WIOD), and plotted these over time.
       The upper panel reveals that the final-use share in gross output in the world economy (F /GO)
  14
       The full output identity should thus be:
                                                    S X
                                                    X J               J
                                                                      X
                                            Yir =              rs
                                                              Zij +         Fijr + Nir .
                                                    s=1 j=1           j=1


  15
    See Antràs et al. (2012) for a derivation of this correction term and how it arises from proportionality assumptions.
  16
    As mentioned in Section 2.3, an alternative approach would be to work directly with the country-industry
measures of GVC positioning in a given year, and take weighted-averages of these to obtain their analogues at the
country level. As explained in Section 2, the two approaches clearly yield exactly the same country-level values for
F/GO and V A/GO if weights equal to gross output in each country-industry are used. While the two approaches
are not equivalent for U and D, they nevertheless result in highly-correlated GVC measures at the country-level
(with a correlation higher than 0.98, for both U and D). The trends that we document are thus not sensitive to the
approach taken to compute the country-level GVC measures. In practice, the net inventory correction introduces
small discrepancies between the country-level GVC measures computed under either approach, but the correlation
remains very high.



                                                               12
                                    .52 .54 .56
           F/GO over time (World)
                                    .5
                                    .46 .48




                                                  1994    1996   1998   2000   2002          2004   2006   2008   2010   2012
                                                                                      Year
                                    2.2
           U over time (World)
                                    2.1
                                    2
                                    1.9
                                    1.8




                                                  1994    1996   1998   2000   2002          2004   2006   2008   2010   2012
                                                                                      Year

                                                         Figure 2: GVC Positioning over Time (World Average)


has been on the decline over this period. While the magnitude of this change was fairly small (from
0.526 in 1995 to 0.486 in 2011), the drop was nevertheless perceptible and steady, particularly after
2002. Put otherwise, production and trade in intermediate inputs has risen relative to that in final
goods, which would be consistent with a rise in GVC activity around the world. The lower panel
corroborates this interpretation. There, we see that the world average upstreamness U has been
on the uptick, suggesting that production processes have become fragmented into more stages.
   What about the other two measures of GVC positioning? Remember from Section 2.3 that the
aggregate world value of final-use expenditures is equal to the aggregate world payments made to
primary factors. A plot of V A/GO over time would thus be identical to the upper panel in Figure
2. As previously discussed, the gross-output weighted-average U value is in fact also equal to the
gross-output weighted-average of D, and thus a separate figure for the evolution of D over time
would also be redundant.
   In Figure 3, we take a more detailed look at these aggregate patterns, by plotting the respective
GVC measures for the countries at the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the cross-country distri-
bution in each year. Note that the worldwide equivalence between F/GO and V A/GO, as well as
that between U and D, no longer holds for individual countries, so we can now meaningfully exam-
ine the evolution of the four separate GVC measures. The plots in the left column of Figure 3 verify
that the downward trend in F/GO, and the converse upward trend in U , both hold across these
different percentiles of the cross-country distribution. Viewed from the perspective of these two
GVC measures, it appears that countries have been broadly moving more upstream relative to final
demand in the nature of the production activities that are conducted. On the other hand, the plots


                                                                                 13
                                   .42.44.46.48 .5 .52.54.56.58




                                                                                                                                                   .42.44.46.48 .5 .52.54.56.58
           (country percentiles)




                                                                                                                           (country percentiles)
                                                                                                                             VA/GO over time
              F/GO over time




                                                                  1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012                                                               1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
                                                                                       Year                                                                                                            Year
                                   2.2




                                                                                                                                                   2.2
           (country percentiles)




                                                                                                                           (country percentiles)
                                   2.1




                                                                                                                                                   2.1
               U over time




                                                                                                                               D over time
                                   2




                                                                                                                                                   2
                                   1.9




                                                                                                                                                   1.9
                                   1.8




                                                                                                                                                   1.8
                                                                  1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012                                                               1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
                                                                                       Year                                                                                                            Year


            Figure 3: GVC Positioning over Time (25th, 50th, 75th country percentiles)


in the right column indicate that the value-added to gross-output ratio (V A/GO) has been falling
over this period, while the measure of production staging relative to sources of value-added (D) has
been rising. The distribution of countries’ GVC positioning has thus simultaneously become more
downstream in relation to primary factors. Taken together, these observations suggest that GVCs
have become more complex, as the average global production chain “length” from primary factors
to a particular country, and onward from that country to final demand, have both increased.
   It is useful to discuss how the above stylized facts relate to the broader empirical literature
on GVC positioning. We are admittedly not the first to document the gradual rise in U and D
over time: Miller and Temurshoev (2017) have also reported this pattern both across countries
and across industries in the 2013 WIOD. In the regression analysis that we present below, we
will extend this finding by showing that these trends are present too when examining the within
country-industry variation in these GVC measures (see Table 2). In contrast, Fally (2012) has
documented a fall over time in the number of production stages from primary factors to industries,
i.e., in the D measure, using U.S. Input-Output Tables that span 1947 to 2002. Nevertheless, the
bulk of the decline documented by Fally (2012) occurred in the 1980s and early 1990s, prior to the
period considered in this paper, and thus prior to the explosion in GVC activity. Furthermore, in
the ongoing revision of his work, Fally documents an uptick in D over the period 1997-2007, which
is consistent with our findings.
   While Figures 2 and 3 point to broad trends that apply across the country sample, these may
mask significant movements in individual countries’ GVC positioning. A simple rank correlation test
nevertheless indicates that each country’s position in GVCs vis-à-vis other countries has remained

                                                                                                                      14
remarkably stable. In particular, we obtain Spearman coefficients in excess of 0.75 for each of the
country-level GVC measures when comparing their cross-country rank order in 1995 against that
in 2011. Table 1 confirms that there is a striking persistence in countries’ GVC position over time,
even in the tail ends of the rank order. For example, focusing on the left half of the table, China,
Luxembourg, and the Czech Republic were among the five most upstream countries relative to
final demand in both 1995 and 2011, based on either the country rank by F/GO or U . On the
other hand, Brazil, Greece, and Cyprus have remained in the five most downstream countries over
this period in their proximity to final-use. A similar persistence can also be seen in the right half
of Table 1, which reports the rank order of countries in terms of their GVC position relative to
primary factors (based on either V A/GO or D).

                                           [Table 1 here]

   The above discussion has described patterns in the evolution of GVC positioning across coun-
tries, in terms of the broad decline in F/GO and V A/GO, as well as the accompanying rise in U
and D over time. We next establish that these patterns are also borne out when focusing instead
on variation within countries – and more specifically, within country-industry – over time. For this,
we turn to the more disaggregate GVC measures computed at the country-industry level. To tease
out the desired “within”-variation, we run a series of regressions of the following form:

                                      s
                                  GV Cj,t = β 1 Y eart + F Ejs + sj,t .                        (11)

                           s denotes the GVC measure for industry s in country j during year
On the left-hand side, GV Cj,t
t. We will use each of the four measures (F/GO, V A/GO, U , and D) as this dependent variable;
summary statistics for these country-industry GVC measures are presented in Appendix Table 1.
On the right-hand side, the F Ejs ’s denote country-industry fixed effects. The variable Y eart then
                                                                                     s within
seeks to pick up whether there is a simple linear time trend in the evolution of GV Cj,t
country-industry. In more detailed specifications, we will replace Y eart with a full set of year
dummies to trace the year-by-year evolution in the respective GVC measures. We report conserva-
tive standard errors that are multi-way clustered by country, industry, and year, to accommodate
possible correlation in the sj,t ’s along each of these dimensions (Cameron et al. 2011).
   Table 2 reports the results from this regression exercise. These confirm that the broad patterns
documented earlier are present too in the evolution of GVC positioning within country-industry:
                                              s , Columns 1-2) and the value-added share in
Both the final-use share in gross output (F/GOj,t
                    s , Columns 3-4) have declined steadily over time. Conversely, upstreamness
gross output (V A/GOj,t
                                           s , Columns 5-6), as has been its production-staging
relative to final demand has been rising (Uj,t
                                s , Columns 7-8). The estimates in the odd-numbered columns
distance from primary factors (Dj,t
point to a significant linear time trend, this being negative in the case of F/GO and V A/GO, while
positive in the case of U and D. Inspecting more closely the coefficients of the year dummies in
the even-numbered columns, most of the movement over time in these GVC measures appears to


                                                   15
have kicked in starting in 2000.17,18

                                                 [Table 2 here]

       In sum, the decline in F/GO and V A/GO, and the rise in U and D, appear to be pervasive
phenomena. These patterns are clearly visible in how the country-level measures of GVC positioning
have moved over time. They also emerge robustly from more formal regressions that exploit within
country-industry movements in the GVC measures.

3.2      Puzzling Correlations
The findings in the previous subsection hint at interesting patterns of co-movement among the
GVC positioning measures. We explore this dimension of the data more carefully now, specifically
the correlation between F/GO and V A/GO (respectively, U and D) across countries, and how this
correlation has behaved over the period 1995-2011.
       As GVCs have grown in importance as a mode of production, one might have imagined that in-
dividual countries would have gradually positioned themselves (on average) in particular segments
of these GVCs in which they have comparative advantage. For example, one might have expected
that countries with comparative advantage in natural resources or basic parts and components
would have increasingly specialized in early stages of production processes, and would have conse-
quently experienced a downward shift in F/GO and an increase in V A/GO. Conversely, countries
with comparative advantage in production stages that are closer to final assembly would have been
expected to experience a rise in F/GO and a decline in V A/GO.19 If such a scenario had indeed
played out, this should have led any positive correlation between F/GO and V A/GO to weaken
over time, and perhaps even turn negative.
       Figure 4 reveals, however, that the actual patterns in the data are surprisingly at odds with
this prior intuition. The upper row in this figure plots the country-level measures of F/GO against
V A/GO in 1995 and 2011 respectively. A positive relationship between these two measures stands
out in both years, and this relationship actually appears to have tightened around the line of best fit
by the end of the period. The plots in the bottom row demonstrate that a similarly strong positive
relationship has persisted between the country-level measures of U and D. These observations are
moreover consistent with what was seen earlier in the country rank lists in Table 1. We saw there
  17
      We have found no major differences in the within country-industry time trends when re-running the Table 2
regressions restricting to either goods-producing or service industries. The time trends for each of the GVC measures
retain the same sign as in Table 2; statistical significance on the Y eart variable is lost in only one case, for the
regression involving F/GO for goods industries (results available on request). The goods-producing industries are
defined as industries 1-16 in the WIOD, these being industries in agriculture, mining, and manufacturing activities;
the service industries are defined as industries 17-35.
   18
      In separate unreported results, we have found similar time trends when weighting each observation by the gross
output of the country-industry in question. Likewise, the results are robust when adopting a less stringent set of
fixed effects, namely when the F Ejs ’s are replaced with a set of country fixed effects instead.
   19
      Costinot et al. (2013) and Antràs and de Gortari (2017) develop models in which countries specialize in equilib-
rium in particular segments of the global value chain: some countries have comparative advantage in more upstream
stages, while others specialize in more downstream stages.



                                                          16
                                                                                                                     .7
                                                                                       CYP




                         .7
                                                                                                                                                                                     GRC
                                                                                                                                                                              CYP
                                                                          GRC




                                                                                                                     .6
                                                                          TUR




                         .6
                                                                                                                                                                          MEX


           F/GO (1995)




                                                                                                       F/GO (2011)
                                                                          BRA                                                                                           USA
                                                                                                                                                                        BRA
                                                               MLT      DNK
                                                                   RoWMEXAUT
                                                                       USA                                                                                            LTU
                                                               PRT     DEU                                                                                       IND
                                                                                                                                                                PRT
                                                                                                                                                                 TURFRA
                                                             LTU ESP FRA
                                                                    GBRCAN
                                                                     JPN                                                                                       ROU
                                                                                                                                                               ESP
                                                                                                                                                              ITA  JPN
                                                                                                                                                                    GBR
                                                                 ITA
                                                                IND




                                                                                                                     .5
                                                             SVN                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                                                                                                   CAN
                         .5
                                                           IRL
                                                          HUN
                                                          BGR     LVA
                                                                  NLD
                                                                IDN
                                                               POLSWE                                                                                         RoW
                                                                                                                                                             SVN  DEU
                                                                                                                                                                IDN
                                                            TWN
                                                          ROU  AUS
                                                             BEL FIN                                                                                      POL NLD
                                                                                                                                                             LVA
                                                                                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                                                                                            MLT AUS
                                                       ESTKOR                                                                                           SVK
                                                                                                                                                      HUN FIN
                                                                                                                                                              SWE
                                                                                                                                                             EST
                                                                   RUS                                                                                  BEL
                                                                                                                                                    BGR IRL      RUS
                                                    CZE




                                                                                                                     .4
                                                                                                                                                  CZE TWN
                         .4

                                                  CHN SVK         LUX                                                                            KOR
                                                                                                                                           CHN




                                                                                                                     .3
                         .3




                                                                                                                                                 LUX

                                          .3          .4          .5            .6           .7                                      .3             .4          .5            .6           .7
                                                           VA/GO (1995)                                                                                  VA/GO (2011)
                         3




                                                                                                                     3
                         2.25 2.5 2.75




                                                                                                                                                                                           CHN




                                                                                                                     2.25 2.5 2.75
                                                                                CHN                                                                                  LUX KOR
           U (1995)




                                                                                                       U (2011)
                                                                                                                                                                   TWN
                                                                        SVK
                                                                         CZE                                                                             RUS            CZE
                                                        LUX                                                                                                           BGR
                                                       RUS                                                                                                AUS  FIN
                                                                                                                                                             ESTIRL
                                                                                                                                                                 BEL
                                                                                                                                                                   HUN
                                                                                                                                                                  SVK
                                                         FINAUS   EST
                                                                KOR                                                                                           MLT
                                                                                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                                                                                            AUT
                                                            BEL
                                                           POL   ROU
                                                               TWN                                                                                          LVA
                                                                                                                                                            NLD
                                                                                                                                                          IDN
                                                                                                                                                            RoW
                                                                                                                                                             SVNPOL
                                                          IDN
                                                        SWE     HUN
                                                                BGR                                                                                      DEU
                         2




                                                        NLD
                                                        LVA   IRL
                                                             SVN                                                                                         DNK
                                                                                                                                                       CAN




                                                                                                                     2
                                                       GBR
                                                      JPN IND
                                                         ITALTU
                                                          ESP                                                                                          GBR
                                                                                                                                                        JPN ITA
                                                                                                                                                           ESP
                                                                                                                                                           ROU
                                                    CAN
                                                      FRAMLT
                                                           PRT                                                                                           TUR
                                                                                                                                                         PRT
                                                                                                                                                       FRA
                                                    DEU
                                                    USA
                                                    MEXRoW
                                                   AUT                                                                                                LTUIND
                         1.5 1.75




                                                    DNK                                                                                             BRA




                                                                                                                     1.5 1.75
                                                  BRA                                                                                               USA
                                                  TUR                                                                                              MEX
                                                  GRC                                                                                         CYP
                                               CYP                                                                                          GRC

                                         1.5   1.75        2     2.25     2.5        2.75    3                                       1.5    1.75         2     2.25     2.5        2.75     3
                                                               D (1995)                                                                                      D (2011)


                                         Figure 4: GVC Positioning Measures and their Correlation over time


that countries such as China and Luxembourg were among the bottom-five according to both F/GO
and V A/GO across the sample period. Similarly, countries such as Brazil, Greece, and Cyprus
were consistently ranked in the top-five of both of these GVC measures. This persistent correlation
between F/GO and V A/GO is surprising, as it is a feature that would be more consistent with a
world in which trade costs have remained relatively high. Recall in particular from the discussion in
the Introduction that in the extreme case of autarky, the cross-country correlation between F/GO
and V A/GO would a perfect one. Taken at face value, this suggests that trade costs have perhaps
not fallen enough to cause any significant dampening in this positive correlation.
   Taking a more detailed look at the annual data, Figure 5 shows that these correlations are
not anomalous or specific to 1995 or 2011. The upper panel here plots the pairwise correlation
between F/GO and V A/GO at the country level for each year in the sample. The correlation was
already strong at the beginning of the period (equal to 0.825 in 1995), and contrary to what we
might expect in an age of rising GVC activity, it in fact strengthened gradually over time (0.925
by 2011). The bottom panel provides a closely-related illustration. There, we have run a simple
bivariate regression of the country-level measures of F/GO against V A/GO, separately for each
year between 1995-2011. The estimates of the coefficient of V A/GO have been plotted, together
with their associated 95% confidence interval bands. The positive partial correlation between the
final-use and the value-added shares of gross output is always precisely estimated, with the slope
coefficient itself hovering around 1 in each year. In sum, the positive correlation between F/GO
and V A/GO has shown no sign of waning over time.
   An analogous set of correlations can be documented between the country-level measures of U

                                                                                                  17
             Correlation: F/GO on VA/GO
                                                1
                                                .95
                                                .9
                                                .85
                                                .8




                                                                1994   1996     1998   2000   2002          2004   2006   2008   2010   2012
                                                                                                     Year
             Slope coefficient: F/GO on VA/GO
                                                1 1.1 1.2 1.3
                                                .9
                                                .8
                                                .7




                                                                1994   1996     1998   2000   2002          2004   2006   2008   2010   2012
                                                                                                     Year


                                                                              Figure 5: F U/GO and V A/GO over time


and D. As seen in Section 2, the definition of U would lead us to expect that it would be inversely
correlated with F/GO, as the more upstream a country is from sources of final demand, the lower
would be the share of country output that goes directly to final-use. Similarly, D exhibits a
negative correlation with V A/GO, so that the more downstream a country is from primary factors,
the lower would be the share of gross output that goes towards direct payments to those factors.20
We therefore obtain a positive correlation in Figure 6 between U and D in each year, in line with
what was seen earlier for F/GO and V A/GO. We find once again that there are no clear signs of a
weakening in the positive U -D correlation in more recent years (upper panel), while the bivariate
slope coefficient is positive and relatively stable over time (lower panel).
    The positive association between F/GO and V A/GO, as well as that between U and D, are
robust features even when we turn to the more detailed country-industry measures of GVC posi-
tioning. Toward this end, we have run a series of regressions of the form:

                                                                             s               s
                                                                         F/GOj,t = β 1 V A/GOj,t + F Ej + F E s + sj,t ,                      (12)

to uncover how the country-industry measures of F/GO and V A/GO are correlated in any given
year t. In the interest of space, we have reported the findings for t = 1995 and t = 2011 in Table
3, but the results for other years are very similar. For each year, the table reports the estimates
from three different specifications, namely: (i) a simple bivariate regression with no fixed effects,
  20
     The correlation between the country-level measures of F/GO and U , as well as between the country-level measures
of V A/GO and D, is indeed negative and lower than −0.96 in any given year.



                                                                                                18
                                        1
            Correlation: U on D
                                        .95
                                        .9
                                        .85
                                        .8




                                                  1994   1996   1998      2000   2002          2004   2006   2008   2010   2012
                                                                                        Year
                                        1.1 1.2
            Slope coefficient: U on D
                                        1
                                        .9
                                        .8
                                        .7




                                                  1994   1996   1998      2000   2002          2004   2006   2008   2010   2012
                                                                                        Year


                                                                       Figure 6: U and D over time


to assess the unconditional cross-sectional correlation between F/GO and V A/GO; (ii) a second
regression that then controls for country fixed effects (F Ej ); and (iii) a last regression that further
includes industry fixed effects (F E s ) as in (12) above. These results are presented in the upper
row of Table 3, while the bottom row performs the analogous exercise from regressing U against
D. (The standard errors in the table are two-way clustered, by country and industry.)

                                                                             [Table 3 here]

    Even in the simple bivariate regressions, we already find a positive association between F/GO
and V A/GO (respectively, between U and D) in the raw cross-section (Columns 1, 4, 7, 10). The
R2 ’s for these regressions range from 0.1-0.2, pointing to a fair bit of unexplained variation in the
data, but the highly significant slope coefficient estimates clearly point at a positive correlation.
Controlling for country fixed effects (Columns 2, 5, 8, 11), and further for industry fixed effects
(Columns 3, 6, 9, 12), successively reduces the magnitude of this slope coefficient, but it always
remains statistically significant except in Column 3 for the relationship between F/GO and V A/GO
at the start of the sample period. In short, the positive associations between F/GO and V A/GO,
as well as between U and D, are present even when we focus on these different sources of variation
in the measures of GVC positioning at the country-industry level.21
  21
     We have verified that the patterns documented in this section are not unduly driven by the small economies
in the WIOD sample. In particular, similar time trends are obtained when: (i) dropping Malta, Cyprus, Estonia,
Latvia, and Lithuania, these being the five smallest countries by GDP; (ii) using aggregate gross output as regression
weights in the cross-country regressions underlying the lower panels in Figures 5 and 6; or (iii) weighting the Table
3 regressions by the gross output of the country-industry in question.


                                                                                   19
4     Proximate Explanations
The correlations that we have just documented warrant closer investigation, as their persistence
runs counter to what one might expect in an era of global production fragmentation. We take a
first look in this section at two proximate explanations that could account (at least qualitatively)
for these puzzling correlations, before turning to a model-based investigation in Sections 5 and 6.

4.1   Trade Costs
A first possibility is that trade costs might not in actuality have fallen as much as commonly
perceived. If cross-border trade frictions have remained relatively high, this would provide an
immediate explanation for the significant and persistent correlation between F/GO and V A/GO
(and by extension, between U and D). One could naturally argue that high cross-border trade
costs would in principle discourage rather than facilitate the formation of GVCs. But for the sake
of argument, let us for now suspend that concern and instead examine what the data tell us about
trade costs over this sample period.
    We make use of the Head and Reis (2001) index as a measure of these cross-border trade costs,
since this can readily be computed from information that is already contained in the WIOD. The
Head-Reis index is usually constructed at the country level to yield a measure of bilateral trade
costs. We extend this concept to the country-industry level, to capture trade costs from country
i to j in industry r, and moreover distinguish between trade costs that are incurred when the
good/service from industry r is being used as an intermediate input and when it is destined instead
for final-use. Specifically, for each i 6= j, we compute:
                                                            ! 1
                                                 rs Z rs − 2θ
                                                Zij     ji
                                    τ rs
                                      ij =                        , and                          (13)
                                                Ziirs Zjjrs

                                                          !− 1
                                                Fijr Fjir    2θ

                                    τ rF
                                      ij   =                    .                                (14)
                                                Fiir Fjj
                                                       r


Note that τ rs
            ij denotes the trade costs associated with exporting sector-r intermediates from country
i to country j when these are purchased as inputs by industry s. On the other hand, τ rF
                                                                                      ij captures
the corresponding trade costs incurred when the exports in question are purchased for final-use.
From the above formulae, one can see that the Head-Reis index infers the magnitude of cross-border
trade costs from the observed values of bilateral trade flows relative to domestic absorption. The θ
that appears in the exponent in (13) and (14) is the familiar trade elasticity with respect to iceberg
trade costs, which we assume satisfies θ > 1. Intuitively, the greater is the level of cross-border
trade relative to domestic absorption, the lower would be the inferred iceberg trade costs; moreover,
the greater is the trade elasticity, the lower will be the trade costs required to rationalize a given
ratio of cross-border to domestic sales.
    As is well-known, the Head-Reis index is an exact way to back out the iceberg trade cost when


                                                   20
bilateral flows are characterized by a gravity equation with a constant trade elasticity θ, subject to
two further assumptions. First, within-country trade costs are uniformly equal to 1; in our context,
this amounts to normalizing τ rs           rF
                              ii = 1 and τ ii = 1 for all countries i and industry pairs r and s.
Second, cross-border trade costs are directionally symmetric; in other words, we have τ rs     rs
                                                                                        ij = τ ji and
τ rF     rF
  ij = τ ji for all industries r and s, so that the cost of exporting for intermediate-use (respectively,
for final-use) is equal regardless of whether one is exporting from country i to j or from j to i.
The latter assumption in particular is more restrictive. As we shall see in Section 5, it potentially
limits the flexibility of the model there to fully match all entries of a WIOT. That said, absent
more direct measures of trade costs, the Head-Reis index provides a convenient empirical handle
to assess how trade costs have been moving on average.
       To get a sense of aggregate trends, we first use the country-by-country version of the WIOT (i.e.,
with the industry dimension collapsed out) to calculate the standard Head-Reis index of bilateral
trade costs between country pairs.22 We adopt a baseline value of θ = 5 for the trade elasticity.
We take for each year a simple average of the Head-Reis index over all country pairs with i < j
(bearing in mind the symmetric nature of the index), and then plot the trends over time in Figure
7. This is done separately for intermediate-use and final-use trade costs.23
       Several observations emerge from Figure 7. Trade costs remain high in absolute levels, with
the average iceberg friction still roughly 300% in ad valorem equivalent terms even at the end of
the sample period. That said, the overall trend between 1995-2011 has been one of declining trade
costs, this being especially marked in the first half of the sample period.24 Absent other forces, this
fall in trade costs is difficult to reconcile with the persistence over time in the positive correlation
between F/GO and V A/GO (as well as between U and D). Interestingly, while trade costs have
fallen for both intermediate- and final-use, the average level of trade frictions faced by intermediate
inputs has been lower than that for final-use throughout this period. This is consistent with a
“tariff escalation” intuition: there is less incentive to impose barriers on trade in intermediates,
since a country may end up bearing a portion of these trade costs if the inputs are embodied in
final goods/services that the country eventually consumes.
       This message of a broad decline in trade costs is reinforced when we examine the Head-Reis
indices constructed at the country-industry level, as given by (13) and (14). With these measures,
we find that even within narrowly-defined country-industry pairs, there is strong evidence of a
downward trend over time in trade costs. More specifically, we regress the log of each Head-Reis
  22
     Using the notation in Section 2.3, this is calculated for any country pair (i, j) as: ((Zij Zji )/(Zii Zjj ))−1/2θ for
trade in intermediates and as: ((Fij Fji )/(Fii Fjj ))−1/2θ for final-use trade. Note that the formulae for the Head-Reis
indices imply that trade costs are infinite when either the value of trade from i to j or that from j to i is zero.
                                                                         rs
For practical purposes, we therefore add a small constant to all Zij        and Fijr entries that are equal to zero, before
collapsing the WIOT to a country-by-country set of tables, in order to bound the implied trade costs away from
infinity. The constant added (1e−18 ) is less than the smallest positive entry seen in the WIOT in any year.
  23
     When plotting Figure 7, we have dropped the largest 1% of values for both intermediate-use and final-use trade
costs. In practice, this helps to smooth out the time trend in the figure, ensuring that the patterns are not being
driven by outliers that correspond to very small trade flows that are most prone to being measured with error.
  24
     There appears to be a small rise in trade costs around the onset of the Global Financial Crisis, consistent with
the collapse in trade flows experienced during that episode.



                                                            21
                 5
                 4.5  4
             Iceberg τ
           3.5   3




                                 Assume: θ=5
                                   Input-use mean τ
                                   Final-use mean τ
                 2.5




                          1995   1997        1999      2001    2003          2005           2007   2009   2011
                                                               Year

                                 Figure 7: Head-Reis τ ’s (country-level) over time


index against a linear time trend (Y eart ) and an extensive set of fixed effects, as follows:

                                        ln τ rs                     rs    rs
                                             ij,t = β 0 Y eart + F Eij + ij,t , and                             (15)
                                        ln τ rF
                                             ij,t   = β 0 Y eart +      r
                                                                     F Eij   +   rij,t .                        (16)

In the first regression involving trade costs for intermediate inputs, we include a full set of source
                                                             rs ), this being the most compre-
country-industry by destination country-industry dummies (F Eij
hensive set of fixed effects that can be used while allowing us to identify the coefficient of the time
trend. Similarly, in the second regression explaining trade costs for final-use, we include a full set of
                                                           r ). The above regressions thus seek
source country-industry by destination country dummies (F Eij
to isolate what could be called the pure “within” component of the time variation in these trade
costs. The findings from estimating (15) and (16) are reported in Tables 4 and 5 respectively, based
on Head-Reis indices calculated once again using a common value of θ = 5. Given the directional
symmetry described earlier, we include in Table 4 only those trade cost observations corresponding
                                                                          rs ’s in the WIOT in
to input-use purchases that lie above the main diagonal of the matrix of Zij
any given year, while we include in Table 5 only observations for which the country index satisfies
i < j. Even so, the regression sample is very large, especially in Table 4: For trade costs related to
intermediate inputs, we will report results for specifications with close to 17.5 million observations,
with more than 1 million fixed effects used!
   Turning now to these results, we obtain coefficients on Y eart that are negative and highly
significant in Column 1 in both Tables 4 and 5. (The standard errors are multi-way clustered


                                                              22
by source country-industry, destination country-industry, and year in Table 4, while clustered by
source country-industry, destination country, and year in Table 5.) For trade in intermediates, the
point estimate indicates an average fall in trade costs of about 1.6% per year. The corresponding
fall has been slightly faster for final-use trade costs, namely a 2.1% decrease per year. A very similar
pattern emerges in Column 2, when replacing the linear time trend with a full set of year dummies.
Over the course of 1995-2011, the average within-category fall in intermediate input trade costs
was a cumulative 25.4%, while the corresponding decline for final-use trade costs was 34.2%.

                                            [Tables 4 and 5 here]

    We have also explored whether there are differences in the manner of these trade cost movements
across goods versus service industries, given that this sectoral distinction will play an important
part in the next subsection. This is done in the remaining columns of Tables 4 and 5, which look
at trade in goods (Columns 3-4) versus trade in services (Columns 5-6). From these columns, it
is clear that the decrease in trade costs is a feature shared by both goods and service industries.
Separately, we have found similar patterns when allowing for differences across industries in the
trade elasticity used to compute the Head-Reis indices, specifically when using the industry-level
estimates of θ from Caliendo and Parro (2015) matched to the WIOD industry categories.25 The
conclusion of a broad decline in trade costs is also robust to dropping the largest 1%, 5%, 10%,
25%, and even 50% of the trade cost observations in each table (results available on request), so
that the patterns are unlikely to be driven by observations that correspond to small trade flows.26
    Ceteris paribus, the widespread decrease in cross-border trade costs would in principle have
spurred GVC activity, which in turn might lead us to expect that the link between F/GO and
V A/GO would have weakened. It is thus difficult to rationalize the persistence in the correlation
between F/GO and V A/GO (as well as that between U and D) on the basis of the observed
movements in trade costs alone. We are left to conclude that other forces must have been at play
that account for these puzzling correlations between the GVC measures.

4.2    Composition of Industries: Goods versus Services
As a second proximate explanation, we explore the possibility of shifts in the underlying composition
of industrial activity. This is motivated by the observation from Appendix Table 1, that there are
distinct differences between goods and service industries in the nature of their GVC positioning.
Goods-producing industries feature on average a lower share of their output going directly to final-
use and are more upstream relative to final demand when compared against service industries,
likely reflecting that the manufacturing process for goods can be more easily fragmented into
stages involving separate parts and components. At the same time, goods industries also exhibit
a lower share of payments to primary value-added and are more downstream relative to primary
  25
     These industry-level elasticities are for goods-producing sectors, and so we continue to set θ = 5 for trade flows
involving services in this robustness exercise.
  26
     Similar results are obtained when dropping the industries related to transport services, namely Inland Transport
(23), Water Transport (24), Air Transport (25), and Other Transport Activities and Travel Agencies (26).


                                                          23
        CHN                                                                   CHN
              IND                                                                   KOR
               IDN                                                                         TWN
                ROU                                                                         IDN
                  BGR                                                                         HUN
                    TUR                                                                        IND
                     KOR                                                                       RoW
                      TWN                                                                        CZE
                         MEX                                                                       MEX
                          IRL                                                                      TUR
                         RoW                                                                         RUS
                           SVK                                                                         POL
                           POL                                                                         BGR
                           HUN                                                                          IRL
                             RUS                                                                       ROU
                              LTU                                                                       DEU
                              SVN                                                                        SVK
                               FIN                                                                       BRA
                              CZE                                                                         CAN
                               MLT                                                                          FIN
                                         EST                                                                          LTU
                                          ITA                                                                         JPN
                                           BRA                                                                         SVN
                                            PRT                                                                         SWE
                                             CAN                                                                        ITA
                                             LVA                                                                         AUT
                                             ESP                                                                          NLD
                                              DEU                                                                          BEL
                                              JPN                                                                            ESP
                                              SWE                                                                            FRA
                                              BEL                                                                            EST
                                                NLD                                                                           PRT
                                                 GBR                                                                           AUS
                                                  AUT                                                                             DNK
                                                   GRC                                                                             USA
                                                   DNK                                                                              MLT
                                                    FRA                                                                              GRC
                                                     USA                                                                             LVA
                                                     AUS                                                                               GBR
                                                       CYP                                                                                CYP
                                                              LUX                                                                               LUX



      -.3     -.2      -.1           0          .1           .2     .3        -.3         -.2       -.1           0          .1          .2      .3
      Services share of Gross Output, De-meaned (1995)                        Services share of Gross Output, De-meaned (2011)

                Figure 8: GVC Positioning Measures and their Correlation over time


factors than service industries, presumably because payments to labor comprise a larger share of the
production costs in service industries. Goods industries thus appear to be positioned in “longer”
production chains – with more stages both upstream and downstream – than service industries.
   This raises a potential explanation for the positive correlation between F/GO and V A/GO at
the country level: Suppose that countries differ in their comparative advantage across goods versus
services. Countries with comparative advantage in services would then feature low final-use and
value-added shares in gross output (“short” GVCs), with the converse being true for countries that
have comparative advantage in goods-producing industries (“long” GVCs). In the cross-section of
countries, this would manifest itself as a positive correlation between F/GO and V A/GO (as well
as between U and D). Pursuing this logic further, a decline in cross-border trade costs of the type
documented in Figure 7, applying broadly to both goods and services, would reinforce this pre-
existing pattern of comparative advantage, and could even strengthen these positive correlations.
   To explore whether such a mechanism may have been at play, we examine how patterns of
specialization across countries in goods versus services have evolved over time. We do so by looking
at the service sector’s share of gross output within each country. (Recall from footnote 17 that
industries 17-35 in the WIOD are classified as services, while industries 1-16 are goods-producing.)
This services share has been on the rise, from an average across countries of 59.5% in 1995 to
65.6% in 2011. At the same time, this secular rise in recorded service activity was accompanied by
a mild increase in dispersion in the services share across economies. This is illustrated in Figure 8,

                                                                         24
where we have plotted these services shares after demeaning by the cross-country average in each
respective year. The figure points to an increase between 1995 and 2011 in the observed spread
in the services share: Countries such as Luxembourg, Cyprus, and Great Britain that initially
were relatively specialized in services have become even more so, while economies such as China,
Korea, and Taiwan have become more skewed towards producing goods.27 These compositional
shifts in output between goods and services thus appear to be moving in the right direction to help
account for the cross-country correlation puzzle among the GVC measures. Admittedly, however,
our empirical results so far cannot help us elucidate the extent to which the shifts observed in
Figure 8 are directly related to the trade cost reductions documented in Figure 7. We will return
to this point in Section 6, after having developed our quantitative model.
      Can the rise of services help to account too for the correlation puzzle at the country-industry
level? Figure 9 plots the relationship between F/GO and V A/GO, constructed at the country-
industry level, for the goods and services sectors separately; a third subplot illustrates the rela-
tionship when pooling across all industries. While the figures are drawn for 2011, the message is
similar if one were to look at 1995 instead. A quick comparison of the first two subplots confirms
that goods industries tend to feature lower final-use and value-added to gross-output ratios than
service industries. The respective lines of best fit (drawn with 95% confidence interval bands) more-
over demonstrate that it is the service industries that are driving the overall positive correlation
between F/GO and V A/GO; the corresponding correlation when looking at goods industries is in
fact weakly negative. Figure 10 performs the analogous exercise for the country-industry measures
of U and D. In line with Appendix Table 1, the service industries are on average more proximate to
final-use, as well as to primary factors, when compared to the goods industries. The raw correlation
between U and D is now slightly positive when examining just the industries in the goods sector.
But this relationship is particularly marked for the service sector, which ultimately contributes to
the strong positive slope seen between U and D when pooling across all industries. Put otherwise,
absent the service industries, the correlations between F/GO and V A/GO (as well as between U
and D) would clearly be much weaker.
      We round off this subsection by further documenting that there has been a compositional shift
away from goods and towards services over the sample period. This is important for translating
the positive correlations described above at the country-industry level into a corresponding set of
correlations at more aggregate levels (say when aggregating over all industries within a country).
More specifically, we show that over time: (i) services have risen as a share of final-use expenditures;
and (ii) service inputs have risen as a share of gross-output value.
    Focusing first on (i), we calculate the share of industry s in the final-use expenditures of country
j as: αsj = ( N
             P       s
                          PN PS          s                   s
               i=1 Fij )/( i=1     s=1 Fij ). Pooling these αj ’s over all years t in the WIOD, we then
explore how these shares have evolved over time with the following regression:

                                           ln αsj,t = β 0 Y eart + F Ejs + sj,t .                                   (17)
 27
      The coefficient of variation of the service share in gross output rose slightly from 0.159 in 1995 to 0.167 in 2011.



                                                            25
       1




                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                  SS
                                                                                                                                 SS            SS                                                                         SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SS            SS
                                                                                                                SSS S   SS SSS    SSSS S SS                                                             SSS S     SS SSS  SSSS S SS
                                                                                                                        SSSSSSSSSSSS SSS                                                                          SSSSSS SSS SSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SS
                                                                                                 S            S S SS          SSSS  SSS
                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                      SSSS     S                                   S                 S            SSS   SSS SSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SSSS     S
                                          G G                                                                   SSS SSSSS   SSSS                                                           S    G SSGS        SSSSS  SSSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                         SS  SSSS     S SS
                                                                                                                      S      SSSS S
                                                                                                                                   S S         S                                          S SSS           SSS   SS   SSS   S S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S           S
                                             G G                                                  S           S S SSS               S SS
                                                                                                                                SSSSS SS                                             S              GSGGS        SS   SSSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SS SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S      S



       .9




                                                                          .9




                                                                                                                                                           .9
                                        G GG                                                                      S S SS          SS       S                                                 G G          S             S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S S SS  S SS S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S
                                      GG        G                                                    S S SSS         SS   S SS S                                                         SGGS S           GS S
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SSS S         SS
                                               GG                                                               S SS SS S                                                                               SG
                                  GG                                                                          S
                                                                                                            SSS           S S                                                         G G SSS        S GSSS S              S
                                    G                                                                        S S                SS SS S                                                  GS S S                             S S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SS S
                                    G GG G
                                        G G                                                     S      SS        S          SS S
                                                                                                                                      S S
                                                                                                                                               S                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                         GSG G SG
                                                                                                                                                                                             G G                      SS S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S
                                    GG G                                                                                                                                                  G GS G
       .8




                                                                          .8




                                                                                                                                                           .8
                             G G    G                                                                      S SSS  SSS S                 S S                                      G G     G              SS SSS S                 S S
                                   GG   GG GGG
                                              G                                                           S SSSS   S
                                                                                                                   S   S   S            SS
                                                                                                                                                                                       GG    GSG G GSSSG
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SS  SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S  S           SS
                       G                                                                                           S                                                        G               GGSS      G    SS
                               GG
                             G G G
                                       GG
                                       G
                                                                                            S             SSSSSS S S
                                                                                                          S                                                                 S G
                                                                                                                                                                                 GG GGS               SSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                    GSS S SSS
                              GGGG                                                                            SS S SSSSS                                                         G GGG S S                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SS
                                                                                                        S    S
                                                                                                             S   SS    S       SSS S                                                                 S           S
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SS SS SS S
                                GG GG      GG                                                      S S  S         SSSS
                                                                                                                  S                                                                GGS G    SSG  G S       SS              S
                                        GG        G                                                                        S SS S                                                          SGG   GGS G S SS S S
       .7




                                                                          .7




                                                                                                                                                           .7
                                           G                                                           S S S S                                                                                  S
                             G G GG                                                                                                        S                                    G GGG           S
                          GG GG   GG G    GG
                                           GGGG
                                                 G                                                  S S SS           S     SS SS                                              GG GG   G SG G GG
                                                                                                                                                                                             G  S G S
                                                                                                                                                                                                 GGGGSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                               G SS SS
                           GG GGGG  GGG  G                                                                           S                                                         GGGG GG   GS G G               S
                                 GGG  GG G                                                         S S SS SSS S S S                                                                 GSGG   GG SGSSS S S S
                            G G   GG
                                   GGG G                                                                  SS S S S                                                              G G   G GGGS S
                                                                                                                                                                                         G          S S S S
                                                                                                                                                                                                    G
                             G
                             GGGGGGG
                                  G GG G                                                          S SSSS  S   S SS      SS S     SS                                             GG
                                                                                                                                                                                 G G
                                                                                                                                                                                   GSGGG
                                                                                                                                                                                       G GSGSS G    SS SS        SS S    SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                               S
                            GGG    GG                   G                                                     S SS SSS S S                                                     GG G     GG       SGS SS     SSSS S S G
       .6




                                                                          .6




                                                                                                                                                           .6
                               G    GGGGGG                                                                                                                                         G      GG GG
                           G
                               GGG GG
                                   GGGGG   G G                                                         S
                                                                                                       S S SSSSS
                                                                                                       S                            S                                          G    G
                                                                                                                                                                                   GG  G
                                                                                                                                                                                        GGGSSG  GGG SG
                                                                                                                                                                                                 S           SSSSS SSS S
                                     G G                                                                           S     SSS SS S                                                           S G    G       S
                                                                                                                                                                                                           S  SSS S S
                            GGGG
                              GG
                               GGG  GGGGG    G
                                             G                                                       S SSS
                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                           S S     S
                                                                                                                  SS SSSS SSS S
                                                                                                                    SS
                                                                                                                    SS
                                                                                                                                                                                GGGG
                                                                                                                                                                                 G G
                                                                                                                                                                                   GGG   SS
                                                                                                                                                                                         G
                                                                                                                                                                                           G
                                                                                                                                                                                           G
                                                                                                                                                                                           S G
                                                                                                                                                                                                S
                                                                                                                                                                                               SGSG   GS  S
                                                                                                                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                                                                                                           SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                             SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                             S    S     SSSS
                                      GGG G                                                                      S                 SS                                                      GG      G          S
                             GG G GG
                                G                                                                       SS S SS      SS
                                                                                                                     S                 S                                        GG GG GG     SSGGSGGSS        SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                              S                S
F/GO




                                                                   F/GO




                                                                                                                                                    F/GO
                           GGG G GG       GG                                                       SS        S S SS                                                            GG     SSG G
                                                                                                                                                                                          G         SS S SS
                        GGG    GGG G  GGG
                                     GGG G     G                                                  S S S S             SS S                                                   GGG GSG
                                                                                                                                                                                  GGG   G  GGG
                                                                                                                                                                                             SG               SSS S
                                 GG                                                                                                                                                  GG   GG       GSS G SS
       .5




                                                                          .5




                                                                                                                                                           .5
                                    GG G G G                                                               S S SSSSSS S S                                                                G
                                                                                                                                                                                         SG  G  S                       S S
                        G
                         GG GGGG       GG                                                       S SS S S SS          SSSSSS S                                                G S G GS G
                                                                                                                                                                              GG G     S    G              S  S
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GSSS S
                                        GG          G                                               S S SSSSSS        SS S                                                           GS G    G
                                                                                                                                                                                             SGS      SSSSS    SS  SGS
                         GGGGGG  GG GG  G GG GG                                                                    S SSS                                                     GG GG
                                                                                                                                                                               GG   GG   GS  G  SGG        GG GS    SGS
                                  G
                                 GGG     G G GG G                                                 S S S SSS
                                                                                                        S SSSSSSSS    SSSSSS   S S
                                                                                                                                   SS                                               SGG
                                                                                                                                                                                       GG   G
                                                                                                                                                                                             SGGS
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SSSSSSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        G       G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                SSSS   SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SS
                       GG    GGG G    GGG   G                                                     S SS                                                                      GG  GGSGSG     GGG
                                                                                                                                                                                             S       SSS            SS
                           GG           GG                                                               SSS S  SSSS S SSSS SS S           S                                   GG            G GSS S     SSSS S  S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SSS SS S S        S
                            G
                    G G G GGGG          GGG                                                        S   SS       SSSS  SSSSSS
                                                                                                                           SS                                            G GG G
                                                                                                                                                                                G
                                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                       G SS  GS
                                                                                                                                                                                              G  G      SSSS   SSSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                          S    S SSSSSSS S S S                                                                  S      S S           S    S
       .4




                                                                          .4




                                                                                                                                                           .4
                                                                                                         S   S    S   S                                                                    G GS    S      S    S                  S
                         GGGG G G G G                                                           S SS
                                                                                                           S  SSSS
                                                                                                                 S S  S           S                                          GGS GGSSG G G
                                                                                                                                                                                                  S   SSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        SS SSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                            S   SG        S     S
                    GG GGGG   GGG GGG
                               G
                                         GG
                                         G                                                            SSSSSS
                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                       S       S
                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                  SSSS
                                                                                                                  S   SS S                                               GG G
                                                                                                                                                                            G GG GGGG GSS   SS
                                                                                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                                                                            GGG
                                                                                                                                                                                               GS  SGSSSS S S
                                                                                                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                                                                       S  S  SS    S
                              G G   GG  GGG                                                    S          S SS                                                             GG SGG   G        G  SG S S
                    GG
                    G GG
                      G GGG
                                G
                                GGGG
                                   GGGG  G
                                                        G
                                                                                                      SSS SS S   S SSSSS                                                 GG
                                                                                                                                                                         G
                                                                                                                                                                           G S GGG
                                                                                                                                                                                    GGGGGG
                                                                                                                                                                                          GSG
                                                                                                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                                                                                          G
                                                                                                                                                                                             GS
                                                                                                                                                                                              GSSGS     S SSSS G
                    G
                            GGG GGG
                                     G  GGG                                                   S         SSS  SS S
                                                                                                               S SSS S
                                                                                                                                                                         G
                                                                                                                                                                                GGGSGGG
                                                                                                                                                                                          G  GSG S G SSS SS S
                      G G               G    GG GG                                             S S S       SS
                                                                                                           S                                                               G G               S
                                                                                                                                                                                             G   S
                                                                                                                                                                                                 SS SS SG     SS S
                      GG G G GG G                                                                          S S SSS   SS S                                                  GG S G G      GG S      GSGG SSS   S
                                                                                                                                                                                                              G
                                          GG                                                                       S SSSS                                                                          G                SSSS
       .3




                                                                          .3




                                                                                                                                                           .3
                                  GGG            GG                                       S       SS S     S                                                              SG         SGG  SGGG  G
                                                                                                                                                                                                SS          SGSGS
                        GG G            G
                                    G GG G G
                                             G
                                                                                           S     SSSS SS SSS SSSS
                                                                                                     SS    S   S                                                              G
                                                                                                                                                                           S GSSSG
                                                                                                                                                                                       G SS
                                                                                                                                                                                         S G     S
                                                                                                                                                                                                SS GSG S
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SGSSGS
                    G        GGG
                                 GG G GGGG G                                                     S SSSS
                                                                                                      S SSSSS S      S S              S                                  G        SG GGG
                                                                                                                                                                                      G
                                                                                                                                                                                      S  SS
                                                                                                                                                                                          SG  SG
                                                                                                                                                                                               S G SSG
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SG               SS         S
                              GGG  G
                                    GG GG                                                 S SS S SS SS S SSS
                                                                                                          S       S                                                       S SSG G  GG  SG
                                                                                                                                                                                         SGGSSGS       SS S SSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SS
                     G            GGGG G
                                 GG         G G
                                            G                                                      SS S S SSSSS S                                                         G         GGS
                                                                                                                                                                                      GS    S
                                                                                                                                                                                            G GG GGGS   S G
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SS S SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                               S
                       G G      G G G  GGGG GG                                                S SSSSSS SS              S SSSS S
                                                                                                                                                                            G SG    SG
                                                                                                                                                                                    G  SG G S
                                                                                                                                                                                            GGSGS    G
                      G       GG G G GGGGGGGG                                                                 SS SS
                                                                                                              S                                                            G SG       SG SGGGG       SSGSG    SS S SSS S
                                                                                             S S SSS SS SSS                                                                  S SGGSG      G  SGG     G  SSS
       .2




                                                                          .2




                                                                                                                                                           .2
                               G GG  GGGG G                                                                           S
                                                                                                                      S                                                                 SG
                                                                                                                                                                                         SGG G   SG            SS
                             G   GG G     G                                                    S SS            S SS   S                                                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                G    GGSS GGS S SS              S
                             GGGGG
                             G         G                                                        S        SSS SSSS  SS                                                            GGGGG
                                                                                                                                                                                 G
                                                                                                                                                                                 S          G SS SSSSSS S S
                     G G GG   G     GG GG
                                        GGG                                                       S S SS       SSS  S SS                                                  G G GG     SGGG   GG
                                                                                                                                                                                             GG GSS      SS  S S S
                              GG  GG GGGG
                                       GG        GG                                           S S         S SSSS SS SS                                                         SGGG  SG   GGG
                                                                                                                                                                                            SG
                                                                                                                                                                                             G S SS   SS SG
                                 GG
                                  G
                                   G
                                   GG
                                   GGG
                                        G
                                       GG GG     GGG      G                                   SS S SSS S                S S                                                   SSG   G G
                                                                                                                                                                                      G
                                                                                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                                                                                        GG  G
                                                                                                                                                                                            G
                                                                                                                                                                                             G
                                                                                                                                                                                             G
                                                                                                                                                                                               S  G S         GSSSG   S        G
                             GGGG GG     GG                                                                           S                                                           GGG S
                                                                                                                                                                                      GG  G GGSG  S G           SGGS
                             GGG GGG
                                   G
                                   GG
                                    GG
                                     G
                                     G GG
                                    GGG G                                                        S       SS             S                                                       GG S
                                                                                                                                                                                     GGG
                                                                                                                                                                                       GGG
                                                                                                                                                                                         GG
                                                                                                                                                                                          GGGGS G S
       .1




                                                                          .1




                                                                                                                                                           .1
                                G
                                G GGG                                                                                                                                              G
                                                                                                                                                                                   GG G  G
                                                                                                                                                                                         GG
                          G GG      GG
                                   GGGGGG GG
                                       G                                                           SS SSSS S S                                                                G GG    SGGSGGGGSSS S G S
                             GGG  G
                                  G
                                  GG    G     G                                               S               SS S                                                            S  GGG  G
                                                                                                                                                                                      G
                                                                                                                                                                                      G G G
                                                                                                                                                                                           G GSGGS
                                                                                                                                                                                             G         S
                                                                                                                                                                                                       G      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                              G
                         G GG    G GGGGG GG                                                                                                                                  G GG   G GGGGG GG
                        GG  GGGG   GG
                                    G    GGG        G
                                                      G                                           S                                                                          GG GGG SG G G
                                                                                                                                                                                         G    GGG                  G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         G
                          GGGG     G GGG
                                     G   GGG     G GG
                                                      G                                                                                                                       GGGG     G  GGG
                                                                                                                                                                                          G   GG G            G GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         G
                          GG                                                                                                                                                  GG
                         G
                         GG
                            G GG
                             G G GG        G      G     G G G                                                                                                                G
                                                                                                                                                                             GG
                                                                                                                                                                                G GG
                                                                                                                                                                                G G GG           G             G            G G G
                                          GGG G G GG                                                                                                                                            GGG G G GG
       0




                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                           0
             0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1                                     0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1                                                   0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                  VA/GO                                                               VA/GO                                                                             VA/GO
                  Goods only (2011)                                                 Services only (2011)                                                             All industries (2011)

   Figure 9: Correlation between F/GO and V A/GO: Goods versus Services




                                           G                                                                                S                                                                        G

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                          4




                                  G            G                                                                                                                                           G                 G
                                                       G G                                                                                                                                                             G G
                              G                                                                                                                                                     G
       4




                                                                                                                                                           4




                                                       G                                                                                                                                                               G
                             G                     G                                                                                                                               G                               G
                              G        G       G                                                              S S                                                                   G            G            G
                     G            G                        G                                                                S                                              G               G                                    G
                         G                                                                                                                                                     G
                                                                          3.5




                                       G              G                                                                                                                                                 SG S                 G
                              GG                                                                                                S                                                         GG
                                         GG G G G                                                                     S
                                                                                                                       S                                                                                      GG G SG G
                   G               G                                                                                                                                   G                               G
       3.5




                                                                                                                                                           3.5




                                     G G G                                                                      S                                                                                         G          G    GS
                       GG    G    G          G                                                      S S S            S SSS                                                    GG              G GS G                  S
                                   GG G         GG                                                                                                                                                      GG G           GG
                                           GGGG G                                                      S S SS S S                                                                                 S S S          GG   GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G
                     G     GG G  G GG        G                                                             S SSS S                                                         G          SGG SG         GS GG          G
                                                G                                                        SSSSS                                                                                     S S SS         SGSGG
                        G GGG GG G G       GG
                                          G GG GGG G                                                S SSS SSS                                                                    G SGG       SGSS  GSGS G
                                                                                                                                                                                                   G           GGGG   GG G
                                                                                                                                                                                                             SG
                                                                          3




                                 G GG    G GG GGG                                              S S SSS SSSSSS S S                                                                         SSS SSS G G G           GG  GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      G
                         G G GG G     G
                                      GGG    GGG                                                                                                                                           S       G      GG GG    GGG
                 G                   G GGGG  G
                                                                                                    S S S SSS S           SS     S                                   G             G SG S        G G     SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                          G  GGGG  G
       3




                                                                                                                                                           3




                              G GG             G                                                                                                                                                        G    S
                     G                 GGGG G
                                            G
                                             G
                                             G          G                                      S SSSS SS              S   SS
                                                                                                                      SS SS
                                                                                                                      S   S                                                G S S SSSGS             SS  SSG  G
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SGGG
                                                                                                                                                                                                             G     G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GSG S      G
                           G GGGG     G
                                     GGG
                                           G G
                                       GGG GG G                                           S SS          S SSS SS SSSSSS  S                                                            SGS   S SG      SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                       G GS
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GGGGS GSG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    G GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SG GS
                                 G GG  G
                                       GG
                                        GGGG   G          G                                        S SS S      S       SS                                                        S SSSS G            GG   S
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SG
                                                                                                                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                                                                                                            G
                                                                                                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                                                                                            GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                             GGSSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GG              G
U




                                                                   U




                                                                                                                                                    U




                                 GG     G   GGGG                                                            S          SSSS                                                               SSSS SS     GG  S  GSSSGG  GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     G
                                    G G                                                            SSSS   S    S
                                                                                                          SS S SS  S  SS
                                                                                                                      S                                                    S SS                         G  G
                                                                                                                                                                                                           S S S
                            G GGGGG GGG
                                      G
                                      GG
                                       G
                                        GG G
                                           G
                                           G
                                           GG
                                            G
                                             GG
                                             G  GG G                                         S S   SS
                                                                                                       SS
                                                                                                              SS S SSSS                                                              S SS  GSS  GG   G
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GG GSG
                                                                                                                                                                                                          G
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GGS
                                                                                                                                                                                                            GS
                                                                                                                                                                                                             GS
                                                                                                                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                                                                                                                             G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                GGGGG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GG
                                 GGG G
                                     GG
                                      G   G
                                          G G                                                                             SS
                                                                                                                           SS S                                                      S S   S     SGSG SGGGG SG G
                                                                                                                                                                                                               G   GS GGG G
                               GGG
                               G     G
                                     GG GG
                                         GGG
                                           G
                                           GG     GG                                           SSSSSS      S
                                                                                                          SSS SSSSSS SSS SS                                                          SSS   S     G    SSGGG
                                                                                                                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GGSGGGG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                GG G     G
                                                                          2.5




                                        GGG                                                                                                                                  S S SSS            SSG        SG G
                                                                                                                                                                                                             GSSSS
                                  G
                                  GG
                                     GGGGGG G         GG G                            S        SS S      SS SSS  SSSSSS     S S                                                           SSS        SGG
                                                                                                                                                                                                          G
                                                                                                                                                                                                           SG
                                                                                                                                                                                                           G  GS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SS   S        G
                              GG GG  G
                                     GGG      G
                                                                                                 SS
                                                                                                SS              S
                                                                                                                SS    SS S                                                       SSSSS     SS SGS    G
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GGSSG
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SG
                                                                                                                                                                                                          G
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GG      GS G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S  S GG G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S
       2.5




                                                                                                                                                           2.5




                            G GGG    G  GGGG  GG
                                              G  GGG                                                   S  S   S
                                                                                                     SSSSS S SSSS
                                                                                                                SS SSSS       S                                        S          SS SS   GS  S
                                                                                                                                                                                              SSG  SG
                                                                                                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                                                                                                                   S S    G
                                                                                                                                                                                                          S  GS GGS GGG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     G  G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SG
                               G
                                 GG   GGG
                                       G  GGGG GG                                                           S                                                                     SS               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SS  G
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SSSSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GGGG
                                                                                                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                                                                                            G  GG  GSGGG
                              GGGGG
                               G
                               G       GGG
                                         G
                                         GG   G G G                                           SSSSS SSS S
                                                                                                        SS S
                                                                                                          SSSS
                                                                                                            S SSS  S
                                                                                                                S SS  S
                                                                                                                      S SS                                                          SSS  SSSSS   G
                                                                                                                                                                                                 GS
                                                                                                                                                                                                  GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SG
                                                                                                                                                                                                   S  SG
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SS G  G
                                                                                                                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                                                                                                                             GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                              G
                                                                                                                                                                                                              GG     G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       G
                                 G  G G    G
                                           G
                                           GGG G  G                                                         SSSS     S                                                                      S S    S G S
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SGGS G     G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 G GG G G
                           GG GG
                                GGG GG
                                  GGGGGGGG G G
                                  G                                                            SSS S  S
                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                        SSSSS SS S
                                                                                                          SSS       S
                                                                                                                    S                                                           SSSSSS   SSSSGSS
                                                                                                                                                                                              SSSSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                  GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                  S  SGGS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        G
                                                                                                                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                                                                                                          G
                                                                                                                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GGS  SGGG G G G
                                GG      GG G                                            S SSS SS SSSSS SS S SS S
                                                                                                                                                                                    SS
                                                                                                                                                                                      SGSS SSSSSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GG S    GGG G     G G G
                                   G GGG
                                       G  G GGG   GG G                                            SSS  SS SS  SSS SS SSS                                                 S SSS SSS   SSSSS SSS
                                                                                                                                                                                          SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                 SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SSGGSG G G S GGG  G
                       G      G GG   G
                                     G
                                          G
                                      GGGGG            G                                    SS
                                                                                             S S       SS S S
                                                                                                           SS
                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                             SSSSSSS S                                                        GS   S            SSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                S
                                                                                                                                                                                                G       S
                                                                                                                                                                                                        GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                         G
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SG
                                                                                                                                                                                                           GGSG
                                                                                                                                                                                                               G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    G G GG G
                            GGGGG GG
                                   GG  GGGG GG GGGGG                                             SS SS
                                                                                                    SSSS SS        SS                                                        SS
                                                                                                                                                                              S S
                                                                                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                                                                                     SS  S
                                                                                                                                                                                         GSSS
                                                                                                                                                                                           S
                                                                                                                                                                                           S  S
                                                                                                                                                                                              GSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                S
                                                                                                                                                                                                G  GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                 SSS  G
                                                                                                                                                                                                      GGG
                                                                                                                                                                                                        G S
                                                                                                                                                                                                          S GGGS G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GG SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      G
                              GGG GG  G GGG GGGG GGG
                                                    G                                   S SSS      SS  S SSSSS S        S S                                                        SS S S
                                                                                                                                                                                       SG GG SSS      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GSSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        GGGG  G  G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GGGGGGG
                           GG GG        GG                                                        S  SS                S                                                              SS           S           GG
                                                                          2




                                    GGG                                                         S   S                                                                                 S           S       G  G
                                   G       G   GG G                                       SSSSSSSS
                                                                                                          S  SS S
                                                                                                            SSS S S SS S
                                                                                                                                                                          S S SS   SS SSG S SS
                                                                                                                                                                                        S SSSG
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SSG
                                                                                                                                                                                                        G
                                                                                                                                                                                                        G   S
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SG
                                                                                                                                                                                                             SG G    SGGG G
       2




                                                                                                                                                           2




                                      G   GGGG                                                              S
                                                                                                           SS                                                                     SSSS     S            S  G     GG GS
                           GG
                              GG G
                              G   GGGG
                                      GG G GGG
                                             G
                                                    G                                   S SSS S      S  S S
                                                                                                          S                                                                 SSS       S     S
                                                                                                                                                                                            S G
                                                                                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                               GGG
                                                                                                                                                                                                      G
                                                                                                                                                                                                        G
                                                                                                                                                                                                        GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                        S
                                                                                                                                                                                                           S
                                                                                                                                                                                                           G  G
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SG G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 G S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           G
                         G GG         G G GG
                                           G G GG                                           SSSS S    SSS  S
                                                                                                        SSSSS
                                                                                                               S SSSSS S                                                  S SS GS  S   GSS    S
                                                                                                                                                                                           S S GS  G        GG  GS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                SG  G GG
                                GG G G
                                     GGGGG
                                         G GGGG G                                          S       SSS  S        S  SSSSS S                                                            S
                                                                                                                                                                                       SS SSGS   SGSG SSGSG
                                                                                                                                                                                                         G GGGG
                                                                                                                                                                                                              G  GGGG G
                            G GG        GGGG
                                           GG GG                                             S SSSS        SSS SS S                                                          SSSS S
                                                                                                                                                                             S            SG SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SSG
                                                                                                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                                                                       GSSG SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                             G G GGSG GG
                               G
                                  GG
                                  G
                                  GG           GGG                                  S S SS      SS S S S S                                                                    S SSS      S     SS  S
                                                                                                                                                                                                  GGS
                                                                                                                                                                                                      G
                                                                                                                                                                                                       GS     SG G GGG
                              G G
                             GGGG  G GGGG GG
                                           G
                                           GG   G                                            S SSSSSSSS SS S S                                                       S S SSS       SSSSS     S
                                                                                                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                                                                                                               G
                                                                                                                                                                                              SG
                                                                                                                                                                                              G SGS  SG GGGS
                                                                                                                                                                                                           GGGSGGGG    G
                                GG     GGG                                                                                                                                            S               SG G   GG  S
                      G        GG  GGGGGG
                                        GGGGG
                                          GG GGGGG
                                             G                                         S SSSSS    SS     SSSS S SSSS S                                                 S SS  G SS G GS   S  S        G GGGS
                                                                                                                                                                                                          G
                                                                                                                                                                                                            G
                                                                                                                                                                                                            GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SGG G
                                                                                                                                                                                                               GGGGGGGGGG
                                      G  G     GG                                              S        S    SS                                                             SSS   S
                                                                                                                                                                                  SS      SSS   S     S   G   G       GG
                                                                          1.5




                                GGGG GGGG  G                                                 SSS S               SSS S S S                                                           S SSS      SG   G
                                                                                                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                                                                                                                     S GG
                                                                                                                                                                                                        SGGGGG    G
       1.5




                                                                                                                                                           1.5




                                G   GG      GG                                                   S SS          SS                                                             SS               SS      SG          GSG
                                    G    GG G                                         S SS                     SSS                                                                  S S         SSSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SSSG SS    GGGG
                           G GG   G
                                   G
                                   G
                                   GGG   G
                                      GGG G
                                      G
                                              GG                                        S     S       S
                                                                                                      S    SSSSS
                                                                                                           SS      SS        S                                         S SS
                                                                                                                                                                          S SS S       SGS   SSS  SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                  GS SGG
                                                                                                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                                                                                                       GSGG
                                                                                                                                                                                                              G
                                                                                                                                                                                                           GGG GS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GG
                                      GGG                                              S S SS S SSS SS                                                                       S S SS              GSG     GGGG
                              GG GGG  G   G                                         S S SS SSSSS    S SS     S  S
                                                                                                                S
                                                                                                                               S                                     S SSSS SSS       S SS        S
                                                                                                                                                                                                    SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SG
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GG   S
                                                                                                                                                                                                          G SG           S
                             GGG GGGG                                                   S
                                                                                             SSSSS SS
                                                                                              S    S      SS  SS
                                                                                                                S  S                                                          SSS  SSSS GS       GSGSS GG G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                G
                             G GG GGG                                                  SS
                                                                                        SSS  SSS
                                                                                               S
                                                                                                SSSSSSS SSSS                                                            SSS S
                                                                                                                                                                           SS SS
                                                                                                                                                                                 SS
                                                                                                                                                                                  SSSSSSS   SGSSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                   G  GS GGG
                             G GG                                                       SS S   SSSSSSS    S S       S S S                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                         SSS S      SSSSSS SSGS  SGS  G
                                  G
                                  G                                                     SS  S  S  S SSSSS  S
                                                                                                           SS
                                                                                                            S  SS S                                                          S   S
                                                                                                                                                                                 S SSS S
                                                                                                                                                                                       S  SSSSS
                                                                                                                                                                                              S   S  SG
                                                                                                                                                                                                      GS      S       S
                 G          G G                                                     S S   SSS S
                                                                                              SS SSSS  S S                                                           G SSS  SSS S
                                                                                                                                                                                SS   SS SG SS
                                                                                       SS
                                                                                          S
                                                                                         SSS SSS
                                                                                             SS SSS SS
                                                                                                   SS SS  S SS                     S                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                        SSSSS S SS
                                                                                                                                                                               SS  SS
                                                                                                                                                                                   S SS
                                                                                                                                                                                      SSS
                                                                                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                                                       S   S G      SS                       S
                                                                                    S SS       SS                                                                    GSS          SS
       1




                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                                           1




                 G                                                                  S        S                                                                       S        S

             1      1.5       2       2.5      3   3.5         4                1       1.5          2        2.5       3       3.5       4                      1       1.5           2       2.5          3        3.5          4
                                      D                                                                       D                                                                                 D
                  Goods only (2011)                                                 Services only (2011)                                                             All industries (2011)

                 Figure 10: Correlation between U and D: Goods versus Services



                                                                                                     26
As before, the use of the F Ejs fixed effects means that we are estimating the Y eart coefficient off
time variation within the industry-by-country bins. Table 6 presents these regression results; multi-
way clustered standard errors (by country, industry, and year) are reported. Since the αsj,t ’s sum up
to 1 in any given country and year, any increases over time in the expenditure shares on particular
goods or services would need to be offset by decreases in the shares spent on other industries;
in line with this, we find no significant time trend on average when pooling across all industries
(Columns 1-2). However, a distinct pattern emerges when we separate goods from services and
re-run (17): There has been a significant decline in the goods industries’ shares in final demand
over time (Columns 3-4), and this has been accompanied correspondingly by an increase in the
expenditure shares on services (Column 5-6). While the coefficient on the linear time trend in
Column 5 is marginally insignificant, the more flexible specification with year dummies in Column
6 uncovers a positive effect over time (albeit one that has tapered off slightly in the last few years).

                                           [Table 6 here]

   Turning to (ii), we take a similar look at how the importance of goods versus service inputs
has shifted. This is done by computing (once again from the WIOD) the following measures
of the share of sector-r inputs in the value of gross output of industry s in country j, namely:
       PN
γ rs          rs     s
  j = ( i=1 Zij )/(Yj ). We focus on the variation over time within each r-by-s-by-j bin using:


                                   ln γ rs                    rs   rs
                                        j,t = β 0 Y eart + F Ej + j,t ,                           (18)

where F Ejrs denotes a full set of industry-pair by destination country fixed effects. The results in
Table 7 highlight the rising importance of services versus goods, this time as an input in production
processes. There is no distinct pattern seen in these input purchase shares over time when looking
over all inputs (Columns 1 and 2). When separately examining goods and services purchases though,
we immediately detect a downward time trend in the purchases of inputs from goods industries
(Columns 3 and 4), and a corresponding rise over time in that associated with services (Columns
5 and 6). Comparing the point estimates in Column 5 across Tables 6 and 7, each successive year
is associated with an increase in the services input-use share of about 0.97% per annum, versus an
increase in the final-use share of about 0.37% per annum; the rise in purchases of services has thus
been larger in proportional terms for intermediate input-use than for final-use.

                                           [Table 7 here]

   This observed increase in the use of services as an intermediate input warrants some discussion.
One interpretation is that production technologies have indeed shifted toward substituting the use
of more service for goods inputs. This view would be in line with the “servification” hypothesis,
as articulated for example by Baldwin and Ito (2014). An alternative interpretation is that the
use of services is now recorded more comprehensively as a result of a rise in outsourcing. Services
that previously were performed in-house – ranging from basic janitorial services to more complex


                                                   27
accounting work – are now increasingly performed by sub-contractors that are independent entities
located outside of firm headquarters. Such activity might in the past have been recorded as pay-
ments to labor within the firm, but are now picked up instead as payments across establishments
and firms with the rise of such outsourcing practices. The observed increase in services purchases
may thus be a reflection of such organizational rather than technological change per se.28
         Distinguishing between these two hypotheses is an interesting research question, but one that
lies beyond the scope of this paper. What should be clear is that the shifting composition of goods
versus services industries – with the latter rising in importance in both final expenditures and
input purchases – has potential to explain why F/GO and V A/GO (respectively, U and D) have
remained positively correlated at both the country and country-industry levels.


5         A Structural Interpretation of the Data
We turn next to develop a theoretical framework that provides a structural interpretation of all the
cells in a WIOT, and that hence allows for a basic quantitative assessment of the extent to which
trade cost declines and the rising importance of services can help to account for the correlations
seen over time between the various GVC measures.

5.1         A Useful Starting Point
The Caliendo and Parro (2015) model provides a useful starting point. Consider a world with J ≥ 1
countries and S ≥ 1 sectors or industries. This gives rise to a J × S by J × S matrix of bilateral
country-industry trade shares for trade in intermediate inputs, and a J × S by J matrix of trade
shares for trade designated for final-use.
         For the purposes of clarity, let us establish upfront the notation to index the economic variables
in the exposition, which deviates from Caliendo and Parro (2015). As in our empirical sections, we
use the subscripts i and j to refer throughout to countries; whenever a pair of subscripts is used
(e.g., to describe a trade flow variable), the left subscript will denote the source country, while the
right subscript will denote the destination country (so ij corresponds to a flow from i to j). On the
other hand, we use the superscripts r and s to refer to industries; once again, whenever a pair of
superscripts is used on a variable, the left superscript will be the identity of the source (i.e., selling)
industry, while the right superscript will be the identity of the destination (i.e., buying) industry
(so rs is a purchase from industry r by industry s).

5.1.1         Model Set-Up and Equilibrium

Preferences are country-specific and take the form:

                                                              S
                                                              Y           αsj
                                                   u(Cj ) =         Cjs          ,                         (19)
                                                              s=1
    28
         See Berlingieri (2014) for a related discussion based on the U.S. domestic Input-Output tables.


                                                              28
where Cjs denotes consumption of a sector-s aggregate, Cj denotes the vector of the Cjs ’s consumed
in country j, αsj is the share of industry s in the expenditure of the country-j representative
consumer, and Ss=1 αsj = 1.
              P

      Within each industry s, there is a continuum of varieties indexed by ω s ∈ [0, 1]. Production of
each variety is a Cobb-Douglas function of equipped labor, as well as intermediate inputs. More
specifically, in country j, the production function for each industry-s variety is given by:

                                                                             S
                                                               1−PSr=1 γ rs Y          rs
                                                                                    s γj
                             yjs (ω s ) = zjs (ω s ) ljs (ω s )           j
                                                                               Mrs
                                                                                j (ω )      .        (20)
                                                                                 r=1

Note that Mrs  s
           j (ω ) is the amount of composite intermediates from industry r used in the produc-
tion of variety ω s in country j. The exponent γ rs
                                                 j is the (constant) share of production costs spent
on intermediate inputs from sector r by each industry-s producer in country j. We assume that
                                     PS
0 < γ rs
      j < 1, and moreover that 0 <
                                             rs
                                       r=1 γ j < 1, so that the equipped labor share (or simply,
value-added share) of production costs is strictly positive in all sectors and countries. The produc-
tivity shifter zjs (ω s ) is an i.i.d. draw from a Fréchet distribution with cumulative density function:
                 s
exp{−Tjs z −θ }. The scale parameter Tjs governs the state of technology of country j in industry
s, while θs > 1 governs (inversely) the dispersion of productivity in industry s across producers
worldwide, thereby shaping comparative advantage.
      The country-j composite in industry s, which is used both for final consumption (Cjs ), as well
as to provide inputs to other sectors r (Msr
                                          j ), is a CES aggregate over the set of varieties on the
unit interval:                                Z                                 σs /(σs −1)
                                                                     s
                                      Qsj =           qjs (ω s )1−1/σ dω s                      ,    (21)

where qjs (ω s ) denotes the quantity of variety ω s that is ultimately purchased, naturally from the
lowest-cost source country. Note that the same CES aggregator over varieties applies to the
industry-j composite, whether it is being consumed in final demand or being used as an inter-
mediate input; this is a key feature of the model that will be relaxed below.
      Consider the decision problem of either the representative consumer or a firm in country j,
regarding which country to purchase variety ω s from. As in Eaton and Kortum (2002), this cor-
responds to choosing the lowest-cost source country across i ∈ {1, . . . , J}, after factoring in the
unit production costs csi and iceberg trade costs τ sij across all potential source countries i.29 The
solution to this discrete choice problem and the law of large numbers yields an expression for the
expenditure share of country j spent on industry-s varieties that come from country i:
                                                                                 s
                                                            Tis (csi τ sij )−θ
                                              π sij   = PJ                             .             (22)
                                                                s s s −θs
                                                           k=1 Tk (ck τ kj )

      In turn, the unit production cost csj is obtained as the solution to the cost-minimization problem
 29
      We ignore tariffs and their implied tariff revenue for simplicity.



                                                               29
faced by each industry-s firm in country j, based on the production function (20). This is given
by:
                                                                           S
                                                              1− S      rs Y
                                                                P
                                                                  r=1 γ j
                                                                                            γ rs
                                         csj = Υsj wj                                 Pjr      j
                                                                                                    ,              (23)
                                                                                r=1

where     Υsj   is a constant that depends only on the parameters γ rs       r
                                                                    j , and Pj is the ideal price index of
the industry-r composite being used as an intermediate input in country j. Following Eaton and
Kortum (2002), the expression for Pjr is given explicitly by:

                                                      " J                                  #−1/θr
                                                       X                            −θr
                                        Pjr = Ar                    Tir cri τ rij                       ,          (24)
                                                              i=1


where Ar is a constant that depends only on σ r and θr .30
       Let Xijs denote the expenditure of country j on industry-s varieties from country i. This is
the sum of country-j expenditures on the industry-s composite from country i, over both its use
as an intermediate input and for final consumption. In turn, define: (i) Xjs = Ji=1 Xijs as the
                                                                               P

total expenditure of country j on industry-s varieties; and (ii) Yjs as the value of gross output in
industry s produced in country j. Having defined these objects, we can close the model by clearing
the market for each industry in each country:

                                             S
                                             X            J
                                                          X
                                  Xjs   =          γ sr
                                                     j          Xir π rji + αsj (wj Lj + Dj ) .                    (25)
                                             r=1          i=1
                                                          |     {z         }
                                                                Yjr


Note that the first term on the right-hand side of (25) is equal to the total purchases of intermediate
inputs from industry s, where the sum is taken over all industries r that purchase intermediate
inputs from s.31 Dj is the national deficit of country j, computed as the sum of all sectoral and
final-use imports of a country minus the sectoral and final-use outputs. Then, the second term on
the right-hand side is the total purchases by country j on industry s for final consumption.
       We finally impose trade balance, equating a country j’s imports to its exports plus its observed
deficit Dj :
                                 S
                                 X               S X
                                                 X J                            S X
                                                                                X J
                                       Xjs   =                 Xjs π sij    =               Xis π sji + Dj         (26)
                                 s=1             s=1 i=1                        s=1 i=1

One can show that this last equilibrium condition can alternatively be derived from the equality of
  30
      We assume that σ r < 1 + θr for each r, in order for the ideal price index over this industry-r CES aggregate to
be well-defined.
   31
      The manipulation uses the fact that gross output of industry r in country j is equal to the world’s total purchases
from this country-industry.




                                                                       30
(equipped) labor income and total value-added.32
       The equilibrium of the model is then pinned down by the system of equations: (22), (23), (24),
(25), and (26).33

5.1.2       Mapping the Model to Empirical Counterparts

How does the model map to the available data from global Input-Output tables? Remember that
a WIOT contains information on intermediate purchases by industry s in country j from sector r
                                  rs . It also contains information on the final-use expenditure in
in country i, which we denote by Zij
each country j on goods/services originating from sector r in country i, which we denote by Fijr .
Finally, the values of country-industry gross output Yjs and value-added Vjs , as well as country-
specific trade deficits Dj , can all be computed from the WIOT. For clarity, we denote the observed
                                                                             rs ).
values for these variables that come from the WIOT data with tildes (e.g., Z̃ij
       The main limitation of this framework as it stands is that it imposes the same market share of
a given country i in the sales of output of a given sector r to a destination country j regardless of
whether that output is designated for final-use or for use as an intermediate by other industries.
In particular, note that the model imposes:

                                           F̃ijr               rs
                                                             Z̃ij
                                 π rij = PJ              = PJ           for j = 1, . . . , J.                       (27)
                                                  r                  rs
                                            k=1 F̃kj        k=1 kjZ̃

Prior to the WIOD, the standard proportionality assumptions used to infer these import shares from
available data would have generated identical shares across both final-use and input purchases. One
of the contributions of the WIOD was to bring additional information to bear to distinguish imports
across different end-use categories (see Dietzenbacher et al., 2013, for details). In the WIOD data,
the J input shares on the right-end of equation (27) and the final-use shares in the middle term
would thus differ from each other, except by extreme coincidence. Hence, the Caliendo and Parro
(2015) model cannot exactly match all the entries of a generic WIOT. For certain applications,
this mismatch may of course not be too important. But in using the WIOT to make sense of the
positioning of a country in GVCs, it stands to reason that it would be important for the model to
be able to fully account for all final-use and intermediate-use trade shares.
  32
       Aggregating (25) across sectors, and using (26), one obtains after some manipulations:
                                        S        S
                                                        ! J            S        S
                                                                                       !
                                      X         X    sr
                                                         X r r X               X
                             wj Lj =        1−     γj        π ji Xi =      1−    γ j Yjr .
                                                                                    sr

                                      r=1          s=1       i=1         r=1       s=1

In words, the total wage payments to labor in country j are equal to total value-added across all sectors of j.
  33
     Note that (22) comprises J × (J − 1) × S independent equations, since the shares π sij need to sum to 1 for each
j-s pair. Also, (23) and (24) each comprise J × S equations. The market-clearing condition (25) comprises J × S − 1
independent equations, since one of these is redundant by Walras’ Law. Finally, there are J trade balance conditions
in (26). On the other hand, the equilibrium seeks to solve for the following objects: the shares π sij (of which there are
J × (J − 1) × S independent shares), the unit production costs csj and price indices Pjs (of which there are J × S each),
as well as the J − 1 wage levels wj ’s (with one country’s wage chosen as the numéraire) and the J × S expenditure
levels Xjs ’s. Thus, we have as many equilibrium conditions as variables to be solved for.



                                                               31
5.2      A More Flexible Model
We now present a more flexible version of the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model. In particular,
we relax their assumption that iceberg trade costs τ sij are only country-pair and (selling) industry
specific.

5.2.1       New Assumptions and Equilibrium

Instead of the previous formulation of trade costs, consider the case in which trade costs are
denoted by τ rs
             ij when goods/services in sector r from country i are shipped to industry s in country
j. Similarly, denote by τ rF
                          ij the trade costs incurred when goods/services in sector r from country
i are shipped to final consumers in country j. This variation could reflect, for instance, underlying
heterogeneity in the characteristics (weight, value, etc.) of the various inputs and final goods that
are lumped together into a sector in the WIOD. Naturally, it might also be driven by heterogeneity
in the man-made trade barriers applied to these various industry subcategories. To the extent that
different sectors buy different types of inputs in a given sector in different proportions, they will
effectively face different trade costs, with the same being true of purchasers of final varieties.
       As noted in the Introduction (see footnote 6 in particular), the proportionality assumptions
used to construct WIOTs would generate identical trade shares, π rij , across all input-purchasing
industries s.34 This suggests that an extension of the Caliendo and Parro (2015) framework that
simply allowed for distinct trade costs for shipments of inputs and final-goods for a given country
pair i-j and selling sector r would be sufficient to match all the entries of a WIOT. In practice,
the WIOD used in our empirical analysis features minor deviations from these proportionality
assumptions, so we develop here a model with more flexible input trade shares that vary depending
on the identity of the purchasing industry.35 Although this added flexibility is likely to be of little
quantitative importance for our exercise centered on the WIOD, there are good reasons to believe
(see de Gortari, 2017) that trade shares do vary significantly in the real world depending on what
the input is used for, and we expect future WIOTs to more effectively exploit firm-level import and
export data to document larger departures from the commonly-used proportionality assumptions.
       How does this more general formulation of trade costs affect the equilibrium conditions of the
model developed above? Following the same exact steps as in our derivations in the Caliendo-
Parro model, it is easy to verify that producers in industry s in country j now spend on inputs
from different sectors r and countries i according to the input trade shares:
                                                                            r
                                                       Tir (cri τ rs   −θ
                                                                  ij )
                                           π rs
                                             ij   = PJ                          .                                  (28)
                                                           r r rs −θr
                                                      k=1 Tk (ck τ kj )


Meanwhile, consumers in j spend a share π rF
                                          ij of their sector-r final consumption on varieties from

  34                                                       rs PJ      rs
     In other words, given the identities of i, j and r, Z̃ij / k=1 Z̃kj would be equal for all purchasing industries s.
  35
     These deviations arise from adjustments made by the WIOD to reconcile the information contained on bilateral
trade flows; see in particular Section 5 of Dietzenbacher et al. (2013).



                                                          32
country i, where π rF
                   ij is given by:

                                                                                r
                                                            Tir (cri τ rF  −θ
                                                                       ij )
                                       π rF
                                         ij   = PJ                                         .             (29)
                                                             r r rF −θr
                                                        k=1 Tk (ck τ kj )


These expressions are analogous to equation (22), but they now define (S + 1) × J distinct trade
shares, rather than only J.
   On the cost side, we now have the following counterpart to equation (23):

                                                 PS    rs Y
                                                           S
                                            s 1− r=1 γ j
                                                                                         γ rs
                                 csj   =   Υj wj                               Pjrs         j
                                                                                                 ,       (30)
                                                          r=1

where Υsj is again a constant that depends only on the parameters γ rs       rs
                                                                    j , but Pj is now the ideal
price index of the sector-r composite good in country j when purchased by industry-s producers.
This price index is given by:
                                                  "   J
                                                                                     #−1/θr
                                                      X                     −θr
                                Pjrs   =A     r
                                                            Tir    cri τ rs
                                                                         ij                          ,   (31)
                                                      i=1

where Ar is again a constant that depends only on σ r and θr . The main difference relative to
equation (24) is that this price index is now rs-specific, rather than just r-specific. For similar
reasons, we now have to separately define the price index for final consumption for each sector in
each country j:
                                                  "   J
                                                                                     #−1/θr
                                                      X                   r
                                                                       rF −θ
                                PjrF = Ar                   Tir cri τ ij                             .   (32)
                                                      i=1

Note that the price index for overall consumption is now given by:

                                                       S
                                                       Y                      αsj
                                           PjF =                  PjsF /αsj          .                   (33)
                                                       s=1

   Consider next the goods-market clearing conditions. As in the previous less flexible model, the
equality of total expenditure of country j on industry-s varieties can still be expressed as the sum
of total expenditure on inputs and on final consumption in that sector:

                                           S
                                           X
                                Xjs    =          γ sr  r   s
                                                    j Yj + αj (wj Lj + Dj ) .                            (34)
                                           r=1

However, it is now not so straightforward to express Yjr as a function of Xir in other sectors and
countries, as we did in equation (25). Instead, we need to consider final sales and intermediate
input sales separately, which leads us to develop a linear system of equations in the gross output




                                                               33
levels:
                                       J
                                       X                                      S X
                                                                              X J
                             Yjs   =         π sF  s
                                               jk αk   (wk Lk + Dk ) +                   π sr   sr r
                                                                                           jk γ k Yk .                       (35)
                                       k=1                                    r=1 k=1
                                       |               {z              }      |          {z         }
                                                final-use sales              intermediate-input sales

In words, the gross output of sector s in country j is either used for final consumption in all
countries around the world (the first term in (35)) or as an input by all industries in all countries
(the second term in (35)).
    We finally impose trade balance, equating a country j’s imports to the sum of its exports and
its trade deficit Dj . After some simplifications, this can be written as:

          J X
          X S X
              S                                        J X
                                                       X S X
                                                           S                             S X
                                                                                         X J
                         π sr   sr r
                           ij γ j Yj   + wj Lj =                       π sr   sr r
                                                                         ji γ i Yi   +             π sF  s
                                                                                                     ji αi (wi Li + Di ) .   (36)
           i=1 r=1 s=1                                 i=1 r=1 s=1                       s=1 i=1

One can show that this last equilibrium condition can again be written as (equipped) labor income
being equal to value-added.36
    The equilibrium is now defined by equations (28), (29), (30), (31), (32), (35), and (36). Note
that (28) comprises J × (J − 1) × S × S independent equations, since the shares π rs
                                                                                  ij need to sum
to 1 for each j-rs pair; for a similar reason, (29) comprises J × (J − 1) × S independent equations.
In turn, (30) and (32) comprise J × S equations each, while (31) comprises J × S × S equations.
Finally, the market-clearing conditions in (35) comprise J × S − 1 independent equations, since
one of these is redundant by Walras’ Law, and we also have J trade balance conditions from (36).
On the other hand, the equilibrium seeks to solve for the following objects: the π rs
                                                                                   ij ’s (of which
there are J × (J − 1) × S × S independent shares); the π rF
                                                         ij ’s (of which there are J × (J − 1) × S
independent shares); the unit production costs csj , and price indices Pjrs and PjrF (of which there
are J × S, J × S × S, and J × S terms respectively); the J − 1 wage levels wj ’s (with one country’s
wage picked as the numéraire); as well as the J × S gross output levels Yjs ’s. Thus, we have as
many equilibrium conditions as variables to be solved for. With wages and the gross output levels,
we can also easily solve for the expenditure levels Xjs using equation (34).
    We shall not concern ourselves with proving the sufficient conditions for the existence and
uniqueness of an equilibrium. Such a proof could be carried out following the approach in Alvarez
and Lucas (2007). In discussing how our extended Caliendo-Parro model maps to a WIOT, we will
however discuss issues that relate to the existence of an equilibrium.
 36
    In particular, and just as in footnote 32, aggregating (25) across sectors, and using (26), one obtains after some
manipulations:                                                         !
                                                     S
                                                     X        XS
                                            w j Lj =      1−      γ j Yjr .
                                                                    sr

                                                            r=1        s=1




                                                                  34
5.2.2   Mapping to Empirical Counterparts

We now turn to evaluate the ability of our model to match the type of data available in world Input-
Output tables. Our main result will be that, via a suitable choice of parameter values for trade
costs, our extended model will be able to match all entries of a WIOT that relate to intermediate-
use and final-use expenditures. This will in turn allow us to provide a structural interpretation of
a WIOT and of the measures of GVC positioning computed from its entries. We will also show
in the next section, that one can perform interesting counterfactuals with information on only a
small subset of the primitive parameters of the model, a subset that crucially does not include the
complex matrix of trade costs that ensure a perfect fit of our model.
   Before discussing the mapping between model and data, remember that a WIOT contains infor-
                                              rs ), country-pair final-use trade flows by sector (F r ),
mation on country-industry pair input flows (Zij                                                   ij
country-sector-specific gross output Yjs and value-added Vjs , and country-specific trade deficits Dj .
As before, we denote the observed values of these variables in the WIOT with tildes.
   It is useful to begin by considering the mapping between the data and both the input share
parameters γ rs                                        s
             j and final expenditure share parameters αj . As in the benchmark Caliendo-Parro
framework developed above, the Cobb-Douglas structure of the model allows us to easily recover
all these parameters from observed trade flows. In particular, we have:
                                                         PJ     rs
                                                          i=1 Z̃ij
                                              γ rs
                                                j    =             ,                                        (37)
                                                           Ỹjs

and:                                                     PJ     s
                                                         i=1 F̃ij
                                        αsj   = PS           r             .                                (38)
                                                     r=1 V Aj +     D̃j
                                                         g
                                                                                       PS     rs
Furthermore, the value-added share in sector r can be recovered as 1 −                  r=1 γ j .
   Let us now turn to the ability of the model to replicate observed inter-industry and final-use
flows, this being a limitation of the benchmark Caliendo-Parro model. With our more flexible trade
cost formulation, we now have:
                                               rs
                                              Zij = π rs   rs s
                                                      ij γ j Yj ,                                           (39)

and:
                                                         S
                                                                               !
                                                         X
                                   Fijr = π rF  r
                                            ij αj              V Arj + Dj          .                        (40)
                                                         r=1

   The key novelty is that the trade shares π rs
                                              ij now vary both across buying and selling industries,
and are also distinct from the trade shares for final consumption (π rF
                                                                     ij ). This feature in turn implies
                                                             s                                   r
that, conditional on the observed values of gross output Ỹ , value-added in all sectors V
                                                                       j
                                                                                             g A , and
                                                                                                    j
the trade deficits D̃j , together with the recovered values of γ rs     s
                                                                 j and αj in (37) and (38), there exist
values for the trade cost parameters τ rs       rF
                                       ij and τ ij that lead the model to exactly match all the
                                 rs and F̃ r .
empirically observed values of Z̃ij       ij
                                                                                                        r
   To illustrate this result, focus first on the π rF                               r     r r −θ and
                                                   ij trade shares. Let us define: bi = Ti (ci )


                                                         35
       −θr
ρrs
 ij =  τ rs
         ij  . Combining equation (39) with the definition of the input trade shares π rs
                                                                                       ij in (28),
we then obtain:
                                                   rs       J
                                                 Z̃ij       X br
                                       ρrs
                                        ij   = PJ                  k rs
                                                                    ρkj .                             (41)
                                                      rs
                                                l=1 Z̃lj
                                                                  bri
                                                            k=1

For each destination country j and each sector pair rs, equation (41) defines        a system of J linear
                                                          rs        rs            rs
equations in the power transformation of trade costs ρ1j , . . . , ρij , . . . , ρJj . Clearly, the system
is linearly dependent: given a solution, if all the ρrs                                      rs
                                                     ij are multiplied by a common constant κj ,
these alternative trade costs also solve the system. One can thus normalize one of the J trade cost
parameters to 1, and it is natural to set the domestic trade cost to ρrs              rs
                                                                      jj = 1 (i.e., τ jj = 1). Under
weak invertibility conditions, the system in (41) with ρrs
                                                        jj = 1 delivers a unique solution for the
matrix of ρrs                                              rs                                  r
           ij ’s, given a vector of observed input flows Z̃ij as well as values for the terms bi .
   Similarly, from equations (40) and (29), we obtain the following system of linear equations:

                                                            J
                                                 F̃ijr      X br
                                       ρrF
                                        ij   = PJ                  k rF
                                                                    ρkj ,                             (42)
                                                        r
                                                 l=1 F̃lj
                                                                  bri
                                                            k=1


which also delivers, under weak invertibility conditions, a unique solution for the matrix of τ rF
                                                                                                ij ’s
conditional on values for observed final-use flows F̃ijr and the values of the terms bri , after setting
ρrF              rF
 jj = 1 (i.e., τ jj = 1).
   It is worth stressing that our results above are not sufficient to provide a method to recover
a unique set of values of the trade cost parameters, τ rs       rF
                                                       ij and τ ij , that ensure a perfect match
between the trade shares in the model and in the data. More specifically, the trade cost parameters
implicitly defined by (41) and (42) are a function of the terms bri , which are in turn shaped by the
unobserved technology parameters Tir and by the (endogenous) unit cost variables cri . Furthermore,
                                                                                      r
transitioning from ρrs      rs
                    ij to τ ij requires knowledge of the trade elasticity parameters θ .
   For these reasons, backing out the values of τ rs       rF
                                                  ij and τ ij that ensure that the model perfectly
matches the data is not straightforward. Fortunately, we will demonstrate in the next section that
this does not preclude a structural interpretation of the data and the implementation of interesting
counterfactuals. For our purposes, it will suffice to show that there exists at least one set of
values for the trade cost parameters τ rs       rF
                                       ij and τ ij such that the model exactly replicates the data.
Our derivations above indicate that this is certainly the case (under weak invertibility conditions)
conditional on the values of bri . In the Appendix, we demonstrate that when allowing the values of
bri to be determined by the technology parameters Tir and by the general equilibrium of the model,
this existence result persists. As long as the general equilibrium of the model exists (regardless of
whether that equilibrium is unique or not), the equilibrium will deliver a well-defined vector of values
for bri , which also ensures that the model can exactly match the input and final-use trade shares,
π rs       rF
  ij and π ij ; it follows immediately that the model will also match the country-sector-specific gross
output Yjs and value-added Vjs , and country-specific trade deficits Dj .
   There is one additional issue with regard to mapping the model exactly to the data. The


                                                     36
underlying Eaton-Kortum structure of the model implies that all of the trade shares, π rs       rF
                                                                                       ij and π ij ,
are strictly positive. In particular, this means that the production of each good s in country j would
source a positive amount of inputs from all sectors r in all countries i. In the WIOD data, however,
zero entries are relatively common. To address this, we have taken the pragmatic approach of
replacing each zero input-purchase or final-use entry in the WIOD with a positive constant (1e−18 )
that is less than the smallest positive entry seen in the WIOD. This naturally precludes us from
evaluating interesting counterfactuals that pertain to how the extensive margin of sourcing would
adjust. In what follows, we have therefore focused on counterfactual outcomes that pertain to the
aggregate economy (rather than on the effects on specific entries in the WIOT).


6        Counterfactuals
We conclude the paper by illustrating how the theoretical results derived in the last section can
be used to deliver quantitative insights related to where countries are positioned in GVCs. First,
we will extend the “hat algebra” results in Dekle et al. (2008) and Caliendo and Parro (2015), to
show that in order to perform various counterfactuals with the model, all that is required are: (i)
the initial trade shares, π rs       rF
                            ij and π ij , available from a WIOT; (ii) the demand and technological
Cobb-Douglas parameters γ rs     s
                          j and αj , which we have also shown are easily recoverable from the
same WIOT; and (iii) a vector of sectoral parameters θr shaping the elasticity of trade flows (across
source countries) to trade barriers. In particular, although the existence of flexible trade costs τ rs
                                                                                                     ij
and τ rF
      ij is crucial to ensure that the model is able to fit the WIOT data exactly, knowledge of the
precise values of these trade cost parameters is not necessary to conduct counterfactuals. Similarly,
although the technological parameters Tir certainly shape the values of the trade costs, τ rs
                                                                                           ij and
τ rF                                                                         r
  ij , that would enable the model to fit the data, the specific values of Ti are not essential for
these counterfactuals. Having derived these sufficient statistics results, we then perform a series of
counterfactual exercises, in order to shed light on the possible determinants of the evolution of our
various GVC positioning measures over time.

6.1      The Hat Algebra Approach
We are interested in obtaining the values of the counterfactual entries of a WIOT following a shock
to some of the parameters of the model. In practice, we will focus in our applications on changes
in trade costs, τ rs       rF                                                    r
                  ij and τ ij , and in the final demand Cobb-Douglas parameters αj ; our exposition
below will therefore consider the case where only these parameters change in the model.37 For
simplicity, we will also assume that deficits Dj are held constant in the counterfactuals we will
study. We denote the counterfactual value of a parameter or variable X with a prime (e.g., X 0 )
and use hats to denote the relative change in these variables, i.e., X̂ = X 0 /X.
    37
    One could also easily use this approach to explore changes in the technology parameters Tir . It would also be
interesting to explore shocks to the Cobb-Douglas technological parameters γ rs
                                                                             j , but the sufficient statistics results
derived below do not easily generalize to this type of shocks.



                                                         37
   With this notation, and invoking equations (39) and (40), we can express the counterfactual
input and final-use flows as:
                                             rs
                                                    0          0 rs s 0
                                            Zij          = π rs
                                                             ij γ j Yj     ,                                     (43)

and:                                                                                                     !
                                 r 0            rF 0         r 0                      r 0
                                                                   X                
                                Fij     = π ij             αj                   V Aj        + Dj             .   (44)
                                                                          r

Clearly, to obtain the specific counterfactual values of these entries, one needs to figure out how
the trade shares π rs       rF                             s                          r
                   ij and π ij , as well as gross output Yj and value-added levels V Aj , are affected
by changes in trade costs or final-consumption shares.
   Consider first trade shares. Using the hat algebra notation, it is easy to verify that (28) and
(29) result in:
                                                                              !−θr
                                                                ĉri τ̂ rs
                                                                        ij
                                                 π̂ rs
                                                    ij =                                                         (45)
                                                                   P̂jrs
and:                                                                          !−θr
                                                                ĉri τ̂ rF
                                                                        ij
                                                π̂ rF
                                                   ij    =                           .                           (46)
                                                                 P̂jrF
In words, the percentage response of trade shares is purely shaped by the trade elasticity parameters
θr and by the percentage shifts of the various trade cost parameters, as well as the percentage
responses of the unit costs cri , and the price indices Pjrs and PjrF . It is worth stressing that
(45) and (46) are not approximations: they hold exactly for any shock to trade costs (or to final
consumption shares), regardless of the size of the shock. Notice also, that the level of trade costs
or the unobserved technological parameters Tir do not appear directly in these equations.
   The responses of the unit costs cri and the price indices Pjrs and PjrF to changes in the en-
vironment can be obtained from simple manipulations of equations (30), (31), and (32). More
specifically, plugging in the expressions for the trade shares from (28) and (29), we obtain:

                                                          PS              S             γ rs
                                                                   γ rs                     j
                                                                          Y
                                      ĉsj = (ŵj )1−        r=1     j           P̂jrs           ,               (47)
                                                                          r=1

                                                " J                                  #−1/θr
                                                 X                           r
                                                                          rs −θ
                                      P̂jrs =             π rs   r
                                                            ij ĉi τ̂ ij                         ,               (48)
                                                    i=1

and:                                                                                 #−1/θr
                                                    J
                                                "
                                                    X                         r
                                                                           rF −θ
                                  P̂jrF =                 π rF   r
                                                            ij ĉi τ̂ ij                             .           (49)
                                                    i=1

   There are two key features of these three sets of equations. First, the only variables in levels that
appear in these equations are the trade shares prior to the shocks (which are obviously observable),
the Cobb-Douglas technological parameters γ rs
                                            j (which are retrievable from the data in a WIOT),
and the trade elasticity parameters θr . Second, it is clear from inspection that combining (47) and

                                                                38
(48), one should be able to solve – albeit computationally – for ĉsj and P̂jrs as a function of these
initial trade shares, as well as the percentage changes in wages (ŵj ) and input trade costs (τ̂ rs
                                                                                                  ij ).
Similarly, combining (47) and (49), we can obtain P̂jrF as a function of these same initial trade
shares, as well as the percentage changes in wages (ŵj ) and final-use trade costs (τ̂ rF
                                                                                        ij ).
       Plugging these resulting values of ĉsj , P̂jrs , and P̂jrF into (45) and (46), this then allows us
to express the changes in trade shares as a function of observables (π rs     rF         rs
                                                                       ij , π ij , and γ j ), the trade
elasticity parameters θr , and the percentage changes in wages and trade costs.
       We finally discuss how to trace the response of wages, as well as gross output and value-added,
to the shocks. For that, we invoke the goods-market clearing conditions (35) and the trade balance
conditions (36). In the counterfactual equilibrium, these can be re-written as:

                                  J                                          S X
                                                                               J
                         0       X          0 s 0                          X                    0 sr r 0
                     Yjs      =         π sF
                                          jk   (αk ) (ŵk wk Lk   + Dk ) +                   π sr
                                                                                               jk γ k (Yk ) ,                   (50)
                                  k=1                                        r=1 k=1

and:
             J X
               S X
                 S                                                  J X
                                                                      S X
                                                                        S
             X                  0 sr r 0                          X                   0 sr r 0
                           π sr
                             ij γ j Yj     + ŵj wj Lj       =                     π sr
                                                                                     ji γ i (Yi )                               (51)
             i=1 r=1 s=1                                            i=1 r=1 s=1
                                                                       S X J
                                                                                         0
                                                                                              (αsi )0 (ŵi wi Li + Di ) .
                                                                      X
                                                                    +             π sF
                                                                                    ji
                                                                        s=1 i=1

            0                                                                   0
Noting that π sr
              ij = π̂ sr     sr
                      ij · π ij , this system of equations delivers solutions for Yj
                                                                                    s = Ŷijs · Yijs and
ŵj as a function of the changes in trade costs and Cobb-Douglas demand parameters (τ̂ rs      rF
                                                                                       ij , τ̂ ij , and
                                                                    0    r
α̂s ). Plugging these values into (39) and (40), and noting that V Ar = V
 j
                                                                        d A ·V Ar = Ŷ r ·V Ar (due
                                                                                         j             j      j      j      j
to the Cobb-Douglas assumption in technology), this then allows us to obtain the counterfactual
values of all the entries in a WIOT.
       In sum, we have demonstrated that in order to perform counterfactual exercises that shock
trade costs or the demand parameters αsj while holding all other parameters constant, all that is
required is the initial values of a set of variables that are easily retrieved from a WIOT, as well
as values for the trade elasticities θr .38 We next turn to an application of this result to various
counterfactual scenarios of interest.

6.2       Applications
We will perform two types of counterfactuals, using the system of equations in “hat algebra” form
just laid out in (43)-(51). First, we will study how much changes in trade costs and changes in
the αsj preference parameters can help explain the evolution of the GVC positioning of industries
and countries over the period 1995-2011. More specifically, we will hold all other parameters of
  38
    As pointed out by a referee, for the approach to work, it is important that the sectoral trade elasticities do not
vary across importing countries.



                                                             39
the model (including trade deficits) to their 1995 level, and allow first trade costs and then the
parameters αsj to jump to their 2011 levels. This will shed light on the extent to which these factors
might help in resolving the empirical puzzles identified in Section 3. We will later consider further
counterfactual trade cost reductions and changes in demand parameters starting from their 2011
levels, to offer projections for the future positioning of countries in GVCs.
       We should stress that the exercise here is not meant to be an exhaustive exploration of the
forces that could account for the persistent correlations in the country-level GVC measures. The
counterfactuals that we run here speak to the two candidate explanations posited earlier in Section
4, namely movements in trade costs and shifts in sectoral composition. Even so, we are unable to
explore the effect of changes in the input purchase share parameters (the γ rs
                                                                            j ’s), though these have
likely contributed too to the realignments in sectoral composition, as such shifts cannot be ana-
lyzed using the “hat algebra” techniques within the current model with Cobb-Douglas production
functions.39 Likewise, we do not explore the possible role of changes in the fundamental technology
levels (the Tir ’s), since these are harder to discipline empirically with available data. (Note that in
the exercises below, we adopt θr = 5 throughout for simplicity.)
       In Table 8 below, we explore the model’s implications for shifts in country GVC positioning over
the 1995-2011 period. Panel A reports several key moments and correlations related to the country-
level GVC measures, including the values computed directly from the 1995 and 2011 WIOTs.
Consider first the effect of a change in trade costs from 1995 to 2011 levels. Since we encounter
a non-trivial number of zero entries in the WIOT in each year (which would inconveniently imply
that the Head-Reis trade cost index is infinite for these entries), we opt to aggregate the industries
in the WIOT into two broad sectors, namely goods versus services. We thus compute Head-Reis
indices associated with trade in intermediates between any country-sector pair (based on the goods
and services sectoral aggregates), as well as the Head-Reis indices associated with final-use trade
between any country pair in goods and in services.40
       What are the quantitative implications of the empirically observed reductions in trade costs?
We argued in Section 4.1 that falling trade costs would tend to weaken the correlation between
the final-use and value-added shares in gross output across countries, as production along GVCs
becomes more fragmented across borders. Yet, in Section 4.2 we also put forth the view that the
increased specialization in services and in goods production illustrated in Figure 8 – which tended
to increase the correlation between F/GO and V A/GO – could also well be driven by trade cost
reductions. Which of these forces dominated over the period 1995-2011? Our results in Table 8
indicate that, in isolation, trade costs would have led to a reduction in the correlation between
F/GO and V A/GO from a value of 0.825 in the initial year to 0.612 by the end of the period.
  39
     To accommodate changes in the γ rs   j ’s, one would require a more flexible production specification, such as CES
production functions in each industry.
  40
     In other words, we calculate (2J)2 instead of (J ×S)2 trade costs for intermediate inputs, and 2J 2 instead of J 2 ×S
trade costs for final-use trade. We adopt θ = 5 when computing these Head-Reis indices. Even after aggregating to
the broad sectoral level, there are still a number of zeros in the matrix. We therefore bottom-code τ̂ rs            rF
                                                                                                           ij and τ̂ ij at
their respective first percentile values if these proportional changes fall below this percentile threshold. Likewise, we
top-code large values of τ̂ rs        rF
                            ij and τ̂ ij at their respective 99th percentile values.




                                                           40
This contrasts against the fact that this correlation actually moved in the opposite direction in the
data, and stood at 0.925 in 2011. Along a similar vein, the changes in trade costs alone would have
generated a drop in the correlation between the country-level production staging measures (U vs
D), from 0.868 to 0.666, whereas the WIOT data point to an increase in this correlation to 0.912.

                                           [Table 8 here]

   We next consider the effects of holding trade costs constant while feeding into the model the
observed change in the αsj preference parameters seen between 1995-2011. As reported under
“Change expenditure shares” in Panel A, this generates a moderate increase in the correlation
between F/GO and V A/GO to 0.857, as well as in the correlation between U and D to 0.889.
As services have become more important in consumption relative to goods, the model implies that
service industries would have expanded across most countries, which in turn would reinforce the
aforementioned positive correlations among these country-level measures of GVC positioning. Note
that quantitatively, the change in the αsj ’s on their own brings us about a third to a half of the way
towards bridging the gap between the correlations recorded in 1995 and in 2011.
   However, when the changes in trade costs and the final-use expenditure shares are considered
simultaneously, the effect of the trade cost declines dominates: The correlations of interest all
weaken relative to 1995, although the extent of this decline is not as large compared to the first
counterfactual where only trade cost movements were considered. This leaves us to conclude that
other forces which we are not able to accommodate with the current framework – such as shifts in
the use of inputs (the γ rs
                         j ’s) towards services – would have had to be at play, in order to rationalize
the rising correlation between the country-level GVC measures from 1995-2011.
   A similar conclusion is reached if we look at Panel B of Table 8. There, we have re-run the same
series of regressions as in Table 3, to estimate the partial correlation between the counterfactual
GVC measures at the country-industry level (i.e., between (F/GO)sj and (V A/GO)sj , as well as
between (U )sj and (D)sj ). These regressions have been run in the pure cross-section with no fixed
effects, with country fixed effects, and further including industry fixed effects. The simulations
point to an increase in the slope coefficients across all columns, which is consistent with what we
see in the actual evolution of the country-industry GVC measures between 1995 and 2011. That
said, the combined effect of the trade costs and expenditure share shifts (“Both changes”) is only
able to partially account for the increase seen in the slope coefficients; in particular, these forces
alone do not do particularly well in explaining the magnitude of the increase in the slope coefficient
when both country and industry dummies are controlled for.
   We turn to some forward projections in Table 9. For this exercise, we now calibrate the model
to the 2011 WIOT as a starting point, and then ask what would happen to the country-level GVC
measures if shifts in trade costs (and/or the final-use expenditure shares) were to persist for a
further 16 years. We take guidance from the average rates of decline in trade costs estimated
earlier in Tables 4 and 5 for intermediate and final-use trade, for goods and services separately. For
example, we assume in these simulations that trade costs for goods shipped for intermediate use


                                                  41
continue to decline at the rate of 1.81% per annum (based on the coefficient estimate in Column 3,
Table 4); the assumed rates of decline for trade in final-goods, as well as for trade in services are
drawn from these tables in an analogous manner.41 For the projected changes in the expenditure
shares, we likewise simulate the effects of a decrease in the αsj ’s associated with goods industries of
1.27% per year (taking guidance from Column 3, Table 6), coupled with a rise in the αsj ’s associated
with services of 0.37% per year (Column 5, Table 6); the counterfactual αsj shares are re-scaled
proportionally to ensure that they sum to 1 for each country.

                                                [Table 9 here]

       We once again find in Table 9 that a decline in trade costs alone would tend to reduce the
country-level correlations between the final-use and value-added shares in gross output (from 0.925
to 0.840), as well as that between U and D (from 0.912 to 0.815). A more nuanced view emerges
when we consider changes in the trade costs associated with shipping goods and shipping services
separately. A hypothetical decline in trade costs for goods (“Goods only”) would tend to reduce
the cross-country correlations, as expected. However, a decline in trade costs for services (“Services
only”) instead sees the correlation between U and D rise to 0.908, and that between F/GO and
V A/GO rise to 0.914. It thus appears that if trade costs for services were to fall relatively more than
trade costs for goods, this would reinforce comparative advantage in services for those countries
that were already initially specializing in those industries; this in turn would be sufficient to raise
the cross-country correlation between the GVC measures. Thus, depending on whether trade costs
declines are larger for goods versus services, there appears to be scope for trade cost movements to
generate a between-industry shift in specialization patterns.
       As in our counterfactuals in Table 8, the effects of an isolated shift in the final expenditure
shares (continuing their 1995-2011 trajectory) would tend to increase the country-level correlations
between the final-use and value-added shares in gross output. Even though the initial correlations
are already very high, they increase even further to 0.934 (between F/GO and V A/GO) and to 0.923
(between U and D), respectively. When considered in conjunction with the trade cost movements,
the shifts in the αsj ’s act to moderate the decline in these key correlations induced when trade
cost decreases are applied to both goods and services; the shift in consumption towards services is
however not sufficiently large to fully undo or reverse the overall weakening in these correlations
between the country GVC measures.
       We round off this discussion of counterfactuals by taking a more detailed look at the projected
shift in countries’ GVC positioning should trade costs continue to decline. Figure 11 plots the
changes in country-level upstreamness (U ) and downstreamness (D) based on the “Change trade
costs” simulation from Table 9. The figure points to interesting variation across countries in
response to a continued fall in trade costs applied to both goods and services. China stands
out as a country that records a large decrease in its production staging distance according to both
  41
    Specifically, trade costs for goods shipped for final-use are assumed to decline at the rate of 2.31% per annum
(Column 3, Table 5); trade costs for services shipped for intermediate use decline at 1.50% per annum (Column 5,
Table 4); and trade costs for services shipped for final-use decline at 1.96% per year (Column 5, Table 5).


                                                        42
           CHN                                                                                       CHN
                        LUX                                                                                        RUS
                           IRL                                                                                        BGR
                                 CZE                                                                                      IRL
                                   BGR                                                                                   ROU
                                     IND                                                                                   AUS
                                      BEL                                                                                            IND
                                       NLD                                                                                            BRA
                                        DNK                                                                                           CAN
                                        HUN                                                                                           KOR
                                         SVK                                                                                           GRC
                                           ESP                                                                                         USA
                                            POL                                                                                         CZE
                                           KOR                                                                                          TUR
                                                      SVN                                                                               GBR
                                                      ITA                                                                               JPN
                                                        DEU                                                                             RoW
                                                        MEX                                                                              PRT
                                                        SWE                                                                              ITA
                                                         FRA                                                                             LVA
                                                         CAN                                                                             POL
                                                         CYP                                                                             ESP
                                                          AUT                                                                            CYP
                                                           PRT                                                                            IDN
                                                           GBR                                                                             FIN
                                                           MLT                                                                              SWE
                                                            AUS                                                                              FRA
                                                            JPN                                                                              SVN
                                                            USA                                                                               DEU
                                                             LVA                                                                              HUN
                                                              EST                                                                              LTU
                                                              ROU                                                                               EST
                                                              GRC                                                                               MEX
                                                              TUR                                                                                MLT
                                                               FIN                                                                               AUT
                                                               RoW                                                                               SVK
                                                                  RUS                                                                            BEL
                                                                   IDN                                                                             TWN
                                                                    BRA                                                                            NLD
                                                                     LTU                                                                            DNK
                                                                      TWN                                                                            LUX



           -.25   -.2    -.15     -.1   -.05      0       .05    .1    .15   .2   .25        -.25   -.2    -.15   -.1   -.05     0       .05     .1    .15   .2   .25
                    Counterfactual Projected Change (U)                                               Counterfactual Projected Change (D)


                 Figure 11: Further Declines in Trade Costs and Country GVC Position


U and D. A closer look at the underlying sectoral shifts reveals that this is driven by a further
decline in output in Mining and Quarrying (an industry with a particularly high value of U ),
as the fall in trade costs reinforces China’s production patterns towards other goods and service
industries in which it has stronger comparative advantage. On the other hand, economies like
Taiwan, Finland, and Japan exhibit an increase in both U and D, and thus appear to become more
embedded in longer value chains that place them at a greater production staging distance from
both end-consumers and primary factors.


7    Conclusion
This paper aims to contribute to our understanding of the positioning of countries and industries
in GVCs. We have relied on data from the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) to document
the evolution of the upstreamness and downstreamness of various countries and industries in GVCs
during the period 1995-2011. We have emphasized, in particular, the presence of a puzzling positive
correlation between several pairs of GVC measures at both the country and country-industry levels.
More specifically, countries and country-industries far removed from final demand also tend to be
far removed from the use of primary factors in production. We have explored potential explanations
for this phenomenon and have assessed the quantitative role of two factors: a reduction in trade
costs and an increase in the share of world spending on services. This quantitative evaluation is
based on a theoretical model of GVCs that we have built, by extending the framework of Caliendo
and Parro (2015) in a way that allows the model to match all the entries of a world Input-Output

                                                                                        43
table. We have finally used the model to conjecture on the future evolution of the positioning
of industries and countries in GVCs. By introducing considerations related to the positioning of
countries and industries in GVCs into a general equilibrium model of trade with cross-sectoral
linkages, we hope to contribute a useful bridge between two literatures: on the one hand, the body
of empirical work on GVCs employing Input-Output analysis techniques, and on the other hand,
the theoretical literature on quantitative trade models that facilitate a structural interpretation
of input flows across countries (c.f., Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare 2014). We also hope that the
modeling framework will in turn provide scope for future research, to arrive at a more complete
decomposition of the forces that account for the evolution of GVC activity. In this regard, a
potentially fruitful line of work would be to generalize the production setup to a constant elasticity
of substitution (CES) specification, in order to assess the role of shifts in input-use shares (the γ’s)
in accounting for the observed trends in the measures of GVC positioning.




                                                  44
References

 Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, (2012), “The Network
     Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica 80(5): 1977-2016.

 Alexander, Patrick D., (2017), “Vertical Specialization and Gains from Trade,” Bank of Canada Staff
     Working Paper 2017-17.

 Alfaro, Laura, Pol Antràs, Davin Chor, and Paola Conconi, (2017), “Internalizing Global Value Chains: A
     Firm-Level Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

 Alvarez, Fernando, and Robert E. Lucas, (2007), “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton–Kortum
     model of International Trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54(6): 1726-1768.

 Antràs, Pol, and Davin Chor, (2013), “Organizing the Global Value Chain,” Econometrica 81(6): 2127-
     2204.

 Antràs, Pol, Davin Chor, Thibault Fally, and Russell Hillberry, (2012), “Measuring the Upstreamness of
     Production and Trade Flows,” American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 102(3): 412-416.

 Antràs, Pol, and Alonso de Gortari, (2017), “On the Geography of Global Value Chains,” mimeo Harvard
     University.

 Baldwin, Richard, and Tadashi Ito, (2014), “The Smile Curve: Evolving Sources of Value Added in Man-
     ufacturing,” mimeo.

 Baldwin, Richard, and Anthony Venables, (2013), “Spiders and Snakes: Offshoring and Agglomeration in
     the Global Economy,” Journal of International Economics 90(2): 245-254.

 Berlingieri, Giuseppe, (2014), “Outsourcing and the Rise in Services,” CEP Discussion Paper No. 1199.

 Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro, (2015), “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA,”
     Review of Economic Studies 82(1): 1-44.

 Cameron, Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller, (2011), “Robust Inference with Multi-way Clustering,”
     Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 29(2): 238-249.

 Costinot, Arnaud, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, (2014), “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the
     Consequences of Globalization,” in Handbook of International Economics, vol. 4: pp.197-261.

 Costinot, Arnaud, Jonathan Vogel, and Su Wang, (2013), “An Elementary Theory of Global Supply
     Chains,” Review of Economic Studies 80(1): 109-144.

 de Gortari, Alonso, (2017), “Disentangling Global Value Chains,” mimeo Harvard University.

 Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum, (2008), “Global Rebalancing with Gravity: Measuring
     the Burden of Adjustment,” IMF Economic Review 55(3): 511-540.

                                                   45
Dietzenbacher, Erik, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, Marcel Timmer, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries, (2013), “The
    Construction of World Input-Output Tables in the WIOD Project,” Economic Systems Research 25(1):
    71-98.

Dixit, Avinash, and Gene Grossman, (1982), “Trade and Protection with Multistage Production,” Review
    of Economic Studies 49(4): 583-594.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum, (2002), “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica 70(5):
    1741-1779.

Fally, Thibault, (2012), “Production Staging: Measurement and Facts,” mimeo UC Berkeley.

Fally, Thibault, and Russell Hillberry, (2015), “A Coasian Model of International Production Chains,”
    mimeo UC Berkeley.

Harms, Philipp, Oliver Lorz, and Dieter Urban, (2012), “Offshoring along the Production Chain,” Canadian
    Journal of Economics 45(1): 93-106.

Head, Keith, and John Ries, (2001), “Increasing Returns Versus National Product Differentiation as an
    Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade,” American Economic Review 91(4): 858-876.

Johnson, Robert C., (2014), “Five Facts about Value-Added Exports and Implications for Macroeconomics
    and Trade Research,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(2): 119-142.

Johnson, Robert C., (2017), “Measuring Global Value Chains,” NBER Working Paper 24027.

Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera, (2012), “Accounting for Intermediates: Production Sharing
    and Trade in Value Added,” Journal of International Economics 86(2): 224-236.

Kikuchi, Tomoo, Kazuo Nishimura, and John Stachurski, (2017), “Span of Control, Transaction Costs and
    the Structure of Production Chains,” Theoretical Economics, forthcoming.

Kohler, Wilhelm, (2004), “International Outsourcing and Factor Prices with Multistage Production,” Eco-
    nomic Journal 114(494): C166-C185.

Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei, (2014), “Tracing Value-Added and Double Counting in
    Gross Exports,”American Economic Review 104(2): 459-494.

Kremer, Michael, (1993), “The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    108(3): 551-575.

Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael Whinston, and Jerry Green, (1995), Microeconomic Theory, Oxford University
    Press.

Miller, Ronald E., and Umed Temurshoev, (2017), “Output Upstreamness and Input Downstreamness of
    Industries/Countries in World Production,” International Regional Science Review 40(5): 443-475.


                                                  46
Sanyal, Kalyan K., and Ronald W. Jones, (1982), “The Theory of Trade in Middle Products,” American
    Economic Review 72(1): 16-31.

Timmer, Marcel P., Abdul Azeez Erumban, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries, (2014),
    “Slicing Up Global Value Chains,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(2): 99-118.

Timmer, Marcel P., Eric Dietzenbacher, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries, (2015),
    “An Illustrated User Guide to the World Input-Output Database: the Case of Global Automotive
    Production,” Review of International Economics 23(3): 575-605.

Tyazhelnikov, Vladimir, (2017), “Production Clustering and Offshoring,” mimeo UC Davis.

Wang, Zhi, Shang-Jin Wei, Xinding Yu, and Kunfu Zhu, (2017), “Measures of Participation in Global Value
    Chains and Global Business Cycles,” NBER Working Paper 23222.

Yi, Kei-Mu, (2003), “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?” Journal of Political
    Economy 111(1): 52-102.

Yi, Kei-Mu, (2010), “Can Multistage Production Explain the Home Bias in Trade?” American Economic
    Review 100(1): 364-393.




                                                  47
A     Appendix
    In this Appendix, we first outline the main steps involved in proving the existence of equilibrium in
our extension of the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model. We also expand our discussion from the main text
regarding the ability of the model to match all the entries of a WIOT.
    Let us first tackle the issue of existence of equilibrium. The key equations characterizing such an
equilibrium are (28), (29), (30), (31), (32), (35), and (36). We begin by noting that the system of equations
in (31), after plugging in (30), can be written as

                                              J                                         S
                                                                                                         !−θr
                          −θr       r −θ
                                          r   X                −θr        1− S
                                                                             P      tr Y
                                                                              t=1 γ i
                                                                                                 γ tr
                     Pjrs        = (A )             Tir   τ rs
                                                            ij        Υri wi                 Pitr i             .
                                              i=1                                      t=1


Following the same approach as in Alvarez and Lucas (2007) or Antràs and de Gortari (2017), one can verify
                                           PS
that as long as trade costs are bounded and t=1 γ tr
                                                  i < 1 for all i and r, the system above delivers a unique
                                                          J
mapping between the vector of wages w = {wj }j=1 and the matrix of price indices Pjrs . From equation (30),
this in turn implies that, under the same conditions, there exists a unique matrix of unit costs cri given a
vector of wages w.
    The proof of the existence of a vector of wages is more involved, and we shall not develop it in full detail
here, but such a proof would proceed as follows. First, notice that the system of equations defined in (35) can
be inverted – under weak invertibility conditions – to express the matrix of gross output levels as a function
of the equilibrium vector of wages w. In doing so, one would invoke that trade shares are only a function of
wages and parameters once plugging in the values of cri as a function of the same vector of wages. With this
result in hand, the last step is to simply plug trade shares – in (28) and (29) – and gross output levels – in
(35) – into the trade balance condition (36) to obtain a system of J equations in the J equilibrium wages
w. Following Alvarez and Lucas (2007) or Antràs and de Gortari (2017), one would then define an excess
demand function Z (w) and show that it satisfies the conditions in Propositions 17.C.1 in Mas-Colell et al.
(1995, p.585), namely continuity, homogeneity of degree 0 in wages, Walras’ Law, the existence of a lower
bound, and a limit condition.
    The existence of an equilibrium does not of course guarantee that it is unique. In fact, even in the
simpler one-sector Eaton and Kortum (2002) model, uniqueness has only been demonstrated under certain
(suficient) conditions on the matrix of trade costs (see Alvarez and Lucas, 2007). To derive the analogous
sufficient conditions, one would need to verify the restrictions on trade costs that guarantee that the excess
demand function Z (w) has the gross substitutes property in w (see Proposition 17.F.3 in Mas-Colell et al.,
1995, p.613).
    Let us now return to the issue of whether our more flexible formulation of trade costs allows our model to
match all the entries of a WIOT, no matter their values. A first obvious observation is that, if an equilibrium
of the model exists, then given matrices of input and final-use trade costs, there exists equilibrium commodity
       rs
flows Zij and Fijr across sectors and industries, as well as country-sector-specific gross output Yjs and value-
added V Asj levels. In other words, the model produces values for all the entries of a WIOT.
    Now suppose that we begin with the empirical entries of an actual WIOT. Suppose you fix the vector
                                 J
of equipped labor L = {Lj }j=1 to some arbitrary values (e.g., the labor force in each country). Given L


                                                                 48
and the vector of aggregate value-added in each country, we obtain a vector of empirical wages w̃, where we
again use tildes to denote empirical values. It is clear that plugging the empirically observed trade shares
π̃ sr        sF                                          r
   ij and π̃ ji , and gross output and deficit levels Ỹj and D̃j , as well as the easily recoverable parameters

γ sr     s
  j and αi (see (37) and (38)), the goods-market and trade balance conditions (35) and (36) will hold as
identities.
                                                               −θ r                 r
                                                                                rs −θ
    As demonstrated in the main text, defining bri = Tir (cri )     and ρrs
                                                                         ij = τ ij     , we can write equations
(28) and (29) as:
                                                       J
                                            rs      rs
                                                       X   brk rs
                                           ρij = π̃ ij          ρ ,                                       (A.1)
                                                           bri kj
                                                                   k=1

and:
                                                                   J
                                                              rF
                                                                   X br
                                                     ρrF
                                                      ij = π̃ ij
                                                                           k
                                                                                ρrF
                                                                                 kj .                                  (A.2)
                                                                          bri
                                                                   k=1

We now further note that the values of (transformed) trade costs ρrs                r
                                                                   ij and the term bi need also satisfy the
two remaining equilibrium conditions (30) and (31), which further imposes:

                                                                          S
                                                                            " J                   #−γ rs
                                                                                                      j /θ
                                                                                                           r

                                  −1/θs                  1− S
                                                            P       rs
                                                              r=1 γ j
                                                                          Y  X
                              bsj          =   Ψsj   (w̃j )                             bri ρrs
                                                                                             ij                ,       (A.3)
                                                                          r=1     i=1

                                                                γ rs
where the constant Ψsj is given by Ψsj = Tjs Υsj (Ar )            j  42
                                                                     .      Fixing the parameters Tjs , as well as σ r and θr
(shaping Ar ), the system provides a second set of equilibrium conditions relating trade costs ρrs
                                                                                                ij and the
term bri (while involving other parameters and “observables”). Combining (A.1) and (A.3) one should, under
the necessary invertibility conditions solve for the matrix of values for bsj consistent with the observables in
the WIOT and the general equilibrium of the model. With those in hand, it just suffices to plug them back
into (A.1) and (A.2) to obtain the matrices of trade costs ρrs      rF
                                                            ij and ρij that make the model replicate all the
entries of a WIOT exactly. Although it should be clear from our proof, obtaining those parameters requires
however fixing the other unobserved (and not easily retrieved) parameters Lj , Tjs , σ r and θr .




  42
    Strictly speaking, one should also be concerned with the model satisfying the equilibrium condition (32), which
solves for the matrix of final-use price indices PjrF . These price indices are however not directly observable in a
WIOT, so this condition is not relevant for the purposes of the result we are proving.


                                                                49
                                                                    Table 1
                                           Country-Level GVC Position by Rank (Top and Bottom Five)

Rank:              F/GO (1995)                        F/GO (2011)                        Rank:             VA/GO (1995)                            VA/GO (2011)
    1.    China               0.384            Luxembourg        0.296                       1.    China              0.373                China              0.325
    2.    Luxembourg          0.388            China             0.340                       2.    Czech Rep.         0.403                Luxembourg         0.362
    3.    Slovakia            0.394            Korea             0.377                       3.    Slovakia           0.416                Korea              0.372
    4.    Czech Rep.          0.408            Taiwan            0.396                       4.    Estonia            0.430                Czech Rep.         0.383
    5.    Russia              0.444            Czech Rep.        0.401                       5.    Romania            0.454                Bulgaria           0.401

    37.   Denmark               0.558          Brazil                 0.557                  37.   Austria               0.563             Brazil                 0.561
    38.   Brazil                0.572          USA                    0.569                  38.   Turkey                0.575             USA                    0.562
    39.   Turkey                0.605          Mexico                 0.586                  39.   Brazil                0.575             Mexico                 0.581
    40.   Greece                0.625          Cyprus                 0.637                  40.   Greece                0.576             Cyprus                 0.586
    41.   Cyprus                0.709          Greece                 0.668                  41.   Cyprus                0.625             Greece                 0.628

Rank:                U (1995)                              U (2011)                      Rank:                D (1995)                                 D (2011)
    1.    Cyprus                1.451          Greece                 1.546                  1.    Cyprus                1.662             Greece                 1.657
    2.    Greece                1.611          Cyprus                 1.617                  2.    Brazil                1.748             Cyprus                 1.763
    3.    Turkey                1.666          Mexico                 1.737                  3.    Turkey                1.758             Mexico                 1.779
    4.    Brazil                1.755          USA                    1.786                  4.    Greece                1.759             Brazil                 1.806
    5.    Denmark               1.810          Brazil                 1.824                  5.    Austria               1.800             USA                    1.808

    37.   Russia                2.185          Czech Rep.             2.358                  37.   Romania               2.155             Luxembourg             2.348
    38.   Luxembourg            2.242          Taiwan                 2.463                  38.   Estonia               2.209             Bulgaria               2.370
    39.   Czech Rep.            2.331          Korea                  2.544                  39.   Slovakia              2.306             Czech Rep.             2.444
    40.   Slovakia              2.389          Luxembourg             2.581                  40.   Czech Rep.            2.344             Korea                  2.534
    41.   China                 2.535          China                  2.819                  41.   China                 2.591             China                  2.900


Notes: Rank order based on the respective GVC measures computed at the country-level, i.e., based on the WIOD aggregated to a country-by-country panel of Input-Output
tables. The top and bottom five countries in the rank order are reported, for both 1995 and 2011.
                                                      Table 2
                            Evolution of GVC Measures within Country-Industries over Time

     Dependent variable:         F/GOj,ts       F/GOj,ts       VA/GOj,ts       VA/GOj,ts        (U)j,ts         (U)j,ts        (D)j,ts         (D)j,ts
                                   (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)

Year                            -0.0009*                      -0.0017***                      0.0064***                      0.0084***
                                [0.0004]                       [0.0005]                        [0.0015]                       [0.0017]
  (Dum: Year=1996)                                -0.0002                      -0.0012                        -0.0060                         0.0019
                                                 [0.0025]                      [0.0026]                       [0.0083]                       [0.0079]
  (Dum: Year=1997)                                -0.0015                      -0.0024                         0.0026                         0.0061
                                                 [0.0020]                      [0.0020]                       [0.0068]                       [0.0062]
  (Dum: Year=1998)                               0.0026**                       0.0002                       -0.0129***                      -0.0085*
                                                 [0.0010]                      [0.0015]                       [0.0032]                       [0.0043]
  (Dum: Year=1999)                             0.0029***                       -0.0005                       -0.0086***                     -0.0073***
                                                 [0.0004]                      [0.0005]                       [0.0010]                       [0.0025]
  (Dum: Year=2000)                                -0.0015                     -0.0094***                     0.0140***                      0.0311***
                                                 [0.0014]                      [0.0016]                       [0.0045]                       [0.0044]
  (Dum: Year=2001)                                -0.0022                     -0.0122***                      0.0182**                      0.0394***
                                                 [0.0020]                      [0.0021]                       [0.0065]                       [0.0053]
  (Dum: Year=2002)                                -0.0010                     -0.0091***                       0.0069                       0.0218***
                                                 [0.0024]                      [0.0022]                       [0.0069]                       [0.0054]
  (Dum: Year=2003)                                -0.0033                     -0.0102***                      0.0204**                      0.0334***
                                                 [0.0027]                      [0.0022]                       [0.0082]                       [0.0059]
  (Dum: Year=2004)                                -0.0052                     -0.0135***                     0.0346***                      0.0490***
                                                 [0.0030]                      [0.0025]                       [0.0100]                       [0.0079]
  (Dum: Year=2005)                               -0.0061*                     -0.0153***                     0.0421***                      0.0657***
                                                 [0.0031]                      [0.0032]                       [0.0099]                       [0.0101]
  (Dum: Year=2006)                              -0.0084**                     -0.0208***                     0.0598***                      0.0919***
                                                 [0.0033]                      [0.0036]                       [0.0117]                       [0.0115]
  (Dum: Year=2007)                             -0.0119***                     -0.0237***                     0.0797***                      0.1103***
                                                 [0.0038]                      [0.0039]                       [0.0137]                       [0.0133]
  (Dum: Year=2008)                             -0.0130***                     -0.0287***                     0.0894***                      0.1333***
                                                 [0.0044]                      [0.0048]                       [0.0159]                       [0.0154]
  (Dum: Year=2009)                                -0.0075                     -0.0164***                     0.0562***                      0.0746***
                                                 [0.0052]                      [0.0052]                       [0.0171]                       [0.0150]
  (Dum: Year=2010)                               -0.0102*                     -0.0211***                     0.0738***                      0.1027***
                                                 [0.0055]                      [0.0053]                       [0.0180]                       [0.0167]
  (Dum: Year=2011)                               -0.0111*                     -0.0226***                     0.0822***                      0.1110***
                                                 [0.0055]                      [0.0054]                       [0.0179]                       [0.0168]
Country-Industry FE?                Y               Y              Y               Y               Y              Y               Y              Y
Observations                     24,076          24,076         24,395          24,395         24,395          24,395          24,395         24,395
R2                               0.9709          0.9709         0.9491          0.9495         0.9632          0.9636          0.9444         0.9460


Notes: The sample comprises all countries (41), industries (35), and years (17) in the WIOD. Standard errors are multi-way clustered by country,
industry, and year; ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. The dependent variables are respectively the GVC
measures computed at the country-industry level for each year. All columns control for country-industry (i.e., j-s) pair fixed effects; columns (2), (4),
(6) and (8) further include year fixed effects, with the omitted category being the dummy for 1995.
                                                 Table 3
                   Correlation between Country-Industry GVC Measures (1995 and 2011)

        Dependent variable:          F/GOj,ts          F/GOj,ts          F/GOj,ts           F/GOj,ts          F/GOj,ts          F/GOj,ts
                                      1995              1995               1995              2011              2011               2011
                                       (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)

VA/GOj,ts                          0.5438***          0.5196**            0.0775          0.6543***          0.6373***         0.2647***
                                    [0.1815]          [0.1924]           [0.0543]          [0.1647]           [0.1740]          [0.0527]

Country FE?                             N                 Y                  Y                 N                 Y                  Y
Industry FE?                            N                 N                  Y                 N                 N                  Y

Observations                          1,417             1,417              1,417             1,414             1,414              1,414
R2                                   0.1285            0.1488             0.8392            0.1927            0.2033             0.8479

        Dependent variable:            Uj,ts             Uj,ts             Uj,ts              Uj,ts             Uj,ts             Uj,ts
                                      1995              1995               1995              2011              2011               2011
                                       (7)               (8)                (9)              (10)              (11)               (12)

Dj,ts                              0.5308***          0.4820**          0.2413***         0.6213***          0.5707***         0.3772***
                                    [0.1640]           [0.1902]          [0.0604]          [0.1454]           [0.1698]          [0.0617]

Country FE?                             N                 Y                  Y                 N                 Y                  Y
Industry FE?                            N                 N                  Y                 N                 N                  Y

Observations                          1,435             1,435              1,435             1,435             1,435              1,435
R2                                   0.1350            0.1742             0.8264            0.1946            0.2232             0.8325


Notes: The sample comprises all countries (41), industries (35), and years (17) in the WIOD. Standard errors are multi-way clustered by
country and industry; ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. The dependent variables are GVC
measures computed at the country-industry level for each year. The upper row reports regressions of F/GO against VA/GO, while the lower
row reports regressions of U against D. Regressions are run for both 1995 and 2011; for each year, three specificatons are reported: (i) with
no fixed effects; (ii) with country fixed effects; and (iii) with country and industry fixed effects.
                                                  Table 4
                           Head-Reis Trade Costs for Intermediate Inputs over Time

               Dependent variable:                             log Trade Costs for Intermediate Inputs
                                              (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (3)              (4)
                          Industries:         All              All            Goods            Goods           Services         Services

Year                                     -0.0164***                         -0.0181***                        -0.0150***
                                          [0.0022]                           [0.0024]                          [0.0026]
  Dum: Year=1996                                            -0.0052                           -0.0211*                           0.0085
                                                            [0.0093]                          [0.0108]                          [0.0142]
  Dum: Year=1997                                           -0.0782***                        -0.0982***                        -0.0609***
                                                            [0.0048]                          [0.0075]                          [0.0061]
  Dum: Year=1998                                           -0.1108***                        -0.1503***                        -0.0768***
                                                            [0.0039]                          [0.0077]                          [0.0055]
  Dum: Year=1999                                           -0.1129***                        -0.1598***                        -0.0725***
                                                            [0.0048]                          [0.0074]                          [0.0063]
  Dum: Year=2000                                           -0.1562***                        -0.1850***                        -0.1313***
                                                            [0.0056]                          [0.0079]                          [0.0086]
  Dum: Year=2001                                           -0.1653***                        -0.2021***                        -0.1336***
                                                            [0.0067]                          [0.0093]                          [0.0099]
  Dum: Year=2002                                           -0.1594***                        -0.1936***                        -0.1299***
                                                            [0.0064]                          [0.0079]                          [0.0107]
  Dum: Year=2003                                           -0.1778***                        -0.2141***                        -0.1465***
                                                            [0.0100]                          [0.0123]                          [0.0154]
  Dum: Year=2004                                           -0.2019***                        -0.2219***                        -0.1846***
                                                            [0.0097]                          [0.0115]                          [0.0155]
  Dum: Year=2005                                           -0.2239***                        -0.2558***                        -0.1965***
                                                            [0.0109]                          [0.0147]                          [0.0159]
  Dum: Year=2006                                           -0.2491***                        -0.2781***                        -0.2241***
                                                            [0.0107]                          [0.0154]                          [0.0152]
  Dum: Year=2007                                           -0.2629***                        -0.2895***                        -0.2400***
                                                            [0.0108]                          [0.0153]                          [0.0157]
  Dum: Year=2008                                           -0.2697***                        -0.3055***                        -0.2387***
                                                            [0.0122]                          [0.0158]                          [0.0182]
  Dum: Year=2009                                           -0.2727***                        -0.2991***                        -0.2499***
                                                            [0.0123]                          [0.0146]                          [0.0188]
  Dum: Year=2010                                           -0.2425***                        -0.2989***                        -0.1939***
                                                            [0.0124]                          [0.0146]                          [0.0188]
  Dum: Year=2011                                           -0.2544***                        -0.3157***                        -0.2016***
                                                            [0.0125]                          [0.0148]                          [0.0190]
Input Country-Industry by
Destination Country-Industry
Pair FE?                                       Y                Y                Y                Y                Y                 Y
Observations                             17,491,215       17,491,215        8,101,928        8,101,928        9,389,287         9,389,287
R2                                         0.8602           0.8604            0.7408           0.7414           0.8806            0.8808



Notes: The left-hand side variable is the Head-Reis index (computed with Ɵ=5) associated with trade costs for intermediate inputs, from
industry r in country i purchased by industry s in country j, for trade costs that correspond to input purchases that lie above the main
diagonal of the WIOT in each year. Standard errors are multi-way clustered by source country-industry (i,r), destination country-industry
(j,s), and year; ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. All columns control for source country-
industry by destination country-industry fixed effects. Columns (3)-(4) restrict to the subsample of trade costs where the industry r is from
the goods sectors, while Columns (5)-(6) restrict to the subsample where the industry r is from the services sectors.
                                                    Table 5
                                  Head-Reis Trade Costs for Final-Use over Time

              Dependent variable:                            log Trade Costs for Final Goods/Services
                                             (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (3)              (4)
                          Industries:        All              All            Goods            Goods           Services         Services

Year                                     -0.0212***                        -0.0231***                        -0.0196***
                                          [0.0039]                          [0.0041]                          [0.0051]
  Dum: Year=1996                                           -0.0217                           -0.0510*                            0.0029
                                                           [0.0332]                          [0.0278]                           [0.0550]
  Dum: Year=1997                                          -0.1123***                        -0.1306***                        -0.0968***
                                                           [0.0104]                          [0.0146]                           [0.0115]
  Dum: Year=1998                                          -0.1588***                        -0.2095***                        -0.1161***
                                                           [0.0099]                          [0.0116]                           [0.0168]
  Dum: Year=1999                                          -0.1479***                        -0.1910***                         -0.1115**
                                                           [0.0193]                          [0.0090]                           [0.0441]
  Dum: Year=2000                                          -0.2001***                        -0.2445***                        -0.1628***
                                                           [0.0257]                          [0.0162]                           [0.0456]
  Dum: Year=2001                                          -0.2370***                        -0.2708***                        -0.2084***
                                                           [0.0233]                          [0.0245]                           [0.0360]
  Dum: Year=2002                                          -0.2295***                        -0.2589***                        -0.2047***
                                                           [0.0179]                          [0.0238]                           [0.0359]
  Dum: Year=2003                                          -0.2500***                        -0.2825***                        -0.2225***
                                                           [0.0251]                          [0.0251]                           [0.0423]
  Dum: Year=2004                                          -0.2814***                        -0.2951***                        -0.2699***
                                                           [0.0304]                          [0.0303]                           [0.0435]
  Dum: Year=2005                                          -0.3024***                        -0.3417***                        -0.2693***
                                                           [0.0323]                          [0.0372]                           [0.0435]
  Dum: Year=2006                                          -0.3260***                        -0.3652***                        -0.2930***
                                                           [0.0307]                          [0.0372]                           [0.0425]
  Dum: Year=2007                                          -0.3470***                        -0.3764***                        -0.3223***
                                                           [0.0317]                          [0.0399]                           [0.0429]
  Dum: Year=2008                                          -0.3524***                        -0.3858***                        -0.3244***
                                                           [0.0391]                          [0.0386]                           [0.0555]
  Dum: Year=2009                                          -0.3588***                        -0.3964***                        -0.3272***
                                                           [0.0392]                          [0.0397]                           [0.0547]
  Dum: Year=2010                                          -0.3250***                        -0.3899***                        -0.2704***
                                                           [0.0413]                          [0.0380]                           [0.0576]
  Dum: Year=2011                                          -0.3421***                        -0.4137***                        -0.2818***
                                                           [0.0421]                          [0.0437]                           [0.0585]


Source Country-Industry by
Destination Country FE?                       Y                Y                Y                Y                Y                Y
Observations                              487,900          487,900          223,040          223,040          264,860          264,860
R2                                         0.9002           0.9005           0.7109           0.7119           0.9140           0.9143



Notes: The left-hand side variable is the Head-Reis index (computed with Ɵ=5) associated with trade costs for final-use sales, from
industry r in country i purchased by country j, for all i<j. Standard errors are multi-way clustered by source country-industry (i,r),
destination country (j), and year; ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. All columns control for
source country-industry by destination country fixed effects. Columns (3)-(4) restrict to the subsample of trade costs where the industry r
is from the goods sectors, while Columns (5)-(6) restrict to the subsample where the industry r is from the services sectors.
                                                       Table 6
                                        Final-Use Expenditure Shares over Time

              Dependent variable:                                      log Expenditure Shares, js
                                             (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                          Industries:        All              All           Goods             Goods          Services         Services

Year                                      -0.0038                          -0.0127***                          0.0037
                                          [0.0025]                          [0.0037]                          [0.0025]
  Dum: Year=1996                                              0.0016                           -0.0087                          0.0104
                                                            [0.0148]                          [0.0183]                         [0.0200]
  Dum: Year=1997                                             -0.0078                          -0.0230*                          0.0050
                                                            [0.0117]                          [0.0127]                         [0.0137]
  Dum: Year=1998                                             -0.0139                        -0.0493***                        0.0160**
                                                            [0.0081]                          [0.0158]                         [0.0059]
  Dum: Year=1999                                          -0.0070***                        -0.0633***                        0.0405***
                                                            [0.0022]                          [0.0077]                         [0.0036]
  Dum: Year=2000                                              0.0028                        -0.0497***                        0.0470***
                                                            [0.0060]                          [0.0130]                         [0.0086]
  Dum: Year=2001                                             -0.0013                        -0.0718***                        0.0582***
                                                            [0.0099]                          [0.0119]                         [0.0155]
  Dum: Year=2002                                             -0.0123                        -0.0991***                        0.0609**
                                                            [0.0144]                          [0.0104]                         [0.0231]
  Dum: Year=2003                                             -0.0192                        -0.1171***                        0.0633**
                                                            [0.0159]                          [0.0134]                         [0.0222]
  Dum: Year=2004                                             -0.0165                        -0.1130***                        0.0648***
                                                            [0.0185]                          [0.0250]                         [0.0212]
  Dum: Year=2005                                             -0.0136                        -0.1123***                        0.0697***
                                                            [0.0216]                          [0.0344]                         [0.0232]
  Dum: Year=2006                                             -0.0207                         -0.1164**                        0.0601**
                                                            [0.0234]                          [0.0396]                         [0.0245]
  Dum: Year=2007                                             -0.0226                         -0.1188**                        0.0584**
                                                            [0.0235]                          [0.0405]                         [0.0247]
  Dum: Year=2008                                             -0.0315                        -0.1409***                        0.0607**
                                                            [0.0256]                          [0.0440]                         [0.0225]
  Dum: Year=2009                                           -0.0687**                        -0.2297***                        0.0670**
                                                            [0.0303]                          [0.0345]                         [0.0311]
  Dum: Year=2010                                           -0.0645**                        -0.2103***                         0.0583*
                                                            [0.0294]                          [0.0373]                         [0.0297]
  Dum: Year=2011                                            -0.0579*                        -0.1938***                         0.0567*
                                                            [0.0292]                          [0.0403]                         [0.0293]
Input Industry by Purchasing
Country FE?                                   Y                Y                Y                Y                Y                Y
Observations                               24,392           24,392           11,152           11,152          13,240           13,240
R2                                         0.9833           0.9834           0.9713           0.9715          0.9872           0.9872


Notes: The sample comprises all countries (41), industries (35), and years (17) in the WIOD. Standard errors are multi-way clustered by
country, industry, and year; ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. The dependent variable is the
log expenditure share in country j on final-use purchases from industry s. All columns control for country-industry (i.e., j-s) pair fixed
effects; columns (2), (4), and (6) further include year fixed effects, with the omitted category being the year dummy for 1995. Columns (1)-
(2) run the regression on all observations; columns (3)-(4) restrict to expenditure shares for purchases from goods industries; while
columns (5)-(6) restrict to expenditure shares for purchases from services industries.
                                                             Table 7
                                                   Input-Use Shares over Time

              Dependent variable:                                       log Input-Use Shares, ɣjrs
                                             (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                          Industries:        All              All           Goods             Goods          Services         Services

Year                                       0.0000                          -0.0113**                         0.0097***
                                          [0.0031]                          [0.0043]                          [0.0031]
  Dum: Year=1996                                            0.0098                            -0.0050                           0.0227
                                                           [0.0160]                           [0.0186]                         [0.0142]
  Dum: Year=1997                                            0.0093                            -0.0209                         0.0351**
                                                           [0.0134]                           [0.0167]                         [0.0131]
  Dum: Year=1998                                           -0.0031                          -0.0580***                        0.0437***
                                                           [0.0110]                           [0.0186]                         [0.0130]
  Dum: Year=1999                                            0.0013                          -0.0728***                        0.0643***
                                                           [0.0043]                           [0.0087]                         [0.0087]
  Dum: Year=2000                                          0.0204***                         -0.0544***                        0.0840***
                                                           [0.0032]                           [0.0091]                         [0.0062]
  Dum: Year=2001                                          0.0450***                         -0.0660***                        0.1391***
                                                           [0.0119]                           [0.0103]                         [0.0157]
  Dum: Year=2002                                          0.0335**                          -0.0894***                        0.1377***
                                                           [0.0154]                           [0.0116]                         [0.0193]
  Dum: Year=2003                                            0.0234                          -0.1068***                        0.1337***
                                                           [0.0183]                           [0.0166]                         [0.0209]
  Dum: Year=2004                                            0.0353                          -0.1028***                        0.1524***
                                                           [0.0230]                           [0.0276]                         [0.0242]
  Dum: Year=2005                                            0.0353                           -0.1032**                        0.1526***
                                                           [0.0260]                           [0.0372]                         [0.0250]
  Dum: Year=2006                                            0.0300                           -0.1072**                        0.1462***
                                                           [0.0269]                           [0.0415]                         [0.0235]
  Dum: Year=2007                                            0.0309                           -0.1154**                        0.1549***
                                                           [0.0292]                           [0.0437]                         [0.0254]
  Dum: Year=2008                                            0.0226                           -0.1298**                        0.1518***
                                                           [0.0318]                           [0.0494]                         [0.0264]
  Dum: Year=2009                                           -0.0112                          -0.2111***                        0.1581***
                                                           [0.0363]                           [0.0440]                         [0.0298]
  Dum: Year=2010                                           -0.0044                          -0.1891***                        0.1520***
                                                           [0.0352]                           [0.0460]                         [0.0297]
  Dum: Year=2011                                           -0.0021                          -0.1773***                        0.1463***
                                                           [0.0350]                           [0.0486]                         [0.0300]
Input industry by Purchasing
country-industry FE?                          Y                Y                Y                Y               Y                Y
Observations                              826,130          826,130          378,258          378,258          447,872          447,872
R2                                         0.9622           0.9623           0.9543           0.9543           0.9662           0.9662


Notes: The sample comprises all input industries (35), purchasing country-industry pairs (41×35), and years (17) in the WIOD. Standard
errors are multi-way clustered by input industry, purchasing country-industry, and year; ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels respectively. The dependent variable is the log share of purchases on inputs from industry r by industry s in country j. All
columns control for country by industry-pair fixed effects; columns (2), (4), and (6) further include year fixed effects, with the omitted
category being the year dummy for 1995. Columns (1)-(2) run the regression on all observations; columns (3)-(4) restrict to input shares
for purchases from goods industries; while columns (5)-(6) restrict to input shares for purchases from services industries.
                                                                     Table 8
                                      Evaluating the Role of Changes in Trade Costs and Expenditure Shares


                                                Mean            Mean           Correlation         Mean             Mean          Correlation      Real wage change
A: Country-level GVC measures                   F/GO            VA/GO         F/GO, VA/GO           U                D               U, D          (Min, Mean, Max)

1995 baseline (from data)                       0.507            0.503            0.825            1.976             1.987             0.868                 ---
2011 baseline (from data)                       0.484            0.487            0.925            2.085             2.070             0.912                 ---


1995 to 2011 Shifts
   Change trade costs                           0.518            0.502            0.612            1.940             1.984             0.666      (1.003, 1.104, 1.512)
   Change expenditure shares                    0.516            0.513            0.857            1.945             1.953             0.889      (0.993, 1.001, 1.017)
   Both changes                                 0.525            0.511            0.660            1.917             1.952             0.705      (1.002, 1.093, 1.434)

                                                   Regress F/GOj,ts on VA/GOj,ts                             Regress Uj,ts on Dj,ts
B: Country-industry GVC measures                      (Coefficient on VA/GOj,ts)                             (Coefficient on Dj,ts)


1995 baseline (from data)                     0.5434***         0.5184**          0.0851         0.5337***         0.4839**           0.2564***              ---
2011 baseline (from data)                     0.6543***        0.6373***        0.2647***        0.6286***         0.5785***          0.4156***              ---


1995 to 2011 Shifts
   Change trade costs                         0.5534***        0.5321***         0.1101*         0.5270***         0.4844**           0.2474***              ---
   Change expenditure shares                  0.5942***        0.5760***         0.1029*         0.5930***         0.5540***          0.2753***              ---
   Both changes                               0.6009***        0.5854***         0.1193**        0.5856***         0.5512***          0.2609***              ---


Country FE?                                       N                Y                Y                N                 Y                 Y                   ---
Industry FE?                                      N                N                Y                N                 N                 Y                   ---


Notes: Quantitative evaluations based on the multi-country, multi-industry general equilibrium model described in Section 5.2. Panel A reports moments and correlations
for the country-level GVC measures, as well as real wage changes. Panel B reports the partial correlation between the country-industry level GVC measures based on the
regression specifications in Table 3; standard errors are multi-way clustered by country and industry; ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels
respectively. For the "1995 baseline" and "2011 baseline" rows, the moments and correlations are calculated directly from the WIOT data. Under "Change trade costs", this
simulates the effect of the observed change between 1995 and 2011 in the Head-Reis trade cost indices computed at the country-sector level after aggregating the
industries up to broad sectoral aggregates (i.e., Goods vs Services). The trade costs indices are computed separately for intermediate-use and final-use shipments; for
each of these categories, changes in trade costs that fall below the 1st percentile (respectively, above the 99th percentile) are bottom-coded (respectively, top-coded).
Under "Change expenditure shares", this simulates the effect of the observed change between 1995 and 2011 in the final-use expenditure shares. The "Both changes" row
simulates the combined effect of both the above changes in trade costs and final-use expenditure shares.
                                                                                  Table 9
                                                                         Counterfactual Projections


                                                       Mean             Mean           Correlation          Mean              Mean          Correlation        Real wage change
Country-level measures                                 F/GO             VA/GO         F/GO, VA/GO            U                 D               U, D            (Min, Mean, Max)

2011 baseline (from data)                              0.484             0.487             0.925            2.085             2.070             0.912                    ---


1995 to 2011 Shifts
  Change trade costs                                   0.482             0.476             0.840            2.095             2.101             0.815         (1.070, 1.207, 1.485)
  Change trade costs (Goods only)                      0.483             0.480             0.836            2.089             2.091             0.811         (1.058, 1.151, 1.269)
  Change trade costs (Services only)                   0.486             0.485             0.914            2.081             2.073             0.908         (1.010, 1.048, 1.286)
  Change expenditure shares                            0.492             0.494             0.934            2.054             2.042             0.923         (0.997, 1.000, 1.006)
  Change trade costs (goods & services)
  and expenditure shares                               0.489             0.483             0.867            2.066             2.072             0.849         (1.064, 1.189, 1.456)


Notes: Quantitative evaluations based on the multi-country, multi-industry general equilibrium model described in Section 5.2. Moments and correlations for the country-level
GVC measures, as well as real wage changes, are reported. The "2011 baseline" row reports summary statistics calculated directly from the 2011 WIOT data. Under "Change
trade costs", this simulates the effects of a decrease commencing in 2011 for sixteen more years, in which trade costs for intermediate goods decline at a rate of 1.81% per
year, trade costs for intermediate service inputs decline at a rate of 1.50% per year, trade costs for final goods decline at a rate of 2.31% per year, and trade costs for final-use
services decline at a rate of 1.96% per year, these being the rates of change estimated from Tables 4 and 5. The subsequent two rows simulate the effects of this trade cost
decrease, but applying the decrease to Goods (respectively, Services) industries only. Under "Change expenditure shares", this simulates the effects of a decrease
commencing in 2011 for sixteen more years, in which the expenditure share for goods industries falls at a rate of 1.27% per year, and that for services industries rises at a rate
of 0.37% per year; the expenditure shares are re-scaled proportionally to ensure that they sum to 1 for each country. The "Both changes" row simulates the combined effect of
both the changes in trade costs and final-use expenditure shares.
                                           Table A.1
                      Summary Statistics: Country-Industry GVC Measures


                                      10th        Median         90th         Mean         Std Dev          N

F/GO
    All industries                    0.125         0.444        0.901         0.473        0.271         24,076
    Goods industries only             0.076         0.373        0.700         0.379        0.240         11,105
    Service industries only           0.216         0.496        0.956         0.553        0.270         12,971


VA/GO
    All industries                    0.279         0.456        0.738         0.489        0.186         24,395
    Goods industries only             0.247         0.360        0.499         0.371        0.118         11,152
    Service industries only           0.378         0.575        0.812         0.589        0.175         13,243


U
    All industries                    1.153         2.126        2.914         2.098        0.649         24,395
    Goods industries only             1.523         2.298        3.048         2.291        0.605         11,152
    Service industries only           1.055         1.982        2.771         1.936        0.640         13,243


D
    All industries                    1.502         2.141        2.624         2.092        0.450         24,395
    Goods industries only             2.033         2.381        2.728         2.376        0.316         11,152
    Service industries only           1.356         1.846        2.363         1.852        0.404         13,243


Notes: Based on the country-industry GVC measures calculated from the WIOD for 1995-2011; the sample
comprises all 41 countries, 35 industries, and 17 years. Goods industries are defined as primary and
manufacturing industries, namely industries 1-16 in the WIOD classification. The service industries are industries
17-35 in the WIOD classification.
