NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT CAN UWE DO FOR ECONOMICS?
Tatyana Avilova
Claudia Goldin
Working Paper 24189
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24189

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018

The authors thank the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for funding the Undergraduate Women in
Economics Challenge through grant no. G-2014-14504 and to Danny Goroff of the Sloan
Foundation for encouraging Goldin to undertake the task of leading the project. Thanks also go to
the members of the UWE advisory board (the “Board of Experts”) who helped the authors set up
The UWE Challenge. For more information see http://scholar.harvard.edu/goldin/UWE This
RCT was registered in the American Economic Association Registry for randomized control
trials under Trial Number AEARCTR-0000686. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Tatyana Avilova and Claudia Goldin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

What Can UWE Do for Economics?
Tatyana Avilova and Claudia Goldin
NBER Working Paper No. 24189
January 2018
JEL No. A0,A22,J16
ABSTRACT
Men outnumber women as undergraduate economics majors by three to one nationwide. Even at
the best research universities and liberal arts colleges men outnumber women by two to one or
more. The Undergraduate Women in Economics Challenge was begun in 2015 as an RCT with
20 treatment schools and at least 30 control schools to evaluate whether better course
information, mentoring, encouragement, career counseling, and more relevant instructional
content could move the needle. Although the RCT is still in the field, results from several within
treatment-school randomized trials demonstrate that uncomplicated and inexpensive interventions
can substantially increase the interest of women to major in economics.

Tatyana Avilova
Columbia University
tva2114@columbia.edu
Claudia Goldin
Department of Economics
229 Littauer
Harvard University
Cambridge MA 02138
and NBER
cgoldin@harvard.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/686

Women do not major in economics to the same degree as do men. In fact, the
fraction of majors in economics who are female is lower than in chemistry, mathematics
and statistics. In fields that are even more male-dominated than economics, such as
engineering, the fraction of majors who are female has increased in the past decade. But the
fraction in economics has not. It has not budged in the last 30 years. The Undergraduate
Women in Economics (UWE) project seeks to uncover why women do not major in
economics to the same degree as men and what can be done to change that.
We will first discuss the various facts that sparked our project including national
data on economics majors and administrative data from one undergraduate institution. The
design of our RCT, created in 2014/15 and sent into the field in 2015/16, will next be
discussed. We then consider the various initiatives that our treated group of schools put
into effect during their treatment year. Because our project treated a group of freshmen in
2015/16, the results from our study will not be fully known until 2020 when that group is
supposed to graduate. We discuss the results from field experiments done by two our
treatment institutions that had more immediate results.
We would like all undergraduates to have accurate information regarding the
usefulness of a major. Many college seniors, both male and female, realize too late in their
studies that statistics, econometrics, and economic modeling are helpful tools. Students
often think that economics is only for those who want to work in the financial and
corporate sectors and do not realize that economics is also for those with intellectual,
policy and career interests in a wide range of fields.
Most know that economics is a lucrative field. Yet both male and female freshmen
are insufficiently informed about the content of economics and its usefulness for their
future careers. Advice from parents, relatives, and friends often emphasizes the importance
of economics to finance and banking careers, and thereby disproportionately encourages
males to major in economics.1 An emphasis on its usefulness to careers in development and
health, for example, would do more to attract women as majors relative to men. One of our
conclusions is that better information can help all undergraduates realize the importance
of economics to their futures and would increase the fraction of women who enter the
workforce well-grounded in economics as an empirical and theoretical subject.
Although we do not have the final results from our RCT, we have formed a good
sense of the reasons for the differential interest in economics between male and female
undergraduates. We also have formulated a set of interventions.

Zafar (2013), for example, finds that male undergraduates are more interested, than are females,
in the pecuniary aspects of the future career their major will enable.
1

12/31/17 -1-

A. Economics Majors by Gender: 1984 to 2015
There are almost three male majors nationwide for every female economics major
today, expressed relative to their numbers as degree recipients (generally BA but also BS).
We term that statistic the “conversion rate.” The reason to deflate or scale by the number of
degree recipients is that women outnumber men as undergraduates (and have done so
ever since around 1980). The conversion rate is nearly 2.5 among the 100 top-ranked
universities (public and private non-profit), about 2.6 for the 100 top-ranked liberal arts
colleges, and 2.9, the highest, among public universities.2
As can be seen in Figure 1, which gives the conversion rate from 1984 to 2015, there
were relatively more female economics majors in the late 1980s than today across all types
of institutions. But by around 1990 the conversion rate reached levels about equal to what
they are today by type of institution, with some ups and downs along the way. That is, there
has been virtually no long-run change in the fraction female in economics, measured here
by the conversion rate, since around 1990. We should note that economics is a popular
major nationwide, although the related major of business is considerably more popular.
B. Evidence and Lessons from “Adams College”
When we began designing our project, we obtained administrative data from an
institution we call “Adams College.” When we obtained the data in 2013, the conversion
rate for Adams was 1.8 and the fraction female among economics majors was 0.35, not
much different from those at its peer institutions, such as Stanford, Princeton, and Harvard.
At Adams and many of its peer institutions, incoming freshmen are asked what they
believe their primary major will be. Twice as many males than females put economics as
their more probable primary major at Adams. We have discovered similar results hold for
its peer institutions. The die is cast, it would appear, even before students unpack their
bags: two males will major in economics for every female. The first lesson from the Adams
data is that useful treatments must occur soon after students arrive on campus. But there
are other moments in the undergraduate experience when interventions could make a
difference.
Adams women divide into three almost equal groups among those who either major
in economics or stated they would major in the subject upon their arrival at college: (1)
0.33 stated upon arrival that economics was their primary major and did major in it; (2)
Data are from the U.S. Department of Education, NCES, IPEDS. Schools are included only if they
grant a bachelor’s degree in economics and are coeducational. The top group of 100 is from US
News & World Report at the time the UWE project was begun.
2

12/31/17 -2-

0.31 stated economics was their primary major but did not major in it; and (3) 0.36
majored in economics but did not state it was their primary major upon arrival.
Principles of Economics is a very popular course at Adams, particularly among those
who had an initial interest in the field. Almost 80 percent of those who gave economics as
their probable future major take the course and another part of that group places out of
Principles through a five on the AP exam.
The women who take Principles but do not eventually major in the subject are
disproportionately among those who obtained a grade below an A- in the course. The
relationship holds even among those who gave economics as their intended major. Women
who take Principles have a much higher probability of majoring in the subject if they obtain
a high grade. That is not true for males, who major in economics almost independent of
their grade in Principles.
Males get higher grades in the Principles course than do females, as can be seen in
Figure 2.A. But conditional on the grade received, females have a far steeper gradient
regarding their likelihood of majoring in the subject, as can be seen in Figure 2.B. A female
who obtains a B+ in Principles has a 27 percent chance of majoring in economics but a male
who receives a B+ has a 41 percent chance. A female who gets an A in principles has a 42
percent likelihood of majoring in the subject and that is about the same as that for a male
(41 percent). Note that there is no difference in the probability males major in economics if
he gets a B+ or an A, but the fraction is reduced for females by almost 20 percentage points.
The line indicating the likelihood of a male majoring in economics is almost flat with
respect to their principles grade whereas it is steeply sloped for women.3
What accounts for these differences? It is possible that female students work hard in
subjects at which they excel (or told they excel), whereas male students take subjects they
know will eventually benefit them. Female students may seek more “comfort” in their
selection of a major, whereas males stick with their goal. It is also possible that this
behavior is the result of “stereotype” threat. Once women do poorly in a subject at which
they are often told they will perform poorly at, they shy away from it. One way to test this is
to see if the same behavior occurs in courses in which women are thought to do well in,

Note that the difference in the gradient regarding the grade in Principles for males versus females
exists within groups. For example, it exists for certain groups like Asian-Americans and
international students who have relatively high rates of majoring in economics and it also exists for
those who intended to major in economics and for those who did not intend to do so. See Rask and
Tiefenthaler (2008) for almost identical results from another institution.
3

12/31/17 -3-

such as literature. Various pieces of evidence suggest that women gravitate to fields in
which they do well, independent of the notion of stereotype threat.4
The important point here is that interventions that praise students who get a B+ or a
B in Principles should have a greater impact on female than male students. The second
lesson from the Adams data is that helping female students not get discouraged in the
gateway course in economics could encourage them to major in the field.
As in most other institutions, the courses that follow Principles for the major at
Adams are the intermediate theory courses and econometrics. There is no differential fall
off by sex after students take these courses. The prime moments where female students
relative to male students decide to major in economics are at the very start of their
undergraduate life and just after taking Principles.
The majors that attract the students who leave the Economics major at Adams are a
mixed bag of government, psychology, and general social sciences.
Another interesting determinant of whether women major in economics is a feature
that cannot be altered: ethnicity and birthplace. At Adams and its peer institutions,
international students, defined as those whose home country is outside the US,
disproportionately major in economics and within the group females have a greater share
than they do in the total. The same is true for Asian Americans. These are interesting facts
that explain some portion of why certain institutions (e.g., Berkeley, UCLA) have a higher
fraction female than do comparable institutions with fewer Asian students. But there are
apparently no implications for increasing the share of women among undergraduate
economics majors.
What about math-ability? The raw difference between males and females in
declaring economics as one of the three top choices upon acceptance at Adams is 0.187.
Including the pre-admission scores on the SAT math and the Adams math placement test
reduces the difference by just 1 percentage point to 0.177. Math-ability does not have much
to do with the initial decision to major in economics and with the choice of an eventual
major.
What about taking economics prior to admission? Males disproportionately take AP
economics, but that does not explain the large differences in major choice. Among male
For example, Butcher, McEwan, and Weerapana (2016) analyze an anti-grade inflation policy at
Wellesley. They find that the policy led to a relative increase in economics majors because
economics was among the subjects that graded the harshest. The anti-grade inflation policy led
other subjects, that had previously been “comfort” or easy graders, to grade more harshly.
4

12/31/17 -4-

undergraduates, 15.8 percent got a five on the macro AP and 11.4 percent of females did;
12 percent of males but 9.2 percent of females got a five on the micro AP. Differences
regarding the major are much larger. Including whether a student got a five on the
economics AP decreases the difference between males and females in the declaration of
economics as the intended major by less than 1 percentage point. Similar results hold for
the eventual major.
C. Origins of UWE
The observations from the IPEDS data sparked Goldin, when she was president of
the AEA, to think about how to get more women to major in economics.5 Economics as a
field had become complacent. The major was popular among male students and males had
once greatly outnumbered females as undergraduates. But that was no longer the case and
economics was losing out. The discipline had become concerned that there were too few
female economics students at the graduate level and finally realized that only by increasing
the undergraduate pipeline could those numbers increase.
In addition to wanting more majors to increase graduate enrollment, some
economists also realized that female undergraduates, as students and as members of
society, were losing out by overlooking economics. The oversight, moreover, was often for
the wrong reasons.
Goldin submitted a proposal to the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation to support an RCT
(randomized controlled trial) now called Undergraduate Women in Economics (UWE), or
The Challenge. The project was funded by Sloan in Summer 2014 and Tatyana Avilova was
hired as the project manager. An advisory group (now called the Board of Experts) met in
November 2014 to discuss strategy.6
In January 2015 e-mails were sent to all departmental chairs and/or undergraduate
heads of colleges and universities (separate campuses) that granted an economics BA to at
least 15 graduates per year, as given in the IPEDS data. There were only 344 of these
institutions in the US. Each e-mail recipient was asked whether the person agreed, in
principle, to implement a set of treatments or interventions to increase the number of
female majors. They were told that their institution would receive $12,500 (in increments
after meeting stated goals) for their efforts and that the funds could be used in any way that
would further the stated objective.

5
6

See Bayer and Rouse (2016) on the beneficial impact of greater diversity on the field of economics.
Information on the Board of Experts is at: http://scholar.harvard.edu/goldin/board-experts

12/31/17 -5-

We received enthusiastic replies from 167 schools, almost half of the 344
institutions we initially contacted, demonstrating a strong latent demand for action.7 Due to
the large number of positive responses, we increased the cutoff number of BAs in
economics from 15 to 30 per year. We wanted to ensure that the economics program at
each institution was large enough to pick up changes in majors induced by the
interventions rather than from fluctuations due to small cohort size. We also imposed other
requirements to increase the power of the experiment.8
We narrowed the group to 88 schools, which we have termed the “treatable”
sample. We then stratified the 88 treatable schools into four selectivity groups and
randomly picked five schools from each group of 22.9 All 20 randomly picked “treatment”
schools agreed to take part in the trial; 36 of the non-treatment schools agreed to be
“controls.”10 Both treatments and controls agreed to submit data through our on-line tool.
D. Treatment and Control Institutions
The idea behind the RCT is that the UWE program would incentive schools to
initiate treatments that would disproportionately increase the number of female majors,
possibly without decreasing the number of male economics majors. The idea was to treat
the group of incoming freshmen who would likely graduate four years later. But some

We later determined that some interested faculty never received the e-mail since it was sent to the
person we believed was the chair of the department or of the undergraduate program.
8 The cutoff of 30 majors, left 118 schools in sample. Next, we eliminated all schools that were not in
the “top 100 universities” or the “top 100 colleges” category according to US News & World Report
(USN&WR). We also eliminated some PhD granting institutions that produced fewer than three
PhDs in the 2008-2012 period. This left us with a “treatable” sample of 88 schools.
9 We combined the USN&WR rankings for top universities and top colleges, and ranked all 88
institutions from highest to lowest. Schools with the same ranking (e.g., #1 university and #1
college) were ordered based on the average SAT score. The ranked list was then divided into four
groups of 22, with a number 1 through 22 based on their relative USN&WR rank. Ten (10) random
numbers were drawn from one to twenty-two using an online random number generator. Schools
with the first five numbers were assigned to the treatment group and schools with the second five
numbers were assigned to a waitlist. The rest of the schools were automatically assigned to the
control group. We did not need to contact any schools on the wait list.
10 The control group can consist of the 68 schools from the treatable sample that were not
randomly selected into the treatment group. Because all these schools were originally invited to
participate in the UWE Challenge, they are aware of the initiative. They cannot be prevented from
implementing interventions of their own design, but they were not provided with the same
guidance and resources as were the treatment institutions. For all institutions in the control and
treatment groups, the numbers of male and female economics majors will be available through the
IPEDS database.
7

12/31/17 -6-

students do not graduate in four years and some sophomores might be treated along with
the freshmen.
The treatment institutions are encouraged, although not obligated, to continue the
interventions going forward, but funding is officially provided in the designated treatment
year only. In addition to proposing and implementing interventions to target
undergraduate students, treatment schools are instructed to report data, beyond what can
be obtained through the IPEDS database. The additional data include contemporaneous
enrollments by sex in the economics principles and intermediate courses, the number of
transfer students in the courses, and the numbers of double majors. We also asked for the
number of graduates who majored in economics, which is available through the IPEDS.11
We have, in addition, asked schools to report outcomes based on the treatment
group since some sophomores and upperclassmen might have been treated along with the
freshmen. We understand that this may not be possible in all cases. We will, as well, follow
cohorts as they go through the program to see if relative enrollments of males and females
in the higher-level classes change.
Our 20 treatment schools are a highly-varied group. Some are large state
universities, a few are flagship institutions; some are small liberal arts colleges and several
are Ivy League institutions. Some have business schools with undergraduate majors
(business programs appear to syphon off females from economics more than they do
males). Several allow double or even triple majors. In terms of the variables of interest,
they range widely in terms of the fraction female among their recent group of BA
economics majors and in terms of the fraction of their undergraduates who major in
economics. Figure 3 gives a map showing the geographic range of the 20 schools.
We provide the fraction female among economics majors in Figure 4 (adjusted for
the numbers of male and female graduates) for all 88 “treatable” schools and for the 20
randomly selected treatment schools.12 Not surprisingly the group of 20 nests inside the
larger group of 88 from which they were randomly drawn (from four selectivity segments).
The range for our treatment sample is considerable. At the high end are Berkeley (0.39)
and Brown (0.38). At the lower end are Illinois State (0.14) and the University of
Connecticut (0.16).13

The IPEDS also asks race and ethnicity of majors.
We graph this version of our “conversion” rate because it has less extreme values.
13 The one school in the group of 88 that is at parity is MIT, in large part because economics is even
less technical than many of the other popular majors there. Other engineering schools (not in the
group of 88) have similarly high values for the fraction female.
11
12

12/31/17 -7-

E. Range of Treatments
In May 2015, we met in Cambridge, MA with the treatment schools in two groups of
ten to discuss the issues faced by each and the treatments and interventions each thought
would be useful to employ. We had acknowledged early on that each potential treatment
would not fit all schools and that a limited set of treatments would not adequately address
the problem. Instead, we assembled a list of potential treatments in three (somewhat
overlapping) areas and required our treatment schools to use several of them:
1. Better Information: These interventions are to provide more accurate information
about the application of economics and career paths open to economics majors.
Interventions include informational sessions at the start of the academic year,
having diverse speakers at events, and ensuring the presence of at least one female
adviser.
2. Mentoring and Role Models: The intent is to create networks among students and to
show support for their decision to major in the field. Potential interventions include
mentoring freshmen and sophomores by upper-class students, providing more
guidance to students in finding summer jobs and RA-ships in economics, organizing
faculty-student lunches, and producing videos about the department and its
students. If possible, the use of female upper-class students and faculty members
was encouraged but since they could not be increased, the added burdens on
existing female instructional staff could be counterproductive.14
3. Instructional Content and Presentation Style: This category is meant to improve
beginning economics courses and make them more relevant to a wider range of
students. Examples include using more evidence-based material in gateway courses,
and incorporating projects, such as those in the local community, into beginning and
upper-level courses to allow students to apply their knowledge to current issues.
Treatment schools submitted plans of action by the start of the Fall 2015 semester
and provided progress reports in January 2016. All but one school began their treatment
year in AY 2015/16.15 Their proposals and progress reports discuss a wide range of
implemented interventions, which we have listed in Table 1. The UWE program sponsored
several conferences that brought together students and faculty from many of the treatment
schools. The first was held at the University of Virginia in April 2016 and the second was

See Carrell, Page, and West (2010) for convincing evidence that female instructors in STEM fields
increase grades of females and their likelihood of majoring in STEM more than male instructors do.
15 Because of staffing problems, University of Central Florida began their treatment year in
2016/17.
14

12/31/17 -8-

held a year later at Colorado State University in April 2017. A northeast undergraduate
conference was held at Williams College, also in April 2017.
We required that treatment and control schools submit data on various measures of
enrollment and graduation going back several years. The enrollment data requested
includes: the number of students enrolled in the Principles sequence, and the number of
students enrolled in the Intermediate Theory sequence, all by course and gender. The
graduation data includes: the number of students by gender graduating with a major in
Economics (or a double major in Economics); the number of students graduating with a
minor or secondary in Economics; the number of students graduating with a major in
Economics who are transfer students to the institutions after their sophomore year.
Several participants, such as the University of California schools, have many transfer
students who enter after completing two years of community college. Most of the
prerequisite coursework for the major, for these students, is completed prior to their
transfer. By the time that they enroll in one of our schools, they would already be on track
to a specific major and would not be affected by interventions aimed at students in the
initial gateway stage of the major. Seeing what portion of total majors are accounted for by
these transfer students may reveal the effect of interventions.
F. Preliminary Results
We will not be able fully to evaluate the UWE Challenge interventions for several
years. In some institutions, students do not declare a major until they are ready to graduate
and for all institutions, students can change majors along the way. Therefore, we must wait
until the first treatment year graduates to assess if more women majored in economics in
the treatment schools than in the controls or than before the treatment.
There are a few reasons why the UWE intervention might have had an impact even
if we cannot measure it. There is considerable variation in majors from year to year. Our
power calculation indicates that we should be able to detect a change in the fraction of
female BAs who are economics majors of 0.0072 between our control and treatment
groups. But because the mean (unweighted by treatment school) is about 0.04, that is a
fairly large change.
There is also leakage in various ways. Some the “treated” students were
sophomores and upperclassmen at the time of treatment and will graduate before the
treatment class does. In addition, we might not be able to account for some of the transfer
students, none of whom would have been treated. Finally, some of the control schools after

12/31/17 -9-

learning about the UWE Challenge instituted interventions of their own to increase the
number of female majors.
We are fortunate that several of our treatment schools executed their own RCTs for
which they obtained IRB approval at their institution. These provide results in advance of
our own and are cleaner due to an absence of the complications mentioned. The two
schools for which we have results—Colorado State University and SMU—were among
those with the lowest fraction female majoring in economics among recent graduating
classes.16
Colorado State University, under the direction of Prof. Hsueh-Hsiang (Cher) Li, ran
an RCT in Spring 2016. Three treatments were included in the principles course that
mirrored those UWE suggested more generally: (1) Students in the treatment arm were
shown a video during section about careers in economics and given information on the
earnings of economists; (2) Female students in the treatment arm received information on
the grade distribution at mid-term and those at and above the median were sent letters
praising their work and encouraging them to major in the field; and (3) Female students in
the treatment arm, regardless of their grades, were encouraged to partake in peer
mentoring activities.
Students were asked at the start and end of the semester whether they planned to
major in economics. The aggregate impact of all three treatments was substantial
(increasing majors by more than 50 percent from baseline levels of 0.13, conditional on
taking the Principles course), particularly given the small cost. Although each intervention
had some impact, treatment (2), which encouraged female students to major in the field
who had a grade above the median, had by far the greatest effect.
At Southern Methodist University, Catherine Porter and Danila Serra (2017) ran a
field experiment in which they randomized which Principles sections would engage in a
role model intervention. At the end of the semester the course is routinely surveyed about
probable major. Administrative data provides information on whether students later
registered for the intermediate course. The same course, with the same instructors, was
offered the year preceding the experiment, giving the authors the ability to do an instructor
fixed-effects model as well.
The intervention was a 15-minute statement by one of two female graduates of SMU
economics on the importance of economics to their careers. The interventions increased
UC Santa Barbara also did an RCT, but their results will not be available for another half year.
Their field experiment was to send congratulatory and encouraging messages to students in the
Principles course (Ec1) who did reasonably well.
16

12/31/17-10-

the fraction of women taking the intermediate course within a year by 8 percentage points
on a base of about 13 percent (using the raw data) and increased the fraction giving
economics as a probable major by about the same. These are extremely large effects. There
was no impact on the males in the class. As in other studies (e.g., Carrell, Page and West,
2010), much of the effect came from female students with high GPAs. Furthermore, the
women who shifted fields disproportionately came from the humanities and languages
rather than from other STEM fields. The authors find, consistent with the results from
Adams College, that grades in the Principles course have no influence on the decision to
continue with the subject for males but are strongly related to continuation for females.
G. What UWE Has Done for Economics
We do not yet know whether the interventions adopted by the UWE treatment
schools will have an impact on the number of female undergraduates who major in
economics. The within-school RCTs did have effects and these effects were very large. In
one case the outcome was whether the students said they would major in economics, not
whether they did. But in the other it was whether the students enrolled in the intermediate
course and that generally indicates that the student will major in economics. It appears that
small interventions could have large effects.
The interventions that most of our treatment schools have used were relatively
inexpensive. But they required the time and initiative of hard-working undergraduate
instructional staff and faculty. Unless the chair of the department or, better yet, the dean of
the school or the provost at the university provides incentives, there is little motivation to
add to the duties of teaching personnel. The Undergraduate Women in Economics program,
together with the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, provided incentives by giving recognition to
the initiatives and collective support and encouragement. In some instances, the initiatives
were recognized by the “higher ups” in the university.
Some of our control schools, we have been told, were motivated by the UWE
Challenge to try their own interventions to increase the number of female majors. If enough
of the schools did that, we could see a trend break in the IPEDS data. We will know more in
the next few years about the impact of the UWE Challenge and the project more generally.

12/31/17-11-

References
Bayer, Amanda and Cecilia E. Rouse (2016). “Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New
Attack on an Old Problem.,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (4): 221–42.
Butcher, Kristin F., Patrick J. McEwan, and Akila Weerapana. (2014). “The Effects of an AntiGrade-Inflation Policy at Wellesley College,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (3):
189-204.
Carrell, Scott E., Marianne E. Page, and James E. West (2010). “Sex and Science: How
Professor Gender Perpetuates the Gender Gap,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (3):
1101–44.
Li, Hsueh-Hsiang (Cheri). 2017. “Does Better Information Reduce the Gender Gap in
Economics Majors?” Colorado State University Working Paper.
Porter, Catherine, and Danila Serra. 2017. “Gender Differences in the Choice of Major: The
Importance of Female Role Models.” Southern Methodist University. Working Paper.
Dec. 5, 2017. To be presented at the ASSA Meetings, Philadelphia PA.
Rask, Kevin, and Jill Tiefenthaler. 2008. “The Role of Grade Sensitivity in Explaining the
Gender Imbalance in Undergraduate Economics,” Economics of Education Review,
27(6): 676-87.
Zafar, Basit. 2013. “College Major Choice and the Gender Gap,” Journal of Human Resources,
48(3): 545-95.

12/31/17-12-

Figure 1: Economics Conversion Rate for US Public and Private Non-Profit Institutions of
Higher Education, 1984 to 2015

3.5

3

2.5

Public
2

All

Top 100
Universities

Top 100
LA Colleges

1.5

1
1980

1985
All

1990

1995

Top 100 Universities

2000

2005

Top 100 LA Colleges

2010

2015

Public Universities

Source: U.S. Department of Education, NCES, IPEDS
Notes: Schools are included only if they granted an undergraduate degree in economics.
The economics “conversion rate” = [(Male Economics BAs/All Male BAs)/(Female
Economics BAs/All Female BAs)], where BA is meant to include all undergraduate
bachelor’s degrees.

12/31/17-13-

Figure 2: Grade Distribution by Sex in Principles and the Fraction Majoring in Economics by
Grade for 2005 to 2013 Graduating Classes at “Adams” College
A. Distribution of Grades in Principles-Spring (or Fall if placed out)
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
A

A-

B+
Male

B

B-

< B-

Female

B. Fraction Majoring in Economics by Grade in Principles-Spring (or Fall if placed out)
0.45
0.40
0.35

Males

0.30
0.25
0.20

Females

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
A
Males

A-

B+
Females

B
Poly. (Males)

B-

< BPoly. (Females)

Source: Adams College administrative data.
Notes: Grade is for Principles-Spring or -Fall if student placed out of Principles-Spring. Results
do not change if Principles-Fall is used. Trend-lines are second degree polynomials.

12/31/17-14-

Figure 3: The Twenty UWE Treatment Schools

Treatment schools (in alphabetical order):
Brown University; Colorado State University, Fort Collins; Connecticut College; Illinois State
University; Princeton University; Southern Methodist University; St. Olaf College; UC Santa
Barbara; UC Berkeley; University of Central Florida; UC Boulder; University of Connecticut;
University of Hawaii, Manoa; University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign; University of
Richmond; University of Virginia; University of Wisconsin, Madison; Washington and Lee
University; Williams College; Yale University.

12/31/17-15-

Figure 4: Fraction Female (Adjusted) among the 88 “Treatable” and the 20 Treatment
(Orange) Institutions (2011-2013)

Fraction Female among Economics Majors (adjusted by number of graduates)
0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
1

88

Source: IPEDS. Data averaged across 2011 to 2013 are given. The UWE RCT was set up
using these data.
Notes: Fraction female (adjusted) = [(Female Ec Majors/Female BAs)/(Female Ec
Majors/Female BAs) + (Male Ec Majors/Male BAs)]

12/31/17-16-

Table 1: Major Interventions Implemented by Treatment Institutions

Intervention Description
Providing more complete information about upper-level courses
Sending letters of encouragement to students in Principles
Use of the AEA video and/or producing own video about economics
Panels with faculty, alumni, and others about economics careers
Informational fliers about economics for freshman at start of year
Focus groups with students to learn what could be improved
UWE (Undergraduate Women in Economics) student clubs
Use of upper-class majors and graduate students as mentors
Faculty workshops with undergraduates
Informal lunches for faculty and students

Number of
Institutions
12
11
10
7
7
7
6
6
6
6

Other: Social media outreach (4); extra sections in Principles (3); changes to Principles
content (2); changing major requirements (2); better matched advising with incoming
freshmen (2); more RA opportunities (2).

12/31/17-17-

