                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DISTRUST AND POLITICAL TURNOVER

                                         Nathan Nunn
                                         Nancy Qian
                                          Jaya Wen

                                      Working Paper 24187
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24187


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2018




We thank Mitra Akhtari, Monica Martinez-Bravo, Suresh Naidu, Peter Lorentzen, Ameet
Morjoria and Torsten Persson for their insights; and the participants at the EIEF workshop, Asian
Econometrics Society and PECA conference for useful comments. Comments and suggestions
are very welcome. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Nathan Nunn, Nancy Qian, and Jaya Wen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Distrust and Political Turnover
Nathan Nunn, Nancy Qian, and Jaya Wen
NBER Working Paper No. 24187
January 2018
JEL No. D72,P16,P51

                                           ABSTRACT

We present findings that document one way in which a society's culture can affect political
outcomes. Examining an annual panel of democratic countries over six decades, we show that
severe economic downturns are more likely to cause political turnover in countries that have
lower levels of generalized trust. The relationship is only found among democracies and for
regular leader turnover, which suggests that the underlying mechanism works through leader
accountability and the electoral process. Moreover, we find that the effects of trust on turnover
are greatest during years with regularly-scheduled elections, and within democracies with a
parliamentary system, a fully free media, and greater stability. The estimates suggest that
generalized trust affects political institutions by influencing the extent to which citizens attribute
economic downturns to the mistakes of politicians.

Nathan Nunn                                       Jaya Wen
Department of Economics                           Yale University
Harvard University                                28 Hillhouse Ave.
1805 Cambridge St                                 New Haven, CT 06520
Cambridge, MA 02138                               jaya.wen@gmail.com
and NBER
nnunn@fas.harvard.edu

Nancy Qian
MEDS
Kellogg SOM
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Rd.
Evanston, Il 60208
and NBER
nancy.qian@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1        Introduction

Research is increasingly showing that cultural values and beliefs are important factors for
institutional structure, and consequently, for economic development (Algan and Cahuc, 2010;
World Bank, 2015; Collier, 2017). However, our understanding of the interplay between
cultural factors and institutional or political structures remains limited. Similarly, while we
have accumulated some evidence about the effects that different institutional settings have
on the evolution of cultural traits (e.g., Tabellini, 2010; Cassar, d’Adda, and Grosjean, 2014;
Lowes, Nunn, Robinson, and Weigel, 2017; Becker, Boeckh, Hainz, and Woessmann, 2015),
evidence on the effect of cultural traits on political or institutional outcomes remains limited
(Martinez-Bravo, Padro-i-Miquel, Qian, Xu, and Yao, 2017; Martinez-Bravo, Padro-i-Miquel,
Qian, and Yao, 2017).1
        This paper attempts to make progress on this important question by examining one par-
ticular cultural trait that has been central in the cultural economics literature: generalized
trust, defined as the extent to which people believe that others can be trusted. We study
the consequences of this for political turnover. Specifically, we posit that generalized trust
affects how citizens evaluate their government’s performance in the face of severe economic
downturns. In societies where trust is low, citizens may be less likely to trust the excuses of
leaders and more likely to blame poor economic performance on poor decisions or low effort
from politicians. In contrast, in societies where trust is high, citizens may be more likely to
trust leaders when they argue that poor economic performance is outside of their control.
This view of the world predicts that all else equal, economic recessions may be less likely to
result in leader turnover in countries with higher levels of generalized trust than in countries
with lower levels of generalized trust.
        Our hypothesis is based on real-world observations. There are many historical periods
during which leaders of higher trust countries seem to receive greater citizen support than
leaders of lower trust countries, even while the countries experience similar economic growth.
For example, from 2001–2014, Italy and Sweden both experienced similar average growth rates
of approximately 0.01%. However, political turnover during this period in Italy, a country
with low levels of trust, was 43 percentage points, while in Sweden, which has high levels of
trust, was fourteen percentage points. If we compare the three European countries in our
sample with the lowest levels of trust (France, Italy, and the United Kingdom) to the three
with the highest levels of trust (Netherlands, Sweden, and Norway), we find that the average
rate of political turnover in the former group was 11.9 percentage points higher than in the
    1
        We discuss these two papers later in the introduction.



                                                          1
latter from 2001–2014.2 We find similar patterns during other economic downturns and in
other regions of the world. The tone of public rhetoric during economic crises also appears to
vary across countries in a manner that is correlated with levels of trust. In low trust contexts,
public figures and citizens tend to place blame on political leaders more frequently than occurs
in high trust countries. In contrast, in high trust countries, rhetoric more often focuses on
cooperation with the government to achieve recovery.3
       Although these cases are instructive, they are not conclusive for several reasons. First,
they may not be representative and thus may not capture the average relationship between
trust and political turnover during recessions. Second, there may exist omitted factors that
confound our interpretation of these relationships; countries with different levels of trust may
also differ in other ways that could affect electoral turnover during recessions. For example,
high trust countries may be richer on average, so policies that voters care about, such as public
goods provision, may be less vulnerable to transitory economic downturns. At the same time,
recessions may coincide with other events, such as military conflict, that can affect political
turnover differentially across high and low trust countries.
       The empirical analysis of this paper addresses these difficulties and tests the hypothesis
that trust affects the relationship between economic downturns and political turnover. To this
end, we merge several publicly available data sets to construct an annual panel of countries
from 1950-2014. Our dependent variable of interest is whether the head of the government is
replaced in a given year and country. We interpret economic downturns as periods of negative
aggregate GDP growth, which is particularly salient and likely to have similar meaning across
countries and times – i.e., at all levels of economic development, negative growth is likely to
be viewed as poor economic performance. In addition, citizens seem to be particularly upset
by negative growth, a form of “macroeconomic loss aversion” that has been documented by
Neve, Ward, Keulenaer, Landeghem, Kavetsos, and Norton (2015).
       Given the nature of trust as a slow-moving cultural trait, we measure it as a time-invariant
country-specific variable generated by averaging over all available surveys that ask the stan-
dard trust question. Our independent variable of interest is the interaction between the
presence of an economic recession in a given year and country and the long-run average level
of trust in that country. A negative coefficient for the interaction term suggests that reces-
sions lead to less political turnover in countries with high levels of trust. A positive coefficient
   2
     This difference is not due to shorter-term lengths in higher trust countries. For our time period, France
elects presidents for five-year terms. Norway holds general elections every four years. Sweden holds general
elections every four years, except from 1970-1994, when general elections were held every three years. The
United Kingdom, Italy, and the Netherlands allow a maximum of five years between general elections.
   3
     We document examples in Section 2.



                                                      2
implies that recessions lead to more political turnover in high trust countries.
       In our baseline specifications, we restrict the analysis to countries with a democratic
system during the previous year because our proposed mechanism of voter behavior should
be the most relevant in a democratic setting.4 In all estimating equations, we include country
fixed effects, which account for time-invariant differences across countries, as well as year fixed
effects, which account for changes over time that influence all countries equally. The main
caveat for causal identification is that trust is correlated with other factors which would cause
political turnover to differ across countries when there is a recession. Similarly, the occurrence
of a recession may be correlated with other changes which would cause political turnover to
differ across countries with different levels of trust. To address the concern of additional
omitted factors, our baseline specification controls for a set of covariates that vary at the
country and year level and are potentially correlated with either a country’s level of trust, the
occurrence of a recession, or political turnover. This set of covariates includes characteristics
of the political leader, the level of democracy, per capita income and the presence of armed
conflict. To avoid endogeneity, we use lagged measures of these variables. We allow these
factors to have differential effects on political turnover depending on a country’s level of trust
by controlling for the interaction of each covariate with country-specific trust. Similarly, we
allow these factors to differentially affect political turnover depending on the occurrence of a
recession by interacting each covariate with the economic recession indicator. We argue that
given this extensive set of covariates, it is unlikely that our baseline estimates are confounded
by omitted factors correlated with either trust or the presence of recession.
       Our estimates show that when economic growth is negative, high trust countries are much
less likely to experience leader turnover than low trust countries. For example, the presence
of a recession is twelve percentage points more likely to cause political turnover in Italy than
in Sweden. Similarly, it is 18.5 percentage points more likely to cause turnover in France than
in Norway. These effects are large, especially when compared to the mean turnover rate in
the sample, which is 24.5 percentage points.
       These results are consistent with our hypothesis that in the face of a recession, individuals
from low-trust countries are more likely to blame their politicians and remove them from
office. Since the electoral process plays an important role in this interpretation, we further
examine the plausibility of our preferred mechanism by testing for the same effect among
non-democracies in our sample. Consistent with our interpretation, we find no effect among
   4
    In autocracies, dissatisfied citizens can invoke leader turnover with a revolution. But we believe that
the elasticity of a revolution with respect to economic downturns is much more inelastic than for elections in
democracies.



                                                      3
this group. In a complementary strategy, we also examine all countries (democracies and non-
democracies) and use a multinomial logit model to estimate the effect of trust on regular and
irregular turnovers. Regular turnovers are those that occur through a process that does not
violate established conventions, like an election, impeachment, vote of no confidence, etc, while
irregular turnovers are ones that violate established conventions, like a coup or military take-
over. We find that the interaction of a recession and trust has an effect on regular turnovers,
but not irregular turnovers. This pattern is consistent with the claim that the mechanism
generating the main results operates through regular leader turnovers, and makes sense if one
believes that the relationship between irregular turnovers and economic downturns is relatively
inelastic. As final confirmation of the importance of the regular electoral process for our main
result, we test whether the effects are different in election years. While we find effects in all
years, the magnitude of the effect is much larger and more significant in election years. We also
find that our effects are larger for parliamentary democracies than presidential ones, which is
likely due to the fact the parliamentary democracies have institutional procedures (i.e., the
vote of no confidence) for removing the prime minister during the term. Moreover, the largest
effects for democracies that have a fully free media and are more stable. Together, these
results show that trust influences political turnover by affecting the outcomes of elections.
   We conduct a number of tests to check the robustness and sensitivity of our estimates.
The results are robust to accounting for additional potentially important covariates, such
as regional economic conditions, and to use alternative measures of recessions or alternative
definitions of democracies and autocracies. We also address the concern of spurious trends
and reverse causality by conducting a placebo exercise which shows that the interaction of
trust and the occurrence of a recession has no effect on political turnover in the previous year.
   We also undertake a number of sensitivity checks regarding our trust measure. A potential
concern is that trust is measured as an average during the period of study and thus it is
potentially endogenous to the occurrence of recessions (because recession may have coincided
with the years that some of the surveys were taken). To address this concern, we use trust
measured in the base year instead of an average over all years. We also use Algan and Cahuc’s
(2010) measure of inherited trust, which uses trust measures of descendants of emigrants to
measure the persistent component of trust that is not affected by country conditions. Another
concern is that survey-based measures may be imprecisely measured. Thus, we also use
measures of trust from trust experiments. Our results are robust when using these alternative
measures of trust.
   The final question that we explore is whether our findings of differential leader turnover
following recessions has any economic implications. Examining our sample of democracies,

                                               4
we find that countries with higher levels of trust experience faster economic growth in the
years immediately following a recession. In addition, countries that do not experience leader
turnover following a recession also have faster economic growth during this time. These
estimates, although not causal, are consistent with higher trust resulting in less leader turnover
following a recession, which in turn results in better economic recovery.
       The finding that less trusting countries are more likely to replace incumbent leaders dur-
ing economic recessions has potentially important consequences given the existing evidence
on the importance of leader identity for growth (Jones and Olken, 2005) and the negative
effects of political instability.5 Our findings contribute to a number of literatures. First, by
providing an example of the political consequences of cultural traits, we provide evidence
for how culture can affect institutions. Most of the pre-existing evidence on this topic has
been historical and descriptive. For example, Fischer (1989) documents how groups of United
States settlers possessed different cultural values, which led them to form different political
institutions. Zerbe and Anderson (2001) make an analogous argument, but for the groups that
first arrived in California during the 19th century Gold Rush. Todd (1983) documents a link
between family structure and the nature of emergent political systems, arguing that the extent
of egalitarianism and authoritarianism within the family is reflected in political systems. Greif
(1994) documents the cultural underpinnings of differential institutional evolution among the
Genoese and Maghreb during the medieval period. In contrast to the existing evidence, our
findings are more quantitative and include a large cross-section of countries. Our findings
relate to recent studies that provide empirical evidence of the institutional consequences of
cultural traits like individualism (Gorodnichenko and Roland, 2017), consanguineous mar-
riage (Schulz, 2016; Akbari, Bahrami-Rad, and Kimbrough, 2017), or the tightness of kinship
structures (Enke, 2017). In contrast to these studies, which all examine the long-run con-
sequences of different cultural traits, the effects that we estimate are realized over a shorter
time horizon and so the consequences are felt immediately.
       Our findings also add to recent studies on the economic consequences of different levels
of trust. In hypothesizing that trust can attenuate problems of asymmetric information, our
study is most closely related to Bloom and Reenen (2007), who show that corporate structures
   5
     Akhtari, Moreira, and Trucco (2017) document the adverse effects of political turnover on educational
outcomes in mayoral elections in Brazil. Rauch (1995) examines the history of municipal bureaucracies in the
United States and shows that bureaucrats, who faced less turnover than political appointees, invested more in
highly beneficial, longer-term projects with lengthy gestation periods. Uppal (2011) examines turnover at the
state level within India and finds that extremely frequent turnover is associated with government expenditures
that are skewed towards consumption and away from productive investments. Political instability has also
been shown, at the cross-country level, to be associated with less private investment (Svensson, 1998), higher
inflation (Aisen and Veiga, 2006), and lower economic growth (Devereaux and Wen, 1998; Aisen and Veiga,
2013).


                                                      5
are more decentralized in countries with high trust. This work is also closely related to
studies of how trust can influence economic outcomes such as income levels (Algan and Cahuc,
2010; Butler, Giuliano, and Guiso, 2009), government regulation (Aghion, Algan, Cahuc, and
Shleifer, 2010), financial behavior (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2004), international trade
and FDI (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2009), and labor market outcomes (Algan and Cahuc,
2009). We contribute to this literature by examining the heterogeneous effects of trust and
political turnover as an outcome and by demonstrating a new channel through which trust
can interact with economic forces.
       In studying the interplay between culture and institutions, our study complements two
recent studies using Chinese data. Martinez-Bravo, Padro-i-Miquel, Qian, Xu, and Yao (2017)
and Martinez-Bravo, Padro-i-Miquel, Qian, and Yao (2017) find that religious heterogeneity
and social capital greatly influences the extent to which the introduction of local elections
increases public goods in rural China.
       Our work is also closely connected to Stevenson and Wolfers (2011), who document that
trust in U.S. government institutions declined during the Great Recession. In contrast to their
study, we focus on the longer-run notion of trust by using a measure of a country’s average
level of generalized trust.6 Our findings also contribute empirical evidence to the literature
on political business cycles, which has mostly focused on documenting and explaining the
relationship between economic performance and re-election. To the best of our knowledge,
earlier studies have not studied how this relationship varies with the underlying cultural
context of the country.7
       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides concrete examples to motivate
the empirical analysis. The empirical strategy is presented in Section 3 and the data are
described in Section 4. The baseline estimates are reported in Section 5. Section 6 examines
the robustness of the main results. In Section 7, we provide a discussion of the importance of
   6
     Naturally, the results of Stevenson and Wolfers (2011) raise the issue of the potential endogeneity of our
trust measure – i.e., low trust could be affected by recessions. We address this concern by using a long-run
measure of average trust. As we discussed earlier, we also conduct several robustness checks to rule out this
particular channel of reverse causality.
   7
     Examples of recent works include Akhmedov and Zhuravskaya (2004), which provides evidence of political
budget cycles in Russia. Brender and Drazen (2008) find a positive cross-country relationship between re-
election and economic growth for developing countries. For a detailed discussion of the literature, see Alesina,
Roubini, and Cohen (1997) and Persson and Tabellini (2002, Ch. 16). A recent related branch of this literature
has focused on how turnover is positively associated with exogenously determined events, and interprets these
relationships as evidence for the irrationality of voters. For example, Cole, Healy, and Werker (2012) find that
Indian voters punish politicians for natural disasters beyond their control as well as for relief efforts. Leigh
(2009) finds that voters reward national politicians more for world economic growth than for national economic
growth. Wolfers (2007) finds that voters in U.S. oil-producing states are more likely to re-elect their governors
when exogenously determined oil prices are high. Achen and Bartels (2013) finds that voters respond to shark
attacks and argue that they are therefore irrational.



                                                       6
our findings and their significance for economic growth, including exploratory estimates that
suggest that trust, through lower leader turnover, may result in better economic recoveries
following recessions. Section 8 concludes.



2    Motivating Examples

To illustrate the phenomenon that motivates this study, we provide a few concrete examples
that document citizens’ propensity to blame leaders for economic problems in lower trust
countries, as well as citizens’ propensity to be more forgiving with leaders during periods of
economic hardship in high trust countries.
    Brazil, the Philippines, and Turkey have respectively the third, fourth and ninth lowest
trust measures in our dataset, out of 79 total countries in the baseline sample. Each of
these countries experienced recessions that led to antagonistic political turnovers. During the
late 1980s and early 1990s, Brazil suffered severe economic downturns. The media widely
reported the unpopularity of then-President Jose Sarney and the fact that he was blamed for
the country’s economic woes. The New York Times reported that “For many Brazilians, Mr.
Sarney’s biggest failure has been the economy.”(Brooke, 1990). Similarly, in the second year
of his term, The Chicago Tribune noted that “Sarney [is] an easy target for those seeking to
assign blame for Brazil’s sudden economic decline” (Langfur, 1987).
    In the early 2000s, the Philippines experienced poor economic growth and a political
turnover when President Joseph Estrada was ousted in favor of Gloria Macagapal Arroyo. The
Economist reported that “middle-class Filipinos were hoping to avoid an economic catastro-
phe” (Economist, 2001). The BBC went further to explain how Filipinos blamed the recession
on the president: “there has been a growing perception among businessmen that his adminis-
tration is inept and corrupt. The government failed to use its dominance of Congress to enact
crucial economic reforms and presidential cronies began to pop up again everywhere. . . The
opposition believes the economic crisis requires an urgent solution, the immediate resignation
of Mr. Estrada” (McLean, 2000).
    During Turkey’s economic crisis in 2002, the Economist echoed the popular opinion that
“Mr. Ecevit’s [the prime minister] government was fatally weakened by its inept handling of
Turkey’s economic crisis” (Economist, 2002). This message was also captured by the BBC,
which reported that “Mr. Erdogan’s success came amid widespread anger at the government,
whom many Turks blame for the economic crisis of the past two years” (BBC, 2001).
    By contrast, there are many examples of citizens in high trust countries being much less



                                              7
inclined to blame political leadership for an economic downturn. There are such examples from
Sweden and Finland, countries with the second- and fifth-highest levels of trust in our sample.
Sweden experienced a severe economic downturn (its worst in fifty years) from 1991-1993 and
Finland a prolonged downturn that began in 2012.8 During Sweden’s downturn, there were
few reports of political unrest, mass accusations against the government, or aggressive calls
for political turnover. Instead, media accounts described an environment of relative harmony.
For example:

          “Sweden, which for decades has provided its citizens with cradle-to-grave welfare
          services, is mired in its deepest recession in 50 years, and economists expect 1992
          to be the third consecutive year of falling output. . . Officials of Prime Minister
          Carl Bildt’s conservative coalition government said they will hold talks through
          this weekend with the opposition Social Democrats to try to agree on a bipartisan
          plan of spending cuts to curb the burgeoning budget deficit and revive the troubled
          Swedish economy. ‘We are looking at this to be settled as soon as possible,’ said
          Bildt’s spokesman, Lars Christiansson. ‘We know how important it is to move
          quickly, so we are optimistic.’ So were many Swedes, even with an interest rate
          that appears to be financially insane. ‘Yes, it is a crazy rate,’ said Hubert Fromlet,
          chief economist with Swedbank. ‘But there is a high degree of acceptance among
          Swedes, because they realize that this is an emergency’” (Swisher, 1992).

These examples illustrate the difference in political response to economic downturns between
low and high trust countries. Citizens in low trust countries appear inclined to quickly decry
the current leadership, while citizens in higher trust countries appear more willing to work
with the government, or to give more time to politicians in office before concluding that
the leader should be ousted. The following empirical analysis examines whether this is a
systematic pattern that is found in the data.



3        Empirical Framework

The goal of our study is to examine whether countries with low trust are more likely to expe-
rience political turnover during periods of poor economic performance. Our main estimating
equation is:


                     yit = β T rusti × I(Growth < 0)it−1 + Xit−1 Γ + γt + αi + εit ,               (1)
    8
        According to World Bank data, GDP growth was -0.94 from 2012 to 2014.


                                                      8
where i indexes countries and t indexes years. The sample includes all countries and years
in which the country is democratic in the previous year. We consider the largest range of
years possible given the data limitations, which is 1951-2015.9 The specification includes
country fixed effects αi and year fixed effects γt . The country fixed effects capture any time-
invariant differences across countries, such as persistent differences in political institutions
or corruption. Year fixed effects control for global trends that affect all countries similarly.
All standard errors are clustered at the country level to correct for non-independence of
observations over time within a country.
       Turnover in country i at time t is denoted yit and is assumed to be a function of the
interaction of a time-invariant measure of trust, T rusti , and an indicator variable that equals
one if country i experiences negative growth between years t − 1 and t, I(Growth < 0)it−1 .
Our hypothesis of interest is whether β < 0: when there is a recession, countries with higher
trust will be less likely to experience leader turnover.
       We expect our effects to be most pronounced in election years. However, since the timing
of elections are potentially endogenous to the explanatory variables of interest, the baseline
sample includes all years for which data are available, even non-election years.10
       The main challenge for causal identification of the coefficient of interest, β, is that trust
is potentially correlated with other factors that could affect the extent to which recessions
lead to political turnover. Or analogously, that the occurrence of recessions are correlated
with other country-specific changes that also affect turnover and are moderated by the level
of trust in the country. To help address these issues, the specification also includes a vector
of covariates, all measured in year t − 1. The vector Xit−1 includes four characteristics of the
leader in power (age when she entered office, gender, days in office and the number of times
previously in office), real per capita GDP, democratic strength measured by the polity2 score,
and an indicator variable for the presence of a conflict or war. Note that the controls are
lagged to avoid endogeneity. In addition to controlling for the direct effect of these covariates
on leader turnover, we also allow their effect to differ by a country’s level of trust by controlling
for each of the measures interacted with trust. Analogously, we allow the measures to have a
differential effect on leader turnover depending on whether the country experienced a recession
   9
      The number of democratic countries in the sample ranges from 23 in 1951 to 70 in 2015. The change in
sample size over time is driven by a range of factors including coverage in the Archigos and Penn World Tables
datasets and the number of countries that are defined as democratic in a year.
   10
      In some countries, the cost of changing leadership has similar costs in any year (particularly in parlia-
mentary systems). In other countries, such as the United States, the electoral cycle is relatively rigid and it
is uncommon to change leadership in a year off the regular cycle. We investigate the notion that the results
may differ according to the nature of office entry later in the paper by separating leader turnover according to
regular and irregular entry into office.



                                                       9
(i.e., negative economic growth) in the previous year. Thus, we also control for each of the
measures interacted with the recession indicator variable.11



4         Data

Our turnover measure is computed from version 4.1 of the Archigos database (Goemans,
Gleditsch, and Chiozza, 2009). The data cover all independent states and their effective
leaders. Coverage extends from 1945-2015, and the number of included countries increases
in the latter parts of the sample.12 The database identifies the actual effective ruler of each
state on a case-by-case basis. For example, it avoids coding ceremonial monarchs in European
countries as heads of state. In parliamentary regimes, the prime minister is coded as the ruler;
in presidential systems, the president is coded as the ruler. In dual systems, where there is a
president and a prime minister, the president is considered the leader. In communist regimes,
the ruler is typically coded as the chairman of the party.              13

         The data report the start and end date of office for each leader-spell, the manner in which
a leader enters office, and several additional leader characteristics. In our baseline estimates,
we include the number of years and terms a leader has previously been in office, the age of
the leader upon entering office and the leader’s gender.
         Our measure of trust is calculated from responses to generalized trust questions in the
World Values Surveys, the Latinobarometer Surveys, the Asiabarometer Surveys, and the
Afrobarometer Surveys. In the World Values Survey, the question is worded as: “Generally
speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you need to be very careful
in dealing with people? [1] Most people can be trusted. [2] Need to be very careful”. In the
Barometer Surveys, the question is: “Generally speaking, would you say that you can trust
    11
     These controls potentially alter the meaning of the interaction variable of interest – trust interacted with
the occurrence of a recession, because many of the correlates of trust may be outcomes of trust in the long
run. For example, high trust may lead to higher levels of institutional quality, which may then lead to higher
levels of trust, generating a positive feedback loop. If we control for the interaction of institutional quality and
recession occurrence, we may remove meaningful variation from our interaction of interest. Hence, in principle,
we face the generic tradeoff between including too few controls, which may be susceptible to problems from
omitted variables, and too many controls, which may eliminate some part of the true effect. However, in
practice, this is not very important for us. The results are quite similar regardless of whether we control for
interacted or uninteracted controls. The results with uninteracted controls are available upon request.
  12
     The principal sources of raw data for Archigos are www.rulers.org and www.worldstatesmen.org. We
corroborate the Archigos data with the Change in Source of Leader Support (CHISOLS) dataset, constructed
by Brett Ashley Leeds and Michaela Mattes. CHISOLS uses the same definition of a primary leader as the
Archigos database, and covers the years 1919 to 2015. However, CHISOLS provides less information about
each leader.
  13
     Goemans, Gleditsch, and Chiozza (2009) discuss the details of each country and exceptions to the usual
coding rules for Archigos.



                                                        10
most people, or that you can never be too careful when dealing with others? [1] You can
trust most people. [2] You can never be too careful when dealing with others”. Countries are
surveyed in different years ranging from 1981–2014. For each country, we aggregate all data
sources and calculate a time-invariant measure, which is the fraction of respondents from a
country that answer that most people can be trusted.14
       Our measure of real GDP is taken from the Penn World Tables (Feenstra, Inklaar, and
Timmer, 2015). We measure income using expenditure-side real GDP at chained PPPs in
millions of 2005 U.S. dollars. With these data, we construct an economic downturn indicator
variable that equals one if annual growth is negative – i.e., real GDP is lower in period t than
in t − 1.


4.1      Descriptive Statistics

The average level of generalized trust for each country is reported in Table 1, where countries
are grouped into seven regions: Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union; Latin America
and the Caribbean; North Africa and the Middle East; sub-Saharan Africa; Western Europe
and offshoots; and Asia. The table shows the known fact that there is significant heterogeneity
in reported trust levels, even within geographically proximate countries (Algan and Cahuc,
2013). The country with the highest level of trust in our sample is Norway (0.79). The
country with the lowest levels of trust is Cape Verde (0.03).
       A potential concern with our identification strategy is that trust might be correlated
with other factors that affect the extent to which recessions result in political turnover. We
investigate the correlation of the most obvious candidates in Table 2. The pairwise correlation
coefficients show that countries with higher levels of trust tend to have higher incomes, have
lower average growth, trade less, have less ethnic diversity, have more media freedom, are
more democratic and have a lower incidence of conflict.15 While all of these correlations are
statistically significant, the strength of the correlations is fairly modest in each case. All
correlation coefficients are 0.36 or less.
       We also consider the possibility that periods of negative economic growth could be cor-
related with other factors. The second column of Table 2 reports the relationship between
recessions and a range of factors. We find that the presence of recessions is (mechanically)
  14
      Our choice to use the generalized trust measure, as opposed to a measure of specific institutional trust,
is due to the limited coverage of the latter set of variables. For example, the World Values Survey question
regarding trust placed in the central government covers 69 countries and 123 country-years, compared to our
baseline trust measure, which covers 108 countries and 400 country-years. Moreover, there is likely to be
non-random selection into the sample of country-years that reports central government trust.
   15
      See the data appendix for the details of these additional variables.



                                                      11
associated with lower average growth rates, but uncorrelated with the other factors except
that it is positively correlated with being democratic.



5     Results

5.1   Baseline Estimates

Since the hypothesized mechanism for turnover is through the electoral process in our baseline
regressions, we use a sample of democracies. We use the coding from Cheibub, Gandhi, and
Vreeland (2010), who define a democratic state as one that: holds elections to select the
executive and the legislature, has a closed legislature, legally allows multiple political parties,
has multiple parties in practice, has a legislature with multiple parties, has seen a rules-based
change in leadership, and whose incumbent leader has not consolidated power in a way that
violates the above criteria. In auxiliary regressions, we will examine effects on autocracies,
and in robustness tests, we will check the sensitivity of our estimates to alternative definitions
of democracy and autocracy.
    Table 3 presents the baseline estimates. We begin by first examining the relationship
between the occurrence of a recession and leader turnover. Column (1) reports estimates
without country fixed effects, while column (2) includes country fixed effects. All other control
variables from equation (1) are included in both specifications.
    In evaluating the effect of recessions on leader turnover, it is important to recognize that
the estimated coefficient for the recession indicator itself is uninformative. This is because
the specification also includes, as controls, the recession indicator interacted with a number
of other variables, namely leader age, gender, tenure, previous times in office, lag polity2
score, lag per capita income, and lag conflict incidence. The estimated coefficient for the
recession indicator simply tells you the predicted effect of a recession on leader turnover
for an observation that has all values of the interacted variables equal to zero. Therefore, in
addition to the estimated coefficient, Table 3 also reports the calculated effect of a recession on
leader turnover for an observation with all control variables evaluated at their mean values.
The effect of a recession on leader turnover (with all controls evaluated at their means) is
positive and significant in both specifications. That is, negative economic growth results
in leader turnover. According to the magnitude of the estimates, a recession results in a
seven- or nine-percentage point increase in the probability of leader turnover (depending on
the specification). This is sizable given that the mean of leader turnover is 24.5 percentage
points.


                                                12
       Column (3) reports the baseline specification, equation (1), which includes the interaction
of the recession indicator with the average trust level of a country. The estimated coefficient for
the interaction term is negative and significant at the 5% level. That is, the positive effect of
recessions on leader turnover is lower in countries with more trust. To assess the magnitude of
the effect, we compute the difference in predicted turnover that results from a one-standard-
deviation change in trust. As reported in Appendix Table A.3, the standard deviation of
the trust variable is 0.14 (the standard deviation of turnover is 0.39). The coefficient for
the interaction term, −0.341, implies that when there is a recession, the difference in the
probability of leader turnover between two countries that have trust levels one-standard-
deviation apart is 5.3 percentage points (0.15 × −0.354 = −0.050), which is 12.8% of a
standard deviation in turnover (0.050/0.39 = 0.128).
       For a concrete example, consider the different effects of a recession between the Western
European countries in our sample with the highest and lowest trust measures: Norway, which
has a trust measure of 0.71, and France, which has a measure of 0.19. The estimated coefficient
of the interaction term implies that the occurrence of a recession is 17.9 percentage points
more likely to cause political turnover in France than in Norway. These effects are large given
that the mean turnover rate in the sample is 24.5 percentage points.
       We next turn to some simple regression diagnostics and check that our estimates are not
due to a small number of influential observations. We do this by calculating the influence
of each observation using Cook’s distance and omitting observations with a distance greater
than 4/n, where n is the number of observations in the sample (Belsley, Kuh, and Welsch,
1980). Column (4) shows that the interaction coefficient for this restricted sample is negative
and similar in magnitude. Thus, the estimates are robust to removing observations that are
potential outliers.
       We next check the sensitivity of our baseline estimates to the use of a logistic model instead
of a linear probability model. Column (5) reports the estimated marginal effects (evaluated
at means) from a logit model. The interaction coefficient is negative and significant at the
5% level. Therefore, the main result is not sensitive to the functional form of the estimation
model. For the remainder of the paper, we will use the linear probability model.
       In column (6), we investigate whether the effect of trust on turnovers is symmetric for
recessions and booms. We do this by dividing the data into three categories: (1) recessions
(negative growth), (2) moderate growth (zero to three percent growth) and high growth
(greater than three percent growth).16 The omitted category is the middle category for
  16
   Our results are very similar if we narrow or widen the range of the middle group. These results are available
upon request.


                                                      13
moderate growth. The results show that the influence of trust is not symmetric. Trust only
affects the likelihood of political turnover during recessions. Relative to periods of moderate
economic growth, higher trust countries are less likely to experience turnover during recessions
– the interaction of recession and trust is negative and significant at the 5% level. However,
higher trust and lower trust countries experience similar turnover rates during periods of high
growth – the interaction effect of trust and high economic growth is small in magnitude and
statistically insignificant. The two reported interaction coefficients are statistically different
from each other. The p-value, reported at the bottom of the table, shows that the difference
is significant at the 5% level.
   This asymmetric result is consistent with the particular sensitivity of citizens to negative
economic growth, which has been documented by studies such as Neve, Ward, Keulenaer,
Landeghem, Kavetsos, and Norton (2015). The authors combine data on the economic per-
formance of the macro-economy and self-reported individual-level subjective well-being. They
document a striking discontinuity in the relationship between economic growth and life sat-
isfaction at zero. Measures of life-satisfaction are more than twice as sensitive to negative
economic growth as they are positive economic growth.


5.2   Effects in Non-Democracies

Our analysis focuses on democracies because the main mechanism for political turnover we
have in mind is voting. For obvious reasons, leader turnover should be less elastic with
respect to economic performance in non-democracies. In this sense, non-democracies serve
as a useful placebo exercise against alternative mechanisms – i.e., if we find a similar effect
in non-democracies, we would be suspicious that our results reflect alternative mechanisms.
Table 4 column (1) estimates the baseline for both democracies and autocracies. As before,
column (1) defines democracy using the categorization from Cheibub, Gandhi, and Vreeland
(2010). Panel A re-states the baseline estimate for democracies presented earlier. Panel B
examines the effect for non-democracies. As we had anticipated, the interaction effect is small
in magnitude, positive in sign and statistically insignificant.
   To ensure that this finding is not due to the particular measure of democracy that we have
chosen, in the remaining columns of the table we report estimates using alternative measures
of democracy and autocracy. In columns (2)–(5), we use the composite polity2 measure from
the Polity IV dataset. The measure ranges from -10 to +10. In column (2), we use a cutoff
of zero, which is a commonly-used cutoff in the political science literature (Epstein, Bates,
Goldstone, Kristensen, and O’Halloran, 2006). In column (3) we use a cutoff of five, which is


                                               14
a standard for full democracies used by the Polity IV project (Marshall, Jaggers, and Gurr,
2015). In column (4), we use a cutoff of eight, which restricts the sample to very stable
democracies. In column (5), we use the median value in the sample to create two groups of
approximately the same size. The sample median is coincidentally five. Thus, the estimates
in columns (3) and (4) are equivalent.17 In columns (6)–(8), we apply the same thresholds as
in columns (2)–(4) but to polity2 measured in the first year that the country is in the sample
(as opposed to the previous year). This procedure creates a time-invariant definition for each
country. Finally, in columns (9)–(11), we apply the same thresholds for democracy to the
mean value for each country over the sample period.
       The interaction coefficients in panel A of columns (2)–(11) are all negative, statistically
significant and similar in magnitude to the baseline in column (1). In addition, the estimates
for non-democracies, reported in Panel B, are all positive in sign, small in magnitude and not
statistically different from zero.


5.3      Effects on Regular versus Irregular Turnovers

An alternative strategy to estimating equation (1) separately for democracies and non-democracies
is to study all observations, but to examine the effects of trust and recessions on the proba-
bility of a regular turnover occurring and the probability of an irregular turnover occurring.18
A regular leader turnover is one where the new leader is selected in a manner prescribed
by either explicit rules or established conventions, irrespective of the nature of the previous
leader’s exit. For example, if a president exits due to an assassination and is replaced by a
vice president, then the turnover is considered regular. To qualify as an irregular turnover,
there needs to be a strict violation of convention by the entrant. For example, if the vice
president who is next-in-line obtains power through a coup, then this will be coded as an
irregular turnover. The most common causes of irregular turnovers in the data are military
coups and foreign military impositions. Therefore, we expect that irregular turnovers are
less likely to reflect changes in the extent to which citizens blame politicians for economic
downturns. Since we postulate that trust matters during economic downturns through its
influence on citizen dissatisfaction, it follows that the interaction effect of trust and negative
growth should matter less in contexts where other factors may drive turnover.
       Since there are very few irregular turnovers in democracies, we pool democracies and non-
  17
     Note that the two groups are not exactly the same size because the polity2 measure only takes on integer
values.
  18
     Archigos codes transfers of power as regular or irregular, depending on the political institutions and
selection rules in place in each state.



                                                     15
democracies to estimate a multinomial logit where the potential outcomes in each country or
period are: no change in leader, a regular leader turnover, and an irregular leader turnover.
The estimates are reported in Table 5. For comparison, column (1) reproduces our baseline
OLS estimates for democracies, while column (2) reports our baseline OLS estimates for the
pooled sample of democracies and non-democracies. The point estimate in column (2) is
smaller in magnitude and it is less precisely estimated, which is not surprising given that
the sample pools observations of non-democracies for which our mechanism of interest is not
relevant.
   Columns (3a) and (3b) report the multinomial logit estimates for the pooled sample. The
omitted category is for the event of no leader turnover. Column (3a) reports the marginal effect
of the trust-recession interaction on the probability of a regular leader turnover (evaluated at
the sample mean of all other covariates in the regression). Column (3b) reports the marginal
effect of the trust-recession interaction on the probability of an irregular leader turnover. We
find that greater trust reduces the probability of a regular leader turnover in the face of a
recession, but it does not reduce the probability of an irregular turnover. These results are
consistent with the divergence in estimates from the sample of democracies and the sample
of non-democracies (reported in Table 4). They also suggest that on average, the elasticity of
turnover with respect to economic performance is larger for regular entries.


5.4   Timing of Elections

To further explore the importance of the electoral process as a mechanism, we check whether
the effects of interest are stronger in election years. We do this by dividing our baseline sample
into observations that are election years and those that are not, and examine the extent to
which our results are stronger in years of regularly-scheduled elections. We use data from
the Database of Political Institutions dataset (Keefer, 2015) to identify years in a country
during which a regular election is scheduled. We then divide observations into those that are
regular election years and those that are not and estimate our baseline equation (1) for each
sub-sample.
   The estimates are reported in columns (4) and (5) of Table 5. The estimated effect for
election years is larger in magnitude than the baseline estimate reported in column (1), while
the estimate for non-election years is smaller. Thus, our main results are disproportionately
due to turnovers that take place during regular election years, although turnovers during
non-election years appear to also be affected.
   Taken together, the estimates from Tables 4 and 5 are consistent with voters in higher trust


                                                 16
countries being less likely to blame poor economic performance on their leaders, which leads
to less political turnover. Moreover, they suggest that the relationship between turnover and
economic downturn is more elastic during regular election years. This pattern is consistent
with the hypothesis that voting is an important driver of the results.


5.5   Type of Democracy

Given the evidence that the effect of citizens’ trust for leader turnover works through the
prescribed democratic process, we now turn to an examination of differences between demo-
cratic systems, namely presidential versus parliamentary systems. There are many differences
between the two systems. However, the most relevant difference for our study is that, due
to the vote of no confidence, it is easier to remove a leader in parliamentary systems. In
presidential systems, no such institutionalized mechanism exists. Therefore, if our effects are
working through leader accountability and the electoral process, then we would expect to find
larger effects of trust in parliamentary democracies. In such a setting, citizens’ trust becomes
more important and has a greater effect on leader turnover during recessions.
   To investigate this hypothesis, we divide democratic countries into those that use pres-
idential and parliamentary systems using the coding from Cheibub, Gandhi, and Vreeland
(2010) and estimate equation (1) separately for each group. The estimates are reported in
columns (6) and (7) of Table 5. The coefficients on the estimated trust interactions are neg-
ative in both sub-samples. However, the magnitude and statistical significance are greater
among parliamentary democracies. This is consistent with trust being more important within
systems for which leaders can be more easily removed from office during their term.


5.6   Media Freedom

A factor that is important in well-functioning democracies is media freedom. Given the
importance of the media for allowing democracies to function effectively, we now turn to an
examination of how the presence of free media affects our relationship of interest. The expected
effect is ambiguous ex ante. On the one hand, greater media freedom may allow voters to
monitor their politicians better, which decreases uncertainty and the need for trust. Thus, we
would expect the estimated trust-recession interaction effect to be smaller in countries with
more media freedom. On the other hand, government-controlled media could minimize or
distort negative news about economic recessions and therefore reduce the importance of trust
in informing citizens’ views. This would suggest that trust is more important in countries
with more media freedom. We will explore the net effect of these two opposing forces.

                                              17
      We compute a long-run measure of media freedom using a variable from Freedom House.
The raw categorical variable takes three values: free media, some free media, and no free
media. From this variable, we construct the long-run average for each country, and then
define two binary categorizations of media freedom. For the first, we define a country as
having free media if they have been coded as such for the entire observed period. These
results are reported in columns (2) and (3) of Table 6. For the second, we define a country
as having free media if their long-run average is freer than the fiftieth percentile of long-run
averages of all the countries. These results are reported in columns (4) and (5) of Table 6.
      We find that the main effects are present when there is fully free media (column 2) or if
media freedom is above the sample median (column 4). For other contexts, the estimated
effect is very close to zero (columns 3 and 5). This pattern suggests that the ability of
government-controlled media to control information flow, which implies that trust is more
important where there is more media freedom, outweighs the role that free media plays in
mitigating asymmetric information between the voters and politicians, which would imply
that trust is less important where there is more media freedom.


5.7      Stability

An additional source of heterogeneity that we examine is stability, which we measure in two
different ways. The first is political: the frequency of leader turnover in a country. We divide
the sample into two groups depending on whether a country’s frequency of leader turnover
during the sample period is above or below the country median. The second is conflict-based:
whether a country experienced any type of conflict during the previous year.19 The estimates
in columns (6) and (7) show that the estimated interaction effect is much larger in magnitude
for countries with less frequent leader turnover. That is, the effects are much larger for
countries that are typically more stable. We also come to a similar conclusion when we use
conflict as a proxy for stability. The estimates of columns (8) and (9) show that the negative
interaction effect is only found for observations without conflict in the previous period. For
observations that experienced conflict in the previous year, the coefficient is actually positive,
although with very large standard errors and it is not statistically different from zero.
      Overall, the estimates suggest that our findings are strongest amongst democratic countries
that have full media freedom and which are politically stable.
 19
      The data are from the UCDP PRIO conflict database.




                                                   18
6     Sensitivity and Robustness Checks

6.1    Additional Control Variables

We now turn to tests of the sensitivity of our baseline estimates. A potential concern with
our estimates is that trust may be correlated with other factors that may affect turnover
during recessions. Similarly, recessions may be correlated with other variables that interact
with trust to affect turnover. Although we have already included many potential correlates
in the baseline specification, we now examine the robustness of our estimates to the inclusion
of additional control variables.
    The first factor that we consider is an observation’s openness to trade. There are may
be many reasons that trade openness matters for political turnover. For example, it may be
harder for voters to understand the relationship between the politician’s effort and domestic
economic outcomes in large and open economies.20 Although trade openness is uncorrelated
recessions (recall Table 2), we nevertheless estimate equation (1) controlling for lagged trade
openness, as well as the variable interacted with trust and the variable interacted with the
occurrence of a recession. Column (2) of Table 7 reports these estimates, which are very
similar to the baseline estimates, which we report in column (1) for comparison.
    We next consider a large number of alternative factors, all of which could conceivably be
correlated with average trust and independently influence the probability of a turnover during
a recession: a country’s average rate of leader turnover, a country’s average growth, a country’s
average media freedom, and diversity (ethnic, linguistic, or religious). We re-estimate equation
(1), while controlling for each factor, one at a time, interacted with the recession indicator
variable. Since all of the variables are time-invariant, the uninteracted effect of each variable is
absorbed by the country fixed effects. The estimates, which are reported in columns (3)–(6),
show that the interaction of trust and the occurrence of a recession remains robust. The
number of observations varies across columns because of differences in the availability of the
control variables.
    The final factor that we consider is a country’s average perception of how much control
one generally has over life. This is commonly referred to as the locus of control (Rotter,
1980). The extent to which citizens believe that people in general (including politicians) have
control over outcomes will affect the extent to which they hold politicians responsible for
economic recessions, and therefore affect leader turnover. We measure the locus of control
  20
     Past studies have found evidence that turnover is more sensitive to economic slowdowns in small or closed
economies, where it is easier to ascribe outcomes to specific policies (e.g., Hellwig, 2007). As before, we measure
trade openness with the trade openness measure provided by the Penn World Tables.



                                                        19
using information from the following World Value Survey question: “Some people feel they
have completely free choice and control over their lives, while other people feel that what
they do has no real effect on what happens to them. Please use this scale where 1 means “no
choice at all” and 10 means “a great deal of choice’ to indicate how much freedom of choice
and control you feel you have over the way your life turns out”. Subjects then choose an
integer ranging from one to ten. We construct a time-invariant measure of the average locus
of control score in each country. The cross-country correlation between trust and the locus of
control is 0.10 and is statistically insignificant. We re-estimate equation (1) while controlling
for the interaction of locus of control and the recession indicator variable. The estimates are
reported in column (7) of Table 7. The main interaction between trust and recession is robust.


6.2   Reverse Causality and Spurious Trends

We consider the possibility that our estimates are biased by reverse causality or spurious
trends. To investigate this possibility, we re-estimate a variant of equation (1) that has the
one-year lag of the leader turnover indicator as the dependent variable. The specification
tests for the possibility of reverse causality: leader turnover may cause recessions in lower
trust countries. If this reverse causal relationship is present, then we would expect that leader
turnover last year will be associated with a recession this year, and more so in lower trust
countries. In addition, the specification also serves as a placebo test to detect spurious trends.
The estimates are reported in column (8) of Table 7. The coefficient is positive, very small in
magnitude, and statistically insignificant. This result provides evidence that reverse causality
and spurious trends are not driving our results.


6.3   The Quality and Endogeneity of the Trust Measure

There are several potential concerns related to our measure of average trust. One is that trust
is potentially endogenous to the occurrence of economic downturns (Stevenson and Wolfers,
2011). If trust is more affected in countries for which negative economic growth is more likely
to lead to leader turnover, then our estimates of interest will be biased.
   We address this potential concern in several ways. First, we redefine the value of trust to
be the level of trust observed in the first year for which data are available for the country.
Second, we calculate an alternative measure of average trust that omits trust measures from
surveys conducted during recessions. The estimates from the two procedures are reported in
columns (2) and (3) of Table 8. The results are similar as in the baseline, which is re-stated in
column (1) for comparison purposes. The magnitude of the effects actually increases slightly

                                               20
with the alternative measures.
       The issue of the endogeneity of trust to economic conditions was recently addressed in a
series of papers by Algan and Cahuc (2010) anAlgan and Cahuc (2013). These paper develop
a strategy of measuring a country’s average level of trust that is independent of economic
conditions in that country. (Their interest was in estimating the causal effect of trust on
economic growth). They do this by using the trust levels of individuals who were born in
the United States but have immigrant backgrounds (e.g., their parents or grandparents were
born in a foreign country). Although these individuals would have never been exposed to the
economic conditions in the origin country, the levels of trust from the origin country would
have been vertically transmitted to them. Their procedure uses individual-level data from the
General Social Survey (Davis and Smith, 2014) on reported trust levels, country or region of
origin, and the number of generations a person’s family has been in the United States. The
authors construct measures of inherited trust for two periods: 1935-1938 and 2000-2003. The
first measure is designed to capture the trust of individuals whose ancestors first immigrated
to the United States before 1910.21 The second measure is designed to capture the trust of
individuals whose ancestors first immigrated to the United States after 1910.22 Following
their methodology, we use all available data and calculate the average level of inherited trust
across all individuals. The estimates are reported in column (4). The sample size using the
Algan and Cahuc (2010) trust measure is much smaller; 754 observations rather than 2,770.
The data cover 14 countries, as opposed to the 79 countries included in our baseline sample.
Since the sample size for this trust measure is dramatically smaller, there is a significant
reduction of statistical power and an imprecise coefficient of -0.188. In light of the small
sample, and the potential for a small number of outliers having disproportionate influence on
the coefficient, we check the sensitivity of this finding to the omission of observations with
disproportionate leverage measured by a Cook’s distance greater than 4/n, where n is the
number of observations in the sample (Belsley, Kuh, and Welsch, 1980). Estimates from this
smaller sample of 686 observations is reported in column (5). The point estimate remains
negative and becomes slightly larger in magnitude, -0.257.
       Another concern with the trust measure is the quality of the underlying survey data. In
  21
     The authors define a set of people whose ancestors likely immigrated to the US prior to 1910. These
individuals fall into three categories: (1) second-generation Americans born before 1910, (2) third-generation
Americans born before 1935, and (3) fourth-generation Americans born before 1960.
  22
     The authors identify people whose ancestors immigrated to the United States after 1910 in the following
way. They are either (1) second-generation Americans born after 1910, (2) third-generation Americans born
after 1935, and (3) fourth-generation Americans born after 1960. A small data note: while the text of Algan
and Cahuc (2010) claims only second-generation individuals born after 1910 and prior to 1975 were included
in the group used to calculate post-1910 immigrant trust, their published code includes all second-generation
individuals born after 1910. We follow their code.


                                                     21
an attempt to test the importance of this concern, we have read through the documentation
of all of the surveys from which the trust measures are taken and manually coded a measure
of data quality. We code a survey as low-quality if it does not report the survey procedure,
has a missing or incomplete technical report, provides no breakdown between urban and
rural observations, appears to be self-administered, or administered through the mail. Using
this information, we recreate our average trust measure after omitting all low-quality trust
surveys.23 As a second strategy, we also identify surveys for which the documentation specifies
explicitly that the sample is not nationally representative.24 We also construct an alternative
trust measure that omits these trust surveys. The estimates of equation (1) using these two
alternative measures are reported in columns (6) and (7). We continue to estimate a negative
relationship between the trust-recession interaction and leader turnover. In addition, the
magnitude of the estimated effect increases noticeably using the revised measures. This is
consistent with measurement error biasing our baseline estimates downwards.
       As a final robustness check related to the quality of the trust survey data, we construct a
measure of average trust that uses only the World Values Surveys, which is the most widely
used source in the cultural economics literature.25 The estimates are reported in column (8).
Despite the sample decreasing to 1,780 observations, the estimate of interest remains robust.
Again, we find that the magnitude of the estimated effect increases noticeably.
       An alternative strategy to using a trust measure based on survey data is to use a measured
based on behavior in laboratory experiments of the Berg, Dickhaut, and McCabe (1995) trust
game. Such data have not been collected as widely as survey-based measures of trust. In a
recent study, Johnson and Mislin (2011) collect data from over 160 implementations of the
trust game.26 Using these data, we construct an experiment-based measure of a country’s
average level of trust, which is the average fraction sent by player 1 to player 2 in the trust
game. The estimates using this alternative measure are reported in column (9). Using this
measure results in a sample size that is much smaller (1,311 observations rather than 2,770),
which leads to a loss of power and precision. However, the magnitude of the point estimate
remains very similar to our baseline estimate.27
  23
     We report the list of low-quality surveys and countries in Appendix Table A.1.
  24
     The list of unrepresentative countries, by survey, is reported in Appendix Table A.1.
  25
     The list of countries covered by the WVS is reported in Appendix Table A.2.
  26
     The game is a strategic game that involves two players. Player 1 is endowed with a sum of money (e.g.,
$10) and chooses how much of this sum to send to player 2. The amount is increased by some multiple (e.g.,
doubled or tripled), and player 2 then decides how much of the increased amount to send back to player 1.
The amount that is sent to player 2 by player 1 is a measure of player 1’s trust of player 2. The amount sent
back by player 2 to player 1 is a measure of player 2’s trustworthiness. We use the average proportion sent by
player 1 in trust games in each country as a measure of average trust in the country.
  27
     Interestingly, we find that trustworthiness (the fraction sent back by player 2) is not an important deter-



                                                      22
6.4    Alternative Measures of Recessions

We now turn to different ways of measuring economic recessions. It is possible that the salience
of negative growth is different in different countries. For example, negative growth may be
less important in countries that generally experience more economic volatility. Thus, it may
be more appropriate to define recessions relative to a country’s typical growth experience. To
do so, we construct recession indicators that equal one when a country experiences growth
that is lower than its own 5th or 10th percentile growth over the sample period. Estimates
using these alternative recession measures are reported in columns (2)–(3) of Table 9. The
coefficients for the interaction of interest are both negative, while the interaction of trust and
growth below the 10th percentile is larger in magnitude and statistically significant.
    It is also possible that it is not only economic growth in the current year that matters for
a leader’s turnover, but perhaps economic growth during his/her entire tenure. Motivated by
this, we construct an alternative recession variable that measures the share of years during
the current leader’s tenure that experienced negative growth. Column (4) presents estimates
with this alternative measure. The coefficient of the interaction term remains negative and
statistically significant.28


6.5    Controlling for External Recessions

Finally, we consider the fact that economic downturns in a country are sometimes corre-
lated with economic downturns in economically connected countries. One may therefore be
concerned that our main results are partly driven by voters’ response to recessions in other
countries. While this would still be a very interesting result, it would open the door to other
mechanisms, since it is unclear why domestic politicians would be blamed for economic per-
formance elsewhere. To investigate this possibility, we control for the economic performance
of foreign countries. We measure this using two different proxies of economic connectedness.
First, we compute the average growth of all countries in the same geographic region, excluding
the country in question. We use the region definitions from Table 1.29 Second, we compute
the trade-share-weighted growth of a country’s trading partners. Trade is measured as the
sum of real exports and imports all divided by real GDP.
minant of the effect of recessions on political turnover.
  28
     When we include the interaction using our baseline negative growth indicator variable together with an
interaction using one of the alternative recession indicators, we find that the estimates generally load on the
baseline negative growth interaction, rather than the alternative interaction. This is consistent with the salience
of negative economic growth.
  29
     We first calculate the total real GDP of all other countries in the region and then calculate the aggregate
annual growth rate for each year.



                                                        23
    Table 10 presents the estimates. Column (1) re-states the baseline estimates for compar-
ison. Columns (2) and (4) report estimates that control for negative external growth (using
either regions or trade-weighted averages), as well as its interaction with a country’s average
trust. In both specifications, we find that our interaction of interest is nearly identical to the
baseline estimate. In contrast, the coefficient for the external recession and trust interactions
are small in magnitude and statistically insignificant.
    Finally, we test whether there is any interaction between domestic and external recessions.
We do this by estimating a version of equation (1) that includes a triple interaction of trust, the
domestic recession measure, and an external recession measure (as well as all of the relevant
double interactions). Columns (3) and (5) show that the triple interaction is not statistically
different from zero using either variable. Thus, external recessions do not appear to affect the
relationship between domestic recessions, trust and leader turnover.



7    Significance and Interpretation of Findings

The main finding of this study is that lower trust countries are more likely to experience
political turnover during a recession. The supplementary estimates are consistent with voting
and the regular democratic electoral process being the main channel through which the results
manifest. In terms of policy implications, it is important to note that our findings are agnostic
about whether the effects of distrust that we estimate are well-placed or misplaced. In other
words, they are silent on whether the higher probability of turnover in low trust countries
during recessions is inefficient. Although this issue is beyond the scope of our analysis, we
now provide a discussion based on the insights from the recent theoretical literature.
    The recent model developed by Ashworth, Bueno de Mesquita, and Friedenberg (2017)
examines the relationships between political accountability, electoral selection, and voter wel-
fare. They show that the relationship between these objects is complex and not necessarily
intuitive. They show how higher levels of accountability can hinder voters’ ability to learn
about a politician’s type, which in turn can worsen leader selection and voter welfare. In
the model, accountability is parameterized as the benefit to the politician of being re-elected.
One consequence of low trust is that it decreases this benefit. A leader that experiences
a recession will be blamed for it whether or not it was his/her fault, lowering the benefit
of being re-elected. Thus, according to the mechanisms in Ashworth, Bueno de Mesquita,
and Friedenberg (2017), lower levels of trust, decrease accountability (i.e., the benefit of re-
election), which can improve leader selection and voter welfare. Viewed through the lens of



                                                24
this model, distrust is not necessarily inefficient.
   Traditional models of retrospective voting (Nordhaus, 1975, 1989) and of signaling (Spence,
1974) can also be used to understand the link between trust, recessions, and political turnover.
In these models, politicians are voted out of office during recessions either because voters ret-
rospectively punish politicians or because recessions signal the lower ability of a politician.
These models do not allow these mechanisms and associated behavior to vary by trust. Nev-
ertheless, the mechanisms could play a role in our context. For example, trust could affect
the extent to which citizens are willing to blame the recessions on their politicians, and thus
are less likely to retrospectively vote them out of office. Or, it could affect the weight that
citizens place on the signaling value of a recession. Whether trust is too high or too low
depends on how this affects the weight citizens place on the signaling value of a recession and
whether this is too high or low. Interesting, Butler, Giuliano, and Guiso (2016) have provided
empirical evidence suggesting that there may be an optimal level of trust, at least in terms of
individual-level income.
   The discussion above makes clear that it is important to understand the source of the
variation in trust across countries. There is ample evidence that cross-country variation is
due to historical and evolutionary processes that have no relationship with business cycles or
political turnover today. This is primarily due to the persistence of trust as a cultural trait.
This has been shown in studies that use immigrants and their children to examine persistence
(Algan and Cahuc, 2010, 2013). Others have found evidence of deep historical factors being
important for trust today. For example, Durante (2010) provides evidence that variation in
trust within Europe can be explained by historical temperature variability (across space and
time) during the growing season prior to the industrial revolution. Nunn and Wantchekon
(2011) argue that variation in trust within the African continent can be explained by a history
of the slave trade. Francois, Fujiwara, and van Ypersele (2010) provide theory and evidence
that the presence of greater inter-group competition increases the level of trust in a society.
Martinez-Bravo, Padro-i-Miquel, Qian, Xu, and Yao (2017) document that trust in rural
China is partly rooted in the historical presence of voluntary associations (village temples).
Given that the current levels of trust are at least partly historically determined, then there
is no reason to expect it to be at a level that is optimal for the modern political-economic
context.
   We now turn to an exploratory empirical investigation of this question and examine
whether more or less trust (and more or less leader turnover) is better for economic recovery
following a recession.



                                                25
7.1      Do Trust and Turnover Matter for Economic Recovery?

In this final section, we provide suggestive evidence on how differences in trust levels affect
the economic recovery from recessions. We first test whether countries with higher levels of
trust recover faster after recessions than countries with lower levels of trust. We examine this
question by estimating the following equation:



               Growthi,t = β1 I(Growth < 0)i,t−j + β2 T rusti × I(Growth < 0)i,t−j                               (2)

                            + Xit−1 Γ + γt + αi + εi,t ,


where i indexes countries, t indexes years, and j is the number of years since the last recession.
Growthi,t is the annual real per capita GDP growth rate during period t (i.e., from period
t to t+1). T rusti is our usual measure of trust and I(Growth < 0)i,t−j is an indicator
variable that equals one if there was a recession during period t-j. The specification includes
country fixed effects αi and year fixed effects γt . The country fixed effects capture any time-
invariant differences across countries, such as persistent differences in political institutions or
corruption. Year fixed effects control for global trends that affect all countries similarly. The
vector Xit−1 includes four leader characteristics (age when she entered office, gender, days in
office, and the number of times previously in office), real per capita GDP, democratic strength
measured by the polity2 score, and an indicator variable for the presence of a conflict or war,
each measured in the previous year.30 The standard errors are clustered at the country level.
Our coefficient of interest is in the sign of β2 . A positive estimate suggests that countries with
higher trust experience faster GDP growth in the years following a recession, while a negative
estimate suggests that they experience slower GDP growth.
       The estimates of equation (2) are reported in Table 11. Column (1) examines the differen-
tial growth experience of countries (by trust) one year after they experience a negative-growth
year. Both coefficients are statistically significant. The estimate of β1 is -0.0344 and that of
β2 is 0.0508. According to the estimates, for a country with the lowest value of trust in
our baseline sample, 0.035, average growth in the year immediately following a recession is
−0.0344 + 0.035 × 0.0508 = −0.033 or -3.3%. For the country in our sample with the high-
est value of trust, 0.712, the estimated effect is −0.0344 + 0.712 × 0.0508 = 0.002 or 0.2%.
More generally, the estimates show that countries with higher trust are more likely recover
  30
    All estimates that we report are qualitatively identical if omit the set of controls and just examine differences
in the raw data.



                                                         26
(or recover more) in the year after a recession.
       In columns (2)-(4), we examine differences in growth in periods that are two, three, and
four years after a recession.31 Although the magnitudes and precision of the coefficient esti-
mates vary slightly across the different periods, in each case, we find a negative estimate of
β1 and a positive estimate of β2 . This suggests that countries with higher trust experience
faster growth in the years following a recession relative to countries with lower trust.
       Having shown that high trust countries have less leader turnover in the face of a recession
with negative growth and that they also have better economic performance in the years
immediately following a recession, we now turn to the obvious question of whether countries
that have less turnover following a recession also experience better economic growth. We
do this by estimating a variant of equation (3) where, instead of allowing economic growth
following a recession to differ by a country’s level of trust, we allow it to differ depending on
whether the country has experienced leader turnover since the recession period. Specifically,
we estimate the following equation:



       Growthi,t = γ1 I(Growth < 0)i,t−j + γ2 I(N o T urnover)i,t−j × I(Growth < 0)i,t−j                    (3)

                 + γ3 I(N o T urnover)i,t−j + Xit−1 Γ + ηt + ζi + i,t ,


where I(N o T urnover)i,t−j is an indicator variable that takes a value of 1 if no leader turnover
has taken place place between the period of the recession, t − j, and the present period, t. It
takes on the value of 0 if there was at least one leader turnover during that period. Equation
(3) includes the same lagged control variables as equation 2, as well as country fixed effects
and year fixed-effects.
       Estimates of equation (3) are reported in Table 12. The four columns of the table report
the same specifications as in Table 2, reporting effects, 1, 2, 3, and 4 years following a recession.
In general, we find that following a recession, growth is consistently negative and significant
for countries that experience at least one leader turnover subsequent to the recession. This
effect is given by the estimate of γ1 . However, we also find that (in all years except the year
immediately following the recession) countries that did not experience turnover have higher
economic growth. This differential effect is given by the estimate of γ2 .32 Examining the
  31
     In the specifications we report here, we include one lag at a time, which facilitates easier interpretation
given the temporal autocorrelation in the data and collinearity between the independent variables. However,
the estimates including all lags at once are very similar although slightly less precise.
  32
     In column (1), the estimate of γ2 is essentially zero. This is perhaps not surprising given that leader
turnovers are uncommon in the data during the year immediately following a recession. We only observe 139


                                                      27
magnitude of the effects 3 or 4 years following a recession – columns (3) and (4) – we see
that while countries that experience leader turnover tend to have growth of about -1.2%, for
countries that do not experience leader turnover, growth is close to zero (either slightly above
or slightly below depending on the specification).
    With the caveat that the estimates reported in Tables 11 and 12 are merely conditional
correlations, and so should be interpreted with caution, they do provide some evidence towards
the question of whether higher trust is more or less optimal (at least in terms of economic
growth following a recession). They seem to suggest that countries with higher trust tend to
have faster economic growth following a recession, and that countries that do not experience
leader turnovers following a recession also tend to have faster economic growth. This pattern,
combined with the paper’s primary finding that higher trust countries have lower leader
turnover following recessions, suggests the potential that higher trust, by resulting in less
leader turnover following recessions, is better for economic growth, at least during the recovery
periods following recessions.



8    Conclusion

This paper has documented a new channel through which culture affects political outcomes.
Focusing on the importance of a country’s average level of generalized trust, we show that
severe economic downturns (defined as periods of negative growth) are much more likely to
lead to political turnover in low trust countries relative to high trust countries. The main
estimates, along with supplementary evidence, are consistent with citizens in high trust coun-
tries blaming poor macroeconomic performance on their politicians with a lower probability
relative to citizens in low trust countries. The magnitudes of our estimated effects are sizable.
For example, according to our estimates, the occurrence of a recession is 18.6 percentage
points more likely to result in leader turnover in France (where 19% of people believe “most
people can be trusted”) than in Norway (where the same figure is 71%).
    In addition to providing an example of the effect that culture can have on political in-
stitutions, our findings also allow policy-makers better anticipate where political instability
will occur during a regional economic downturn. They also suggest the potential for future
research that studies the importance of trust in determining political stability. To the best of
our knowledge, this question has not been raised in the existing literature. Future research
should try to make progress on understanding the mechanisms to address the question of
leader changes during this period in our sample.



                                                   28
whether low trust creates socially inefficient outcomes.




                                              29
References

Achen, C., and L. Bartels (2013): “Blind Retrospection: Why Shark Attacks are Bad
  for Democracy,” Working Paper 5-2013, Vanderbilt University, Center for the Study of
  Democratic Institutions.

Aghion, P., Y. Algan, P. Cahuc, and A. Shleifer (2010): “Regulation and Distrust,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3), 1015–1049.

Aisen, A., and F. J. Veiga (2006): “Does Political Instability Lead to Higher Inflation? A
  Panel Data Analysis,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 38(5), 1379–1389.

        (2013): “How Does Political Instability Affect Economic Growth?,” European Journal
  of Political Economy, 29, 151–167.

Akbari, M., D. Bahrami-Rad, and E. O. Kimbrough (2017): “Kinship, Fractionalization
  and Corruption,” Working paper, Simon Fraser University.

Akhmedov, A., and E. Zhuravskaya (2004): “Opportunistic Political Cycles: Test in A
  Young Democracy Setting,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4), 1301–1338.

Akhtari, M., D. Moreira, and L. Trucco (2017): “Political Turnover, Bureaucratic
  Turnover, and the Quality of Public Services,” Working paper, Harvard University.

Alesina, A., N. Roubini, and G. Cohen (1997): Political Cycles and the Macroeconomy.
  MIT Press.

Algan, Y., and P. Cahuc (2009): “Civic Virtue and Labor Market Institutions,” American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1), 111–45.

        (2010): “Inherited Trust and Growth,” American Economic Review, 100(5), 2060–92.

        (2013): “Trust and Growth,” Annual Review of Economics, 5(1), 521–549.

Ashworth, S., E. Bueno de Mesquita, and A. Friedenberg (2017): “Accountability
  and Information in Elections,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 9(2), 95–138.

Becker, S. O., K. Boeckh, C. Hainz, and L. Woessmann (2015): “The Empire is Dead,
  Long Live the Empire! Long-Run Persistence of Trust and Corruption in the Bureaucracy,”
  Economic Journal, forthcoming.




                                           30
Belsley, D. A., E. Kuh, and R. E. Welsch (1980): Regression Diagnostics: Identifying
  Influential Data and Sources of Collinearity. Wiley, New York.

Berg, J., J. Dickhaut, and K. McCabe (1995): “Trust, reciprocity, and social history,”
  Games and economic behavior, 10(1), 122–142.

Bloom, N., and J. V. Reenen (2007): “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices
  Across Firms and Countries,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1351–1408.

Brender, A., and A. Drazen (2008): “How Do Budget Deficits and Economic Growth
  Affect Reelection Prospects? Evidence from a Large Panel of Countries,” The American
  Economic Review, 98(5), pp. 2203–2220.

Brooke, J. (1990): “In Brazil, Scathing Criticism for the Departing President,” The New
  York Times, March 12, 1990.

Butler, J., P. Giuliano, and L. Guiso (2009): “The Right Amount of Trust,” NBER
  Working Papers 15344, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Butler, J. V., P. Giuliano, and L. Guiso (2016): “The Right Amount of Trust,” Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 14(5), 1155–1180.

Cassar, A., G. d’Adda, and P. Grosjean (2014): “Institutional Quality, Culture, and
  Norms of Cooperation: Evidence from Behavioral Field Experiments,” Journal of Law and
  Economics, 57(3), 821–863.

Cheibub, J. A., J. Gandhi, and J. R. Vreeland (2010): “Democracy and dictatorship
  revisited,” Public choice, 143(1-2), 67–101.

Cole, S., A. Healy, and E. Werker (2012): “Do voters demand responsive governments?
  Evidence from Indian disaster relief,” Journal of Development Economics, 97(2), 167 – 181.

Collier, P. (2017): “Culture, Politics, and Economic Development,” Annual Review of
  Economics, 20, 111–125.

Davis, J. A., and T. W. Smith (2014): General Social Surveys, 1972-2014: Cumulative
  codebook, no. 12. National Opinion Research Center (NORC).

Devereaux, M. B., and J.-F. Wen (1998): “Investment, Property Rights and Political
  Instability: Theory and Evidence,” European Economic Review, 42(9), 1635–1651.



                                                 31
Durante, R. (2010): “Risk, Cooperation and the Economic Origins of Social Trust: An
  Empirical Investigation,” Sciences po working paper 25887, Sciences Po Working Paper.

Enke, B. (2017): “Kinship Systems, Cooperation and the Evolution of Culture,” Working
  paper, Harvard University.

Epstein, D. L., R. Bates, J. Goldstone, I. Kristensen, and S. O’Halloran (2006):
  “Democratic transitions,” American journal of political science, 50(3), 551–569.

Feenstra, R. C., R. Inklaar, and M. P. Timmer (2015): “The Next Generation of the
  Penn World Table,” American Economic Review, 105(10), 3150–3182.

Fischer, D. H. (1989): Albion’s Seed: A Cultural History. Oxford University Press, New
  York.

Francois, P., T. Fujiwara, and T. van Ypersele (2010): “Competition Builds Trust,”
  Working paper, University of British Columbia.

Goemans, H., K. S. Gleditsch, and G. Chiozza (2009): “ARCHIGOS: A Data Set on
  Leaders, 1875-2004, Version 2.9,” Report.

Gorodnichenko, Y., and G. Roland (2017): “Culture, Institutions, and the Wealth of
  Nations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(3), 402–416.

Greif, A. (1994): “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theo-
  retical Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies,” Journal of Political Economy,
  102(5), pp. 912–950.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2004): “The Role of Social Capital in Financial
  Development,” American Economic Review, 94(3), 526–556.

          (2009): “Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  124(3), 1095–1131.

Hellwig, T. (2007): “Economic openness, policy uncertainty, and the dynamics of govern-
  ment support,” Electoral Studies, 26(4), 772–786.

Johnson, N. D., and A. A. Mislin (2011): “Trust games: A meta-analysis,” Journal of
  Economic Psychology, 32(5), 865–889.

Jones, B. F., and B. F. Olken (2005): “Do Leader’s Matter?,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 120(3), 835–864.

                                              32
Keefer, P. (2015): “Database of political institutions: Changes and variable definitions,”
  Development Research Group, World Bank.

Langfur, H. (1987): “Troubled Brazil Turns Leader into Scapegoat,” Chicago Tribune, May
  18, 1987.

Leigh, A. (2009): “Does the World Economy Swing National Elections?,” Oxford Bulletin
  of Economics and Statistics, 71(2), 0305 – 9049.

Lowes, S., N. Nunn, J. A. Robinson, and J. Weigel (2017): “The Evolution of Culture
  and Institutions: Evidence from the Kuba Kingdom,” Econometrica, 85(4), 1065–1091.

Marshall, M. G., K. Jaggers, and T. R. Gurr (2015): “Polity IV project,” .

Martinez-Bravo, M., G. Padro-i-Miquel, N. Qian, Y. Xu, and Y. Yao (2017): “Mak-
  ing Democracy Work: Culture, Social Capital and Elections in China,” Working Paper
  21058, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Martinez-Bravo, M., G. Padro-i-Miquel, N. Qian, and Y. Yao (2017): “Social Frag-
  mentation, Public Goods and Elections: Evidence from China,” Working Paper 18633,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

McLean, J. (2000): “The Philippines Struggles Against Economic and Political Crisis,” BBC
  World Service, October 7, 2000.

Neve, J.-E. D., G. W. Ward, F. D. Keulenaer, B. V. Landeghem, G. Kavetsos, and
  M. I. Norton (2015): “The Asymmetric Experience of Positive and Negative Economic
  Growth: Global Evidence Using Subjective Well-Being Data,” IZA DP No. 8914.

Nordhaus, W. D. (1975): “The political business cycle,” The review of economic studies,
  42(2), 169–190.

Nordhaus, W. D. (1989): “Alternative Approaches to the Political Business Cycle,” Brook-
  ings Papers on Economic Activity, 20(2), 1–68.

Nunn, N., and L. Wantchekon (2011): “The Slave Trade and Origins of Mistrust in
  Africa,” American Economic Review, 101(7), 3221–3252.

Persson, T., and G. Tabellini (2002): Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy,
  Zeuthen lecture book series. MIT Press.



                                            33
Rauch, J. E. (1995): “Bureaucracy, Infrastructure, and Economic Growth: Evidence from
  U.S. Cities During the Progressive Era,” American Economic Review, 85(4), 968–979.

Rotter, J. B. (1980): “Generalized Expectations for Internal Versus External Control of
  Reinforcement,” Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 80(1), 1–28.

Schulz, J. (2016): “The Churches’ Bans on Consanguineous Marriages, Kin-networks, and
  Democracy,” CeDEx Discussion Paper 2016-16.

Spence, A. M. (1974): Market signaling: Informational transfer in hiring and related screen-
  ing processes, vol. 143. Harvard Univ Pr.

Stevenson, B., and J. Wolfers (2011): “Trust in Public Institutions over the Business
  Cycle,” American Economic Review, 101(3), 281–87.

Svensson, J. (1998): “Investment, Property Rights and Political Instability: Theory and
  Evidence,” European Economic Review, 42(7), 1317–1341.

Swisher, K. (1992): “Sweden’s Crazy 500 Percent Interest Rate,” The Washington Post,
  September 18, 1992.

Tabellini, G. (2010): “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of
  Europe,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(4), 677–716.

Themnér, L. (2014): “UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset Codebook,” Uppsala Conflict
  Data Program (UCDP).

Todd, E. (1983): The Explanation of Ideology: Family Structures and Social Systems. Black-
  well Publishers, New York.

Uppal, Y. (2011): “Does Legislative Turnover Adversely Affect State Expenditure Policy?
  Evidence from Indian State Elections,” Public Choice, 147(1-2), 189–207.

Wolfers, J. (2007): “Are Voters Rational? Evidence from Gubernatorial Elections,” Dis-
  cussion paper, Pennsylvania University, The Wharton School.

World Bank (2015): World Development Report 2015: Mind, Society, and Behavior. World
  Bank Publications, Washington, D.C.

Zerbe, R. O., and C. L. Anderson (2001): “Culture and Fairness in the Development of
  Institutions in the California Gold Fields,” Journal of Economic History, 61(1), 114–143.


                                              34
                                                           Table 1: Trust by Region

        E. Europe & Former USSR           Latin America & Caribbean      W. Europe and Offshoots    S. Saharan Africa             Asia
              Country        Trust              Country        Trust         Country       Trust      Country    Trust      Country    Trust
            Macedonia         0.11       Trinidad and Tobago    0.04          France       0.19     Cape Verde 0.03       Philippines 0.09
             Armenia          0.17               Brazil         0.06           Italy       0.29      Tanzania    0.10       Malaysia   0.11
             Slovenia         0.18                Peru          0.11     United Kingdom 0.30           Kenya     0.10      Sri Lanka   0.18
              Georgia         0.18             Paraguay         0.13           Spain       0.31       Lesotho    0.10     Bangladesh 0.23
             Moldova          0.19              Ecuador         0.14          U.S.A.       0.38      Botswana    0.10         Nepal    0.27
             Lithuania        0.22             Colombia         0.15         Canada        0.40        Ghana     0.11         India    0.33
            Kyrgyzstan        0.23                Chile         0.16       Switzerland     0.44       Uganda     0.12       Thailand   0.33
              Poland          0.24             Venezuela        0.17         Australia     0.48       Zambia     0.13      Indonesia 0.35
             Bulgaria         0.24            Costa Rica        0.17      New Zealand      0.52       Nigeria    0.17        Bhutan    0.35
               Latvia         0.25            El Salvador       0.18          Finland      0.55         Mali     0.18        Taiwan    0.35
             Slovakia         0.25             Honduras         0.19       Netherlands     0.56       Malawi     0.26       Pakistan   0.37
              Croatia         0.25             Nicaragua        0.19         Sweden        0.63       Senegal    0.27         Japan    0.42
              Albania         0.26            Guatemala         0.20         Norway        0.71        Benin     0.27




35
              Ukraine         0.28             Argentina        0.20                                Madagascar 0.33
             Hungary          0.28               Bolivia        0.20           N. Africa and
              Estonia         0.31              Panama          0.21            Middle East
                                                 Mexico         0.26          Turkey         0.10
                                                Uruguay         0.26         Lebanon         0.11
                                         Dominican Republic     0.27          Cyprus         0.11
                                                                              Tunisia        0.16
                                                                               Israel        0.23

     Our measure of trust is calculated from the responses to generalized trust questions in the World Values Surveys, the Latinobarometer
     Surveys, the Asiabarometer Surveys, and the Afrobarometer Surveys. In the World Values Survey, the question is worded as: “Generally
     speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you need to be very careful in dealing with people? [1] Most people can
     be trusted. [2] Need to be very careful.” In the Barometer Surveys, the question is: “Generally speaking, would you say that you can
     trust most people, or that you can never be too careful when dealing with others? [1] You can trust most people. [2] You can never be
     too careful when dealing with others.” Countries are surveyed in different years ranging from 1981–2014. For each country, we aggregate
     all data sources and calculate a time-invariant measure, which is the fraction of respondents from a country that answer that most people
     can be trusted.
         Table 2: Correlates of Trust and Recessions
                                                (1)             (2)

                                              Trust       I(Growth<0)
Economic Characteristics
 I(Growth < 0)                                 -.02
 Log real per capita GDP                      .33***            -.01
 Growth in real per capita GDP               -.10***          -.64***
 Trade Openness: (X+M)/Y                      -.17**            -.03

Leader Characteristics
 Leader's Age                                  -.01             .01
 Leader's Gender                               -.03             -.02
 Days in office since entry                     .06             .02
 Previous times in office                       .05             .01

Institutional Characteristics
Country-level variables:
  Ethnic Fractionalization                     -.25**             .02
  Religious Fractionalization                     .02             .02
  Linguistic Fractionalization                   -.08            -.04
Country-year level variables:
  Media Freedom                                .36***             .02
  Polity2                                      .35***             .01
  DD Democracy                                 .07***          .06***
  Conflict Incidence                            -.14*             .01
Notes: Bivariate correlation coefficients are presented in the table. The
unit of observation is generally at the country and year level. The table
reports correlation coefficients and statistical significance adjusted for
clustering at the country level. The unit of observation for the
correlations between Trust and Ethnic Fractionalization, Religious
Fractionalization, and Linguistic Fractionalization is a country. The
Growth measures are for growth from period t to t +1. *, **, and ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.




                                   36
        Table 3: The Moderating Effect of Trust on the Relationship between Recessions and Leader Turnover

                                                                                      Dependent Variable: Leader Turnover
                                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)
                                                                                                           Omitting
                                                                                                          Influential
                                                                                            Baseline         Obs.           Logit

     Mean of Dependent Variable                                0.245          0.245          0.245          0.195           0.228         0.245

     Trust x I(Growth<0)                                                                    -0.341**      -0.421**       -2.457**       -0.357**
                                                                                             (0.157)       (0.174)        (1.088)        (0.163)

     Trust x I(Growth>3%)                                                                                                                -0.0297
                                                                                                                                        (0.0898)

     I(Growth<0)                                               -0.168         -0.140          -0.182        -0.247         -1.211
                                                              (0.265)        (0.256)         (0.281)       (0.266)        (1.729)
       [I(Growth<0) evaluated at the mean]                   0.074***       0.091***        0.18***        0.19***        1.2***         0.17***
                                                              [0.024]        [0.023]        [0.057]        [0.065]        [0.36]         [0.062]




37
     Controls:
     I(Growth<0)                                                 Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y
     Growth>3%                                                   N              N              N              N              N              Y
     Year FE                                                     Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y
     Country FE                                                  N              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y
     Lag controls
       Lag Characteristics of the Leader                         Y              Y              Y              Y               Y             Y
       Lag Polity2 Score                                         Y              Y              Y              Y               Y             Y
       Lag Real per capita GDP                                   Y              Y              Y              Y               Y             Y
       Lag Conflict Incidence                                    Y              Y              Y              Y               Y             Y
     Trust x all lag controls                                    Y              Y              Y              Y               Y             Y
     I(Growth<0) x all lag controls                              Y              Y              Y              Y               Y             Y

     Observations                                                2,770          2,770            2,770           2,589       2,696         2,770
     R-squared                                                   0.056          0.198            0.199           0.306      0.1369         0.199
     Trust x I(Growth<0)= Trust x I(Growth>3%)                                                                                             0.045
     Notes: The sample is comprised of democratic country-year observations. Observations are at the country and year level. The dependent
     variable is an indicator that equals one if there was a leader turnover in that country and year. Leader characteristics include the age of the
     leader when she entered office, gender, the total number of days in office and the number of times he/she was previously in office. The
     standard errors are clustered at the country level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.
     Table 4: The Moderating Effect of Trust on the Relationship between Recessions and Leader Turnover: Democracies vs. Autocracies
                                                                                                             Dependent Variable: Leader Turnover
                                                             (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)            (8)           (9)        (10)        (11)

                                                                                                      Cutoffs Based on Polity2 Score. Definition for Democratic Samples:
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Country
                                                       Cheibub et. al.                                              Lag                                   Initial year                              avg
                                                      (2010) demo vs.                                            Polity2>                                  Polity2>       Country     Country    Polity2>
                                                            auto            Lag          Lag          Lag         sample    Initial year   Initial year     sample          avg         avg       sample
                                                        classification   Polity2>0    Polity2>5    Polity2>8     median      Polity2>0      Polity2>5       median       Polity2>0   Polity2>5   median

                                                                                                                 Panel A. Democratic Samples

          Mean of Dep. Var.                                0.245           0.232        0.242        0.257        0.242        0.240         0.251          0.238         0.240       0.251       0.238

          Trust x I(Growth<0)                             -0.341**       -0.366**     -0.415**      -0.388*      -0.415**    -0.362**      -0.406***      -0.357**       -0.264*     -0.546***   -0.373**
                                                           (0.157)        (0.146)      (0.160)      (0.197)       (0.160)     (0.137)       (0.144)        (0.142)       (0.150)      (0.144)     (0.145)

          Observations                                     2,770           3,145        2,590        1,507        2,590        2,673         1,874          2,610         3,155        1,882      2,636
          R-squared                                        0.199           0.190        0.216        0.278        0.216        0.191         0.238          0.194         0.164        0.224      0.187

                                                                                                               Panel B. Non-Democratic Samples




38
          Mean of Dep. Var.                                0.123           0.122        0.135        0.159        0.135        0.156         0.162          0.155         0.110       0.152       0.136

          Trust x I(Growth<0)                             0.0122          0.0340       0.0892       0.00656      0.0892        0.171         0.185          0.169        -0.00404      0.113     0.0541
                                                          (0.148)         (0.185)      (0.175)      (0.153)      (0.175)      (0.155)       (0.151)        (0.156)        (0.186)     (0.149)    (0.170)

          Observations                                     2,534           2,165        2,720        3,803        2,720        2,637         3,436          2,700         2,155        3,428      2,674
          R-squared                                        0.175           0.189        0.147        0.131        0.147        0.144         0.124          0.142         0.153        0.119      0.140

          Controls:
          I(Growth<0)                                         Y              Y            Y            Y            Y            Y              Y              Y            Y           Y           Y
          Year FE                                             Y              Y            Y            Y            Y            Y              Y              Y            Y           Y           Y
          Country FE                                          Y              Y            Y            Y            Y            Y              Y              Y            Y           Y           Y
          Lag controls
            Lag Characteristics of the Leader                 Y              Y            Y              Y            Y         Y             Y           Y            Y             Y            Y
            Lag Polity2 Score                                 Y              Y            Y              Y            Y         Y             Y           Y            Y             Y            Y
            Lag Real per capita GDP                           Y              Y            Y              Y            Y         Y             Y           Y            Y             Y            Y
            Lag Conflict Incidence                            Y              Y            Y              Y            Y         Y             Y           Y            Y             Y            Y
          Trust x all lag controls                            Y              Y            Y              Y            Y         Y             Y           Y            Y             Y            Y
          I(Growth<0) x all lag controls                      Y              Y            Y              Y            Y         Y             Y           Y            Y             Y            Y
          Notes: Observations are at the country and year level. All regressions control for country fixed effects, year fixed effects, the uninteracted recession indicator variable, as well as the full
          (the age of the leader when she entered office, gender, the total number of days in office and the number of times she was previously in office), lag polity2, lag per capita GDP, lag conflict
          incidence; the interaction of each variable with trust, and the interaction of each variable with the recession indicator variable. Sample restrictions are stated in the column headings.
          Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.
Table 5: The Moderating Effect of Trust on the Relationship between Recessions and Leader
Turnover: Multinomial Estimates on Regular vs. Irregular Turnover
                                                                                                Dependent Variable: Leader Turnover
                                                (1)                (2)                (3a)               (3b)                (4)                 (5)               (6)                 (7)
                                                                                    Multinomial Logit Estimates

                                                                                 Regular Leader    Irregular Leader
 Dependent Variable:                                      All                      Turnover            Turnover                                          All
                                                                                                                                   Democracies                           Democracies
                                                                                                                                          Non-Election
 Sample:                                   Democracies                     Democracies and Autocracies                 Election Years        Years             Presidential    Parliamentary

 Mean of Dep. Var.                            0.245               0.187              0.164               0.023             0.536             0.153               0.245             0.246

 Trust x I(Growth<0)                         -0.341**            -0.198*            -0.151**            0.050             -1.301**           -0.145               -0.121         -0.396**
                                              (0.157)            (0.110)             (0.073)           (0.041)             (0.509)          (0.176)              (0.371)          (0.168)
 Controls:
 I(Growth<0)                                     Y                  Y                    Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
 Year FE                                         Y                  Y                    Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
 Country FE                                      Y                  Y                    Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
 Lag controls
   Lag Characteristics of the Leader             Y                  Y                    Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
   Lag Polity2 Score                             Y                  Y                    Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
   Lag Real per capita GDP                       Y                  Y                    Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
   Lag Conflict Incidence                        Y                  Y                    Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
 Trust x all lag controls                        Y                  Y                    Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
 I(Growth<0) x all lag controls                  Y                  Y                    Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y

 Observations                                    2,770              5,310                        5,310                        442             1,658               1,176           1,593
 R-squared                                       0.199              0.160                        0.2275                      0.526            0.267               0.368           0.188
 Notes: Observations are at the country and year level. All regressions control for country fixed effects, year fixed effects, the uninteracted recession indicator variable, as well as the
 full set of baseline controls, which include: lag leader characteristics (the age of the leader when she entered office, gender, the total number of days in office and the number of times
 she was previously in office), lag polity2, lag per capita GDP, lag conflict incidence; the interaction of each variable with trust, and the interaction of each variable with the recession
 indicator variable. Column (1) reports our baseline estimate, which is estimated using lagged democracies only. Column (2) reports the baseline regression estimated on the pooled
 sample of democracies and autocracies. In the multinomial estimates, reported in columns (3a) and (3b), the omitted category is for no political turnover. The coefficients reported
 are marginal effects evaluated at control variable means. Columns (4) and (5) estimate the baseline regression on a partition of the baseline democratic sample: those observations
 from election years, and those observations from non-election years. Columns (6) and (7) estimate the baseline regression on a different partition of the baseline democratic sample:
 those observations from presidential versus parliamentary democracies. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
 5% and 1% level.




                                                                                    39
     Table 6: The Moderating Effect of Trust on the Relationship between Recessions and Leader Turnover: Heterogeneity by Media
     Freedom and Frequency of Leader Turnover
                                                                                              Dependent Variable: Leader Turnover
                                                   (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)            (8)             (9)
                                                                                                           Some or No
                                                                             Some or No Free Media -       Free Media -       Mean            Mean
                                                              Always Free   Free Media at   50th               50th        Turnover <      Turnover >         Lag            Lag
                                                Baseline         Media        Any Point   Percentile        Percentile       Median          Median        Conflict=0     Conflict=1


      Mean of Dep. Var.                          0.245           0.256          0.240          0.259           0.234          0.162          0.349           0.247          0.239


      Trust x I(Growth<0)                       -0.341**       -0.543**        -0.0204       -0.531***        -0.0117       -0.472**        -0.0141         -0.273*         0.193
                                                 (0.157)        (0.202)        (0.490)         (0.185)        (0.489)        (0.177)         (0.299)        (0.150)        (1.308)

      Controls:




40
      I(Growth<0)                                   Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
      Year FE                                       Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
      Country FE                                    Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
      Lag controls
        Lag Characteristics of the Leader           Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
        Lag Polity2 Score                           Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
        Lag Real per capita GDP                     Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
        Lag Conflict Incidence                      Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
      Trust x all lag controls                      Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y
      I(Growth<0) x all lag controls                Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y

      Observations                                2,770          1,064          1,691           1,318          1,437          1,532           1,238          2,243           422
      R-squared                                   0.199          0.341           0.156           0.280          0.167          0.116          0.248           0.221          0.356
      Notes: The sample is comprised of democratic country-year observations. Observations are at the country and year level. All regressions control for country fixed effects,
      year fixed effects, the uninteracted recession indicator variable, as well as the full set of baseline controls, which include: lag leader characteristics (the age of the leader
      when she entered office, gender, the total number of days in office and the number of times she was previously in office), lag polity2, lag per capita GDP, lag conflict
      incidence; the interaction of each variable with trust, and the interaction of each variable with the recession indicator variable. A description of each sample is provided in
      the column headings. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.
     Table 7: The Moderating Effect of Trust on the Relationship between Recessions and Leader Turnover: Robustness to additional
     controls
                                                                                                           Dependent Variable:
                                                                                                                                                            Lag Leader
                                                                                                      Leader Turnover                                        Turnover
                                                                     (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)           (5)        (6)         (7)            (8)

           Mean of Dependent Variable                               0.245       0.248        0.245        0.245         0.234      0.248       0.256           0.245

           Trust x I(Growth<0)                                    -0.341**     -0.424**     -0.293*       -0.233     -0.383**     -0.469***   -0.496***       0.0533
                                                                   (0.157)      (0.169)     (0.157)       (0.155)       (0.182)    (0.173)     (0.153)        (0.133)

           Controls:
           I(Growth<0)                                                Y            Y           Y            Y             Y          Y            Y              Y
           Year FE                                                    Y            Y           Y            Y             Y          Y            Y              Y
           Country FE                                                 Y            Y           Y            Y             Y          Y            Y              Y
           Lag controls
             Lag Characteristics of the Leader                        Y            Y           Y            Y             Y          Y            Y              Y
             Lag Polity2 Score                                        Y            Y           Y            Y             Y          Y            Y              Y
             Lag Real per capita GDP                                  Y            Y           Y            Y             Y          Y            Y              Y




41
             Lag Conflict Incidence                                   Y            Y           Y            Y             Y          Y            Y              Y
           Trust x all lag controls                                   Y            Y           Y            Y             Y          Y            Y              Y
           I(Growth<0) x all lag controls                             Y            Y           Y            Y             Y          Y            Y              Y

           Additional Controls:
            Lag Trade Openness                                        N            Y           N            N             N          N            N              N
            Trust x Lag Trade Openness                                N            Y           N            N             N          N            N              N
            Growth<0 x Lag Trade Openess                              N            Y           N            N             N          N            N              N
            Growth<0 x Mean Turnover                                  N            N           Y            N             N          N            N              N
            Growth<0 x Mean Growth Rate                               N            N           N             Y            N          N            N              N
            Growth<0 x Media Freedom                                  N            N           N            N             Y          N            N              N
            Growth<0 x Ethnic, Ling, Rel Fractionalization            N            N           N            N             N          Y            N              N
            Growth<0 x Locus of Control                               N            N           N            N             N          N            Y              N

           Observations                                             2,770        2,361       2,770        2,770         1,697       2,492       2,187          2,665
           R-squared                                                  0.199       0.219        0.174      0.175         0.205          0.212       0.217        0.358
           Notes: The sample is comprised of democratic country-year observations. Observations are at the country and year level. All regressions control for country
           fixed effects, year fixed effects, the uninteracted recession indicator variable, as well as the full set of baseline controls, which include: lag leader
           characteristics (the age of the leader when she entered office, gender, the total number of days in office and the number of times she was previously in
           office), lag polity2, lag per capita GDP, lag conflict incidence; the interaction of each variable with trust, and the interaction of each variable with the
           recession indicator variable. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.
     Table 8: The Moderating Effect of Trust on the Relationship between Recessions and Leader Turnover: Robustness to quality of
     trust measure
                                                                                                     Dependent Variable: Leader Turnover
                                                               (1)           (2)           (3)           (4a)          (4b)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)

                                                                                                                   Algan &
                                                                                                                    Cahuc:
                                                                                       Omit Trust     Algan &     Inherited                        Omit                     Johnson &
                                                                                        Surveys       Cahuc:     Trust Pooled       Omit       Unreliable or                  Mislin:
                                                                                         from        Inherited     Measure,       Unreliable   Unrepresent     Use only    Experiment-
                                                                         Base Year     Recession    Trust Pooled   Dropped          Trust       ative Trust     WVS        Based Trust
                                                            Baseline       Trust         Years        Measure      Outliers        Surveys       Surveys       Surveys       Measure


                Mean of Dep. Var.                            0.245         0.245         0.242          0.288         0.230         0.254         0.246         0.243          0.287


                Trust x I(Growth<0)                        -0.341**       -0.374**     -0.450***       -0.188         -0.257      -0.451***     -0.550***      -0.597***      -0.282
                                                            (0.157)        (0.159)       (0.155)       (0.748)       (0.448)       (0.159)        (0.174)       (0.179)       (0.352)

                Controls:




42
                I(Growth<0)                                     Y             Y             Y             Y             Y              Y             Y             Y             Y
                Year FE                                         Y             Y             Y             Y             Y              Y             Y             Y             Y
                Country FE                                      Y             Y             Y             Y             Y              Y             Y             Y             Y
                Lag controls
                  Lag Characteristics of the Leader             Y             Y             Y             Y             Y              Y             Y             Y             Y
                  Lag Polity2 Score                             Y             Y             Y             Y             Y              Y             Y             Y             Y
                  Lag Real per capita GDP                       Y             Y             Y             Y             Y              Y             Y             Y             Y
                  Lag Conflict Incidence                        Y             Y             Y             Y             Y              Y             Y             Y             Y
                Trust x all lag controls                        Y             Y             Y             Y             Y              Y             Y             Y             Y
                I(Growth<0) x all lag controls                  Y             Y             Y             Y             Y              Y             Y             Y             Y

                Observations                                 2,770         2,770          2,675          754           686          2,546         2,269          1,862         1,311
                R-squared                                     0.199         0.199         0.198        0.394           0.607         0.197         0.209         0.230         0.264
                Notes: The sample is comprised of democratic country-year observations. Observations are at the country and year level. All regressions control for country
                fixed effects, year fixed effects, the uninteracted recession indicator variable, as well as the full set of baseline controls, which include: lag leader characteristics
                (the age of the leader when she entered office, gender, the total number of days in office and the number of times she was previously in office), lag polity2, lag
                per capita GDP, lag conflict incidence; the interaction of each variable with trust, and the interaction of each variable with the recession indicator variable.
                Information about the definition of trust is provided in column headings. Column (2) defines the long-run trust measure as the first year trust is observed for
                each country. Column (3) omits trust observations measured during recession years. Column (4a) uses Algan and Cahuc's pooled measure of inherited trust.
                Column (4b) uses the same measure, but we identify and drop outliers according to Cook's distance using the cutoff of 4 divided by the sample size. Column (5)
                omits unreliable trust surveys, and column (6) omits unreliable or unrepresentative surveys. Column (7) uses trust measures from the World Value Surveys
                only. Column (8) uses Johnson and Mislin's measure of trust that is constructed from trust experiments. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *, **
                and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.
Table 9: The Moderating Effect of Trust on the Relationship between Recessions and Leader
Turnover: Robustness to Alternative Measures of Recession
                                                                      Dependent Variable: Leader Turnover
                                                           (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)

                                                                         Recession Defined Relative to
                                                                          Country's Average Growth:         Share of Years
                                                                                                            with Growth<0
                                                        Baseline                             <10th          during Leader
                                                      (Growth <0)       <5th Percentile    Percentile           Tenure


        Dep Variable Mean                                 0.245             0.245            0.245              0.245


        Trust x Recession Measure                       -0.341**            -0.235          -0.389**           -0.443*
                                                         (0.157)            (0.303)          (0.188)           (0.246)

        Controls:
        Recession Measure                                   Y                  Y                Y                  Y
        Year FE                                             Y                  Y                Y                  Y
        Country FE                                          Y                  Y                Y                  Y
        Lag controls
          Lag Characteristics of the Leader                 Y                  Y                Y                  Y
          Lag Polity2 Score                                 Y                  Y                Y                  Y
          Lag Real per capita GDP                           Y                  Y                Y                  Y
          Lag Conflict Incidence                            Y                  Y                Y                  Y
        Trust x all lag controls                            Y                  Y                Y                  Y
        Recession Measure x all lag controls                Y                  Y                Y                  Y

        Observations                                      2,770              2,770            2,770             2,770
        R-squared                                          0.199              0.194            0.196              0.197
        Notes: The sample is comprised of democratic country-year observations. Observations are at the country and
        year level. All regressions control for country fixed effects, year fixed effects, the uninteracted recession
        indicator variable, as well as the full set of baseline controls, which include: lag leader characteristics (the age
        of the leader when she entered office, gender, the total number of days in office and the number of times she
        was previously in office), lag polity2, lag per capita GDP, lag conflict incidence; the interaction of each variable
        with trust, and the interaction of each variable with the recession indicator variable. Standard errors are
        clustered at the country level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.




                                                                 43
Table 10: The Moderating Effect of Trust on the Relationship between Recessions and Leader
Turnover: Controlling for External Recessions
                                                                           Dependent Variable: Leader Turnover

                                                       (1)                 (2)               (3)                 (4)               (5)
                                                                                 External Recession Measure. Negative Growth of:

                                                    Baseline          Countries in the same Region                 Trading Partners


 Mean of Dependent Variable                          0.245                0.245             0.245              0.245             0.245


 Trust x I(Growth<0)                                -0.341**             -0.349**          -0.362**          -0.342**          -0.339**
                                                     (0.157)             (0.156)           (0.180)            (0.156)           (0.162)


 Trust x External Recession                                               0.066             0.059              0.018             0.083
                                                                         (0.119)           (0.150)            (0.161)           (0.205)


 External Recession                                                      -0.0410           -0.0355            -0.0202           -0.0810
                                                                         (0.0374)          (0.0456)           (0.0616)         (0.0741)


 Trust x I(Growth<0) x External Recession                                                   0.0341                               -0.160
                                                                                           (0.338)                              (0.438)


 I(Growth<0) x External Recession                                                           -0.024                               0.147
                                                                                           (0.104)                              (0.164)
 Controls:
 I(Growth<0)                                            Y                   Y                 Y                   Y                Y
 Year FE                                                Y                   Y                 Y                   Y                Y
 Country FE                                             Y                   Y                 Y                   Y                Y
 Lag controls
   Lag Characteristics of the Leader                    Y                   Y                 Y                   Y                Y
   Lag Polity2 Score                                    Y                   Y                 Y                   Y                Y
   Lag Real per capita GDP                              Y                   Y                 Y                   Y                Y
   Lag Conflict Incidence                               Y                   Y                 Y                   Y                Y
 Trust x all lag controls                               Y                   Y                 Y                   Y                Y
 I(Growth<0) x all lag controls                         Y                   Y                 Y                   Y                Y


 Observations                                         2,770               2,770             2,770              2,770             2,770
 R-squared                                            0.199                 0.199           0.200              0.199            0.201
 Notes: The sample is comprised of democratic country-year observations. Observations are at the country and year level. All
 regressions control for country fixed effects, year fixed effects, the uninteracted recession indicator variable, as well as the full set of
 baseline controls, which include: lag leader characteristics (the age of the leader when she entered office, gender, the total number of
 days in office and the number of times she was previously in office), lag polity2, lag per capita GDP, lag conflict incidence; the
 interaction of each variable with trust, and the interaction of each variable with the recession indicator variable. Standard errors are
 clustered at the country level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.




                                                                    44
                  Table 11: The Effect of Trust on Recession Recovery
                                                           Dependent Variable:
                                                    GDP growth from year t to year t+1
                                             (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)


Mean of Dep. Var.                          0.0411         0.0411        0.0413           0.0412


I(GDP Growth t-1 to t < 0)               -0.0344***
                                          (0.00847)
       x Trust                            0.0508**
                                          (0.0231)
I(GDP Growth t-2 to t-1 < 0)                             -0.0158*
                                                         (0.00799)
       x Trust                                            0.0262
                                                          (0.0187)
I(GDP Growth t-3 to t-2 < 0)                                           -0.0180**
                                                                       (0.00691)
       x Trust                                                         0.0370**
                                                                       (0.0177)
I(GDP Growth t-4 to t-3 < 0)                                                         -0.0113**
                                                                                     (0.00479)
       x Trust                                                                           0.0208
                                                                                     (0.0133)
Controls:
Year FE                                       Y              Y             Y               Y
Country FE                                    Y              Y             Y               Y
Lag controls
  Lag Characteristics of the Leader           Y              Y             Y               Y
  Lag Polity2 Score                           Y              Y             Y               Y
  Lag Real per capita GDP                     Y              Y             Y               Y
  Lag Conflict Incidence                      Y              Y             Y               Y

Observations                                2,619          2,619         2,596           2,573
R-squared                                       0.309          0.295       0.296        0.296
Notes: The sample is comprised of democratic country-year observations. Observations are at
the country and year level. Leader characteristics include the age of the leader when she entered
office, gender, the total number of days in office and the number of times he/she was previously
in office. The "I" followed by a parenthetical inequality represents an indicator variable that
equals one if the interior statement is true. The standard errors are clustered at the country
level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.




                                               45
            Table 12: The Effect of Leader Turnover on Recession Recovery
                                                               Dependent Variable:
                                                        GDP growth from year t to year t+1
                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)


Mean of Dep. Var.                              0.0411         0.0414        0.0415         0.0415


I(GDP Growth t-1 to t < 0)                   -0.0202***
                                              (0.00454)
       x I(No leader turnover t-1 to t+1)     -0.000287
                                              (0.00804)
I(GDP Growth t-2 to t-1 < 0)                                 -0.0102**
                                                             (0.00469)
       x I(No leader turnover t-2 to t+1)                     0.00188
                                                             (0.00612)
I(GDP Growth t-3 to t-2 < 0)                                              -0.0128***
                                                                           (0.00417)
       x I(No leader turnover t-3 to t+1)                                  0.00972*
                                                                           (0.00576)
I(GDP Growth t-4 to t-3 < 0)                                                             -0.0116***
                                                                                          (0.00364)
       x I(No leader turnover t-4 to t+1)                                                 0.0160**
                                                                                          (0.00737)
Controls:
Year FE                                           Y              Y             Y              Y
Country FE                                        Y              Y             Y              Y
Lag controls
  Lag Characteristics of the Leader               Y              Y             Y              Y
  Lag Polity2 Score                               Y              Y             Y              Y
  Lag Real per capita GDP                         Y              Y             Y              Y
  Lag Conflict Incidence                          Y              Y             Y              Y

Observations                                    2,619          2,518         2,420           2,327
R-squared                                         0.308        0.293         0.292          0.298
Notes: The sample is comprised of democratic country-year observations. Observations are at the
country and year level. Leader characteristics include the age of the leader when she entered office,
gender, the total number of days in office and the number of times he/she was previously in office.
The "I" followed by a parenthetical inequality represents an indicator variable that equals one if the
interior statement is true. The standard errors are clustered at the country level. *, ** and ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.




                                                 46
Data Appendix

A        Variable Definitions and Sources

A.1       Trust Measure

The generalized trust questions from the World Values Survey and the different Barometer
series are both formulated to produce binary measures. In the Barometer series, the fol-
lowing waves contain questions regarding trust: Afrobarometer 2004, Afrobarometer 2008,
Asiabarometer 2003-2007, Latinobarometer 1996-1998, and Latinobarometer 2000-2010.
       In the World Values Survey, the question is worded as: “Generally speaking, would you
say that most people can be trusted or that you need to be very careful in dealing with people?
[1] Most people can be trusted. [2] Need to be very careful.”
       In the Barometer Surveys, the question is: “Generally speaking, would you say that you
can trust most people, or that you can never be too careful when dealing with others? [1]
You can trust most people. [2] You can never be too careful when dealing with others.”
       Table A.1 lists the countries and number of years for which the trust survey questions
were deemed low-quality or nationally unrepresentative. We code a survey as low-quality if it
does not report the survey procedure, has a missing or incomplete technical report, provides
no breakdown between urban and rural observations, appears to be self-administered, or
administered through mail. A survey is unrepresentative if the documentation explicitly
states that the sample is not nationally representative.
       Table A.1 lists the countries and number of years covered by the World Values Survey.


A.2       Leader Turnover Measure

Our turnover measure is computed from leader data from version 4.1 of the Archigos database
Goemans, Gleditsch, and Chiozza (2009). The data cover all independent states and their
effective leaders. Each country is included each year from 1945-2015.33 The database identifies
the actual effective ruler of each state on a case-by-case basis. For example, it avoids coding
ceremonial monarchs in contemporary European countries as heads of state. In parliamentary
regimes, the prime minister is coded as the ruler; in presidential systems, the president is coded
as the ruler. In communist regimes, the ruler is typically coded as the chairman of the party.
  33
    The principal sources of raw data for Archigos are www.rulers.org and www.worldstatesmen.org. We
corroborate the Archigos data with the Change in Source of Leader Support (CHISOLS) Dataset, constructed
by Brett Ashley Leeds and Michaela Mattes. CHISOLS uses the same definition of a primary leader as the
Archigos database and covers the years 1919 to 2015


                                                  A.1
                                Table A.1: Reliability and Representativeness
                   Barometer Surveys                                               World Values Survey
       Total country-years       330                                     Total country-years     225

Unrepresentative                                                  Unrepresentative
   countries         Years       Low Quality countries Years         countries        Years      Low Quality countries Years
     Bhutan            1                   Benin        1             Argentina         2                Algeria        1
      Bolivia          2                Botswana        2              Australia        2              Argentina        2
      Brazil           3               Cape Verde       1           Bangladesh          1               Australia       1
   Cambodia            2                  Ghana         1              Belarus          1               Belarus         1
    Colombia           3                  Kenya         1              Canada           1                 Brazil        1
   Costa Rica          3                 Lesotho        2                Chile          3                 Chile         3
  El Salvador          2               Madagascar       1                China          2                 China         4
   Guatemala           2                  Malawi        2             Colombia          3              Colombia         3
   Honduras            2                    Mali        2               Cyprus          1           Czech Republic      1
       India           2               Mozambique       1              Ecuador          1             El Salvador       1
       Laos            2                 Namibia        2                Egypt          1                Finland        1
    Malaysia           2                  Nigeria       2            El Salvador        1             Guatemala         1
    Maldives           1                 Senegal        1             Germany           1                 India         3
    Mongolia           1               South Africa     2            Guatemala          1              Indonesia        1
    Myanmar            3                 Tanzania       2                India          2                  Iraq         1
      Nepal            1                  Uganda        2             Indonesia         1                 Japan         1
   Nicaragua           2                  Zambia        2                Israel         1                Jordan         1
     Panama            2                Zimbabwe        1                 Italy         1                Mexico         2
    Paraguay           3                                                Jordan          1               Moldova         1
   Philippines         2                                             Kyrgyzstan         1            New Zealand        1
   Singapore           2                                               Lebanon          1                Nigeria        3
  South Korea          1                                                Mexico          1               Norway          1
    Sri Lanka          2                                            Montenegro          1               Pakistan        1
     Taiwan            1                                            Netherlands         1             Philippines       2
   Uzbekistan          2                                            New Zealand         2                Poland         1
    Vietnam            3                                                Nigeria         2                Russia         1
                                                                       Norway           2            Saudi Arabia       1
                                                                       Pakistan         1               Slovakia        1
                                                                          Peru          1            South Africa       2
                                                                     Philippines        2            South Korea        1
                                                                    Saudi Arabia        1                 Spain         1
                                                                       Slovakia         1               Sweden          1
                                                                       Slovenia         2            Switzerland        1
                                                                    South Africa        2              Tanzania         1
                                                                    South Korea         2                Turkey         2
                                                                         Spain          2
                                                                       Sweden           2
                                                                        Taiwan          1
                                                                      Tanzania          1
                                                                       Thailand         1
                                                                        Tunisia         1
                                                                        Turkey          3
                                                                       Uruguay          1
                                                                     Uzbekistan         1
                                                                     Venezuela          1
                                                                       Vietnam          2

     Total                 52             Total             28         Total                66          Total               51




                                                            A.2
        Table A.2: Coverage of World Values Survey
                         World Values Survey
        Country           Years                  Country           Years
         Albania            2                       Mali             1
         Algeria            2                     Mexico             7
        Andorra             1                    Moldova             3
       Argentina            5                  Montenegro            3
        Armenia             2                    Morocco             3
        Australia           4                  Netherlands           2
      Azerbaijan            2                 New Zealand            3
      Bangladesh            2                     Nigeria            4
        Belarus             3                     Norway             2
Bosnia and Herzegovina      2                    Pakistan            3
          Brazil            2                      Peru              4
        Bulgaria            2                  Philippines           3
     Burkina Faso           1                     Poland             4
        Canada              2                      Qatar             1
          Chile             5                    Romania             3
          China             5                     Russia             4
       Colombia             4                    Rwanda              2
         Croatia            1                 Saudi Arabia           1
         Cyprus             2                   Singapore            2
    Czech Republic          1                    Slovakia            2
  Dominican Republic        1                    Slovenia            3
        Ecuador             1                 South Africa           4
          Egypt             3                 South Korea            6
      El Salvador           1                      Spain             5
         Estonia            2                    Sweden              5
        Ethiopia            1                  Switzerland           3
         Finland            3                     Taiwan             2
         France             1                    Tanzania            1
        Georgia             2                    Thailand            1
       Germany              3             Trinidad and Tobago        2
         Ghana              2                     Tunisia            1
      Guatemala             1                     Turkey             5
        Hungary             3                     Uganda             1
          India             4                    Ukraine             3
       Indonesia            2               United Kingdom           2
           Iran             2           United States of America     5
           Iraq             3                    Uruguay             3
          Israel            1                  Uzbekistan            1
           Italy            1                   Venezuela            2
          Japan             5                    Vietnam             2
         Jordan             3                     Yemen              1
      Kazakhstan            1                     Zambia             1
         Kuwait             1                   Zimbabwe             2
      Kyrgyzstan            2
          Latvia            1
        Lebanon             1
          Libya             1
       Lithuania            1
      Macedonia             2
        Malaysia            2




                                  A.3
In dual systems, where there is a president and a prime minister, the president is considered
the leader.34
    The data report the start date and end date of office for each leader-spell, the manner in
which a leader enters office, and several additional leader characteristics. We define our main
dependent variable as an indicator for whether a leadership transition occurred in a given
year: a value of 0 represents no leadership transition, and a value of 1 represents a leadership
transition.


A.3     Recession Measure

Our measure of recessions is defined using data on national GDP from version 9.0 of the Penn
World Tables (Feenstra, Inklaar, and Timmer, 2015). We use expenditure-side real GDP at
chained PPPs and generate an indicator which equals 0 if a country’s GDP is larger than its
GDP in the previous year, and equals 1 if a country’s GDP is smaller than its GDP in the
previous year.


A.4     Democracy Measure

Our baseline sample includes only country-years for which the country was democratic in the
last period. We use the coding system of Cheibub, Gandhi, and Vreeland (2010) to define
democracy for the baseline inclusion criteria. In that dataset, the definition of a democratic
state is one that holds elections to select the executive and the legislature, has a closed
legislature, legally allows multiple political parties, has multiple parties in practice, has a
legislature with multiple parties, has seen a rules-based change in leadership, and whose
incumbent leader has not consolidated power in a way that violates the above criteria.


A.5     Controls in Baseline

Our baseline regression contains seven additional controls: four controls for leader character-
istics, and three controls for national characteristics. The four leader characteristic controls
come from version 4.1 of the Archigos database Goemans, Gleditsch, and Chiozza (2009).
First, we include gender, a binary variable which equals 1 if a leader is male, and equals 0 if
not. Second, we include age, which is a continuous variable that records the age of the leader
in years. Third, we include the tenure of the leader in days during the current, uninterrupted
  34
     Goemans, Gleditsch, and Chiozza (2009) discuss the details of each country and exceptions to the usual
coding rules for Archigos.




                                                   A.4
                                          Table A.3: Summary Statistics
                                                    (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)
                                                                Standard
                                                  Mean          Deviation       Minimum         Maximum      Observations

                                                                                Full Sample
     Trust                                      0.2511581       0.1379823       0.0349878      0.7120841           5304
     I(Growth < 0)                              0.1813726       0.3853629           0              1               5304
     Trust * I(Growth < 0)                      0.0442497       0.1098524           0          0.7120841           5304
     Leader Turnover Indicator                  0.1870287       0.3899713           0              1               5304

                                                                          Lagged democracies only
     Trust                                        0.273           0.156           0.035           0.712            2770
     I(Growth < 0)                                0.156           0.363             0               1              2770
     Trust * I(Growth < 0)                        0.042           0.114             0             0.712            2770
     Leader Turnover Indicator                    0.245           0.430             0               1              2770

                                                                       Lagged non-democracies only
     Trust                                        0.227           0.111           0.035           0.559            2534
     I(Growth < 0)                                0.209           0.407             0               1              2534
     Trust * I(Growth < 0)                        0.047           0.105             0             0.559            2534
     Leader Turnover Indicator                    0.123           0.329             0               1              2534

     Notes: The table reports summary statistics for the primary variables of the analysis. The sample is that of our baseline
     regression, reported in Column (3) of Table 3. The unit of observation is the country-year.




leadership spell. For example, if a president is voted into office for two consecutive terms, the
tenure variable includes the number of days since the start of the first term. If a president is
in office for two non-consecutive terms, then the tenure variable will include the number of
days since the start of the most recent term. Finally, we include a categorical variable that
encodes the number of times a leader has previously held the same office. This variable takes
values from 0 to 4 in our sample.
   The three national controls are conflict incidence, GDP, and political regime. To measure
armed conflict, we use version 4 of the UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset Codebook
(Themnér, 2014) and generate an indicator variable that takes a value of 0 if a country
experiences no armed conflict in a given year, and takes a value of 1 if a country experiences
any kind of conflict in a given year. An armed conflict is defined as “a contested incompatibility
that concerns government and/or territory where the use of armed force between two parties,
of which at least one is the government of a state, results in at least 25 battle-related deaths.”
To measure GDP, we use the expenditure-side real GDP at chained PPPs from version 9.0 of
the Penn World Tables (Feenstra, Inklaar, and Timmer, 2015). To measure political regime,
we use the Polity 2 variable from the Polity IV Project (Marshall, Jaggers, and Gurr, 2015).
The Polity scale ranges from 10, which represents strongly democratic states, to −10, which
represents strongly autocratic states.




                                                              A.5
