NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FRAGILITY OF MARKET RISK INSURANCE
Ralph Koijen
Motohiro Yogo
Working Paper 24182
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24182

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018
A.M. Best Company, Morningstar, and the NAIC own the copyright to their respective data,
which we use with permission under their license agreements with Princeton University. This
paper is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation grant 1727049 and the
Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance. We thank Adam Xu and Zhen Ye for
assistance on constructing data from Morningstar Annuity Intelligence. We thank Don Noh,
Jihong Song, and Haiyue Yu for proofreading. For comments and discussions, we thank Naoki
Aizawa, Mark Flannery, Victoria Ivashina, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Emanuel Mönch, Borghan
Narajabad, Theo Nijman, Anna Paulson, Richard Rosen, and Donghwa Shin. We also thank
seminar participants at Boston University; Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis; Federal
Reserve Board; Michigan State University; NYU; Ohio State University; Princeton University;
Temple University; UC Berkeley; UCLA; University of Chicago; University of Cincinnati;
University of Delaware; University of Maryland; University of Michigan; University of
Nebraska; UNC; University of South Carolina; UT Austin; UVA; Derivatives and Volatility
2017: The State of the Art; 2017 DNB/Riksbank Macroprudential Conference; 2017
SITEWorkshop on Financial Regulation; 2017 NBER Conference on Financial Market
Regulation; 2017 ICPM-Netspar Discussion Forum; 2017 IMF Conference on Monetary,
Financial, and Prudential Policy Interactions in the Post-CrisisWorld; 2017 NBER Insurance
Meeting; and 2018 Macroeconomics of Pensions and Retirement Financing Conference. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ralph Koijen and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Fragility of Market Risk Insurance
Ralph Koijen and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 24182
January 2018, Revised June 2020
JEL No. G22,G32
ABSTRACT
Insurers sell retail financial products called variable annuities that package mutual funds with
minimum return guarantees over long horizons. Variable annuities accounted for $1.5 trillion or
35% of U.S. life insurer liabilities in 2015. Sales decreased and fees increased after the 2008
financial crisis as the higher valuation of existing liabilities stressed risk-based capital. Insurers
also made guarantees less generous or stopped offering guarantees to reduce risk exposure. These
supply-side effects persist long after the financial crisis in the low interest rate environment, and
variable annuity insurers have suffered especially low stock returns in the COVID-19 crisis. We
develop an equilibrium model of insurance markets in which financial frictions and market power
are important determinants of pricing, contract characteristics, and the degree of market
incompleteness.

Ralph Koijen
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Ralph.koijen@chicagobooth.edu
Motohiro Yogo
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
myogo@princeton.edu

The traditional role of life insurers is to insure idiosyncratic risk through products like
life annuities, life insurance, and health insurance. With the secular decline of deﬁned
beneﬁt pension plans and Social Security around the world, life insurers are increasingly
taking on the role of insuring market risk through minimum return guarantees. In the
U.S., life insurers sell retail ﬁnancial products called variable annuities that package mutual
funds with minimum return guarantees over long horizons. Variable annuities have grown
to be the largest category of life insurer liabilities, larger than traditional annuities and
life insurance, and accounted for $1.5 trillion or 35% of U.S. life insurer liabilities in 2015.
Variable annuities also represent an important share of the mutual fund sector because the
underlying investments are mutual funds.
The large size of the variable annuity market reﬂects its importance for household welfare.
In theory, minimum return guarantees could facilitate eﬃcient risk sharing across heterogeneous agents (Dumas, 1989, Chan and Kogan, 2002) or overlapping generations (Allen and
Gale, 1997, Ball and Mankiw, 2007). Investors cannot easily replicate minimum return guarantees because traded options have shorter maturity and model uncertainty exposes investors
to basis risk in a dynamic hedging program. Therefore, insurers complete a missing market
for long-maturity options by oﬀering minimum return guarantees over long horizons.
From the insurers’ perspective, minimum return guarantees are diﬃcult to price and
hedge because traded options have shorter maturity. Imperfect hedging leads to risk mismatch that stresses risk-based capital when the valuation of existing liabilities increases with
a falling stock market, falling interest rates, or rising volatility. During the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis, many insurers including Aegon, Allianz, AXA, Delaware Life, John Hancock, and Voya
suﬀered large increases in variable annuity reserves ranging from 27% to 125% of total equity.
Hartford was bailed out by the Troubled Asset Relief Program in June 2009 because of signiﬁcant losses on their variable annuity business.1 Risk mismatch between general account
assets and minimum return guarantees leads to negative duration and negative convexity for
the overall balance sheet and poses a challenge for insurers in the low interest rate environment after the ﬁnancial crisis. As a consequence, the stock returns of U.S. life insurers have
signiﬁcant negative exposure to long-term bond returns after the ﬁnancial crisis (Hartley
et al., 2017).
The COVID-19 crisis has again exposed the fragility of variable annuity insurers, which
have suﬀered among the lowest stock returns in the overall ﬁnancial sector that includes
banking. We compare the drawdown, which is the maximum fall in the cumulative stock
return, from January 2 to April 2, 2020. The drawdown on a value-weighted portfolio of
1

Other examples of risk mismatch due to minimum return guarantees include the ﬁnancial distress of
Japanese life insurers in the 1990s (Kashyap, 2002) and the failure of Equitable Life in 2000 (Roberts, 2012).

2

U.S. variable annuity insurers was −51% during this period. AIG, Brighthouse Financial,
and Lincoln National have suﬀered the largest drawdowns exceeding −65%. The drawdown
on variable annuity insurers was substantially larger than −34% for the S&P 500 index and
−43% for the subset of ﬁnancial sector stocks in the S&P 500 index. The drawdown on the
airline industry was −62% to put the pain of variable annuity insurers into perspective.
Given their size and potential risk, variable annuities are an essential piece of the puzzle
for understanding the insurance sector more broadly. To this end, we construct a new and
comprehensive panel data set on the variable annuity market at the contract level. The data
contain quarterly sales, fees, and contract characteristics from 1999:1 (ﬁrst quarter) to 2015:4
(fourth quarter). We combine these data with the insurers’ annual ﬁnancial statements from
2005 to 2015, which contain information about the value of variable annuity liabilities and
the share of these liabilities that are reinsured. The data provide a detailed account of
how the variable annuity market has evolved over time as the changing valuation and risk
exposure of existing liabilities aﬀected the insurers’ ﬁnancial strength.
Quarterly sales of variable annuities grew robustly from $22 billion in 2005:1 to $41 billion
in 2007:4 and subsequently decreased to $27 billion in 2009:2. At the same time, the average
annual fee on contracts with minimum return guarantees increased from 2.04% of account
value in 2007:4 to 2.38% in 2009:2, suggesting an important role for a supply shock. After
the ﬁnancial crisis, insurers made the minimum return guarantees less generous or stopped
oﬀering guarantees to reduce risk exposure. The share of contracts with minimum return
guarantees decreased from 36% in 2007:4 to 20% in 2011:4. In the cross section of insurers,
sales decreased more for insurers that suﬀered larger increases in the valuation of existing
liabilities. These insurers moved their variable annuity reserves oﬀ balance sheet through
reinsurance, consistent with the importance of a risk-based capital constraint (Koijen and
Yogo, 2016).
To interpret this evidence, we develop an equilibrium model of insurance markets in
which ﬁnancial frictions and market power are important determinants of pricing, contract
characteristics, and the degree of market incompleteness. Insurers compete in an oligopolistic
market by setting the fee and the rollup rate, which is a key contract characteristic that
is equivalent to the strike price of a put option. Required capital increases in the rollup
rate because of a risk-based capital or an economic risk constraint. An adverse shock to
the valuation of existing liabilities increases the shadow cost of capital and drives up the
marginal cost of issuing contracts. The insurer not only raises the fee but lowers the rollup
rate to reduce risk exposure. When the shadow cost of capital is suﬃciently high, the insurer
stops oﬀering minimum return guarantees to avoid additional risk exposure.
Variable annuity demand could depend on factors other than the fee and the rollup
3

rate. They include the attractiveness (such as a tax advantage) of variable annuities relative
to other savings products, the menu of options within contracts, and insurer characteristics
that capture reputation in the retail market. We model these factors through a diﬀerentiated
product demand system for the variable annuity market, which implies estimates of demand
elasticities to the fee and the rollup rate. Through the insurer’s optimality conditions, we
decompose the time-series variation in fees and the share of contracts with minimum return
guarantees into their sources, which are demand elasticities, the frictionless option value,
and the shadow cost of capital. The 34 basis point increase in the average annual fee from
2007:4 to 2009:2 reﬂects an increase of 1 basis point in the markup, 15 basis points in the
option value, and 18 basis points in the shadow cost of capital. Thus, ﬁnancial frictions are
more important than the option pricing channel for explaining the increase in fees during
the ﬁnancial crisis.
Previous research shows that exposure to market and interest rate risk from variable
annuities is one of the most important sources of risk for U.S. life insurers. Variable annuity
insurers became ﬁnancially constrained and signiﬁcantly reduced the prices of traditional
annuities and life insurance during the ﬁnancial crisis (Koijen and Yogo, 2015). Variable
annuity insurers hold less liquid bonds, and the common exposure to market risk through
variable annuities makes these insurers more vulnerable to ﬁre-sale dynamics in bond markets
(Ellul et al., 2018). Variable annuity insurers have negative duration and negative convexity,
making them vulnerable to a prolonged period of low interest rates (Hartley et al., 2017).
As a consequence, they continue to register high in systemic risk indicators long after the
ﬁnancial crisis (Acharya et al., 2017). These papers study the consequences of variable
annuities on other parts of the balance sheet, but they do not study the source of risk
directly. Our contribution is to use contract-level data to provide a deeper understanding of
the variable annuity market itself and its impact on insurers.
Another contribution is to develop a theory of market risk insurance, building on the work
of Froot (2007) for catastrophe insurance. Variable annuities, which guarantee investment
returns over long horizons, are essentially a private solution to a gap left by the secular
decline of deﬁned beneﬁt pension plans and Social Security. Insurers complete a missing
market for long-maturity options by oﬀering market risk insurance over long horizons, but
they do so only imperfectly because of ﬁnancial frictions and market power. Our theory
of insurance markets explains how insurers choose prices and contract characteristics and
why they may not oﬀer insurance, answering the same questions as Rothschild and Stiglitz
(1976). However, ﬁnancial frictions and market power instead of informational frictions
are the important determinants of market equilibrium. Our theory could apply to other
insurance markets in which insurers bear signiﬁcant aggregate risk over long horizons, such as
4

the long-term care insurance market (Cutler, 1996) and catastrophe insurance that depends
on climate risk.
Our work also relates to the mutual fund literature. Previous research has shown that
mutual fund ﬂows depend on past performance (Chevalier and Ellison, 1997, Sirri and Tufano,
1998, Wermers, 2003) and tax eﬃciency (Bergstresser and Poterba, 2002, Sialm and Starks,
2012). At the same time, demand is signiﬁcantly less elastic to fees than the law of one
price implies, which suggests an important role for product diﬀerentiation and market power
(Hortaçsu and Syverson, 2004). Calvet et al. (2019) ﬁnd that minimum return guarantees
can increase participation in equity risk for Swedish households that do not hold stocks and
mutual funds. We study the determinants of supply and demand for variable annuities,
which has received relatively little attention despite being the largest life insurer liability
and an important share of the mutual fund sector.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes variable annuities
and details about their regulation that are relevant for this paper. Section II describes the
data construction and summarizes key facts about the variable annuity market. Section III
presents a model of variable annuity supply that explains the evidence on pricing and contract
characteristics. Section IV estimates a model of variable annuity supply and demand to
quantify the importance of ﬁnancial frictions. Section V concludes.
I.

Institutional Background

We start with an example of an actual product to explain how variable annuities work.
We then summarize risk-based capital regulation, which is important for understanding how
an adverse shock to the valuation of existing liabilities could aﬀect variable annuity supply.
We also explain how an economic risk constraint could work in conjunction with a risk-based
capital constraint. We then summarize economic and institutional reasons why insurers do
not fully hedge variable annuity risk. Finally, we present evidence on interest risk mismatch
after the ﬁnancial crisis.
A.

An Example of a Variable Annuity

Insurers sell long-term savings products called variable annuities, which are investments
in mutual funds. For an additional fee, insurers oﬀer an optional minimum return guarantee
on the mutual fund. Thus, a variable annuity is a retail ﬁnancial product that packages a
mutual fund with a long-maturity put option on the mutual fund. To explain how variable
annuities work, we start with an example of an actual product.

5

MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company (2008) oﬀers a variable annuity contract
called MetLife Series VA, which comes with various investment options and guaranteed living
beneﬁts. In 2008:3, one of the investment options was the American Funds Growth Allocation
Portfolio, which is a mutual fund with a target equity allocation of 70% to 85% and an annual
portfolio expense of 1.01%. One of the guaranteed living beneﬁts was Guaranteed Lifetime
Withdrawal Beneﬁt (GLWB). MetLife Series VA has an annual base contract expense of
1.3% of account value, and GLWB has an annual fee of 0.5% of account value. Thus, the
total annual fee for the variable annuity with a GLWB is 1.8%, which is on top of the annual
portfolio expense on the mutual fund.
Suppose that an investor were to invest in the American Funds Growth Allocation Portfolio in 2008:3. After 2013:3, the investor withdraws a constant dollar amount each year that
is 5% of the highest account value ever reached. For example, this behavior describes an
investor who invests in a mutual fund ﬁve years prior to retirement and subsequently spends
down her wealth by consuming a constant dollar amount each year. Figure 2 shows the
path of account value per $1 of initial investment, with the shaded region covering the withdrawal period after 2013:3. The account value ﬂuctuates over time because of uncertainty
in investment returns.
The same investor could purchase a GLWB from MetLife and guarantee her investment
returns. GLWB has an annual rollup rate of 5% prior to ﬁrst withdrawal, which means that
at each contract anniversary, the guaranteed amount steps up to the greater of the account
value and the previous guaranteed amount accumulated at 5%. Thus, GLWB is a put option
on the mutual fund that locks in every year to a strike price that accumulates at an annual
rate of 5%. Figure 2 shows that the guaranteed amount can only increase during the ﬁve-year
accumulation period, protecting the investor from downside risk in investment returns.
Once the investor enters the withdrawal period, she can annually withdraw up to 5%
of the highest guaranteed amount ever reached. In our example, the guaranteed amount in
2013:3 is $1.44, which means that the investor can withdraw up to $1.44 × 0.05 = $0.072
per year. Each withdrawal gets deducted from both the account value and the guaranteed
amount. GLWB is a lifetime guarantee in that the investor receives income (i.e., $0.072 per
year) as long as she lives, even after the account is depleted to zero. During the withdrawal
period, the guaranteed amount steps up to the account value at each contract anniversary.
In Figure 2, these step-ups occur in 2014:3 and 2016:3 because of high investment returns.
Because the annual rollup rate is 5% and the annual fee is 0.5%, one may be tempted to
conclude that the guaranteed return on the variable annuity is 4.5% during the accumulation
period. This logic turns out to be incorrect because the guaranteed amount of $1.44 in 2013:3
is only payable as annual income of $0.072 over 20 years (or until the investor’s death).
6

Because of the time value of money, the present value of $0.072 per year over 20 years is
worth substantially less than $1.44. Appendix A shows the empirical relevance of this issue
based on the historical term structure of interest rates.
GLWB is the most common type of guaranteed living beneﬁt. The other three types of
guaranteed living beneﬁts are Guaranteed Minimum Withdrawal Beneﬁt (GMWB), Guaranteed Minimum Income Beneﬁt (GMIB), and Guaranteed Minimum Accumulation Beneﬁt
(GMAB). A GMWB is similar to a GLWB, except that the investor does not receive income
after the account is depleted to zero. A GMIB is similar to a GLWB, except that guaranteed
amount at the beginning of the withdrawal period converts to a life annuity (i.e., ﬁxed income for life). A GMAB provides a minimum return guarantee much like the accumulation
period of a GLWB, but it does not have a withdrawal period with guaranteed income.
If an investor were to die while the contract is in eﬀect, her estate receives a standard
death beneﬁt that is equal to the remaining account value. For an additional fee, insurers
oﬀer four types of guaranteed death beneﬁts (highest anniversary value, rising ﬂoor, earnings
enhancement beneﬁt, and return of premium) that enhance the death beneﬁt during the
accumulation period. Our main focus is on guaranteed living beneﬁts, so we will not go into
the details of guaranteed death beneﬁts in this paper.
Even without minimum return guarantees, variable annuities may be attractive to investors because of a potential tax advantage in non-qualiﬁed accounts. Earnings on variable
annuities can be deferred and accumulate tax free if the ﬁrst withdrawal occurs after age
59.5. However, all earnings including capital gains are taxed at the ordinary income tax rate,
which is higher than the capital gains tax rate. Therefore, the tax advantage can justify the
variable annuity fees only if the accumulation period is very long. In an illustrative example,
Brown and Poterba (2006, Table 5.2) show that the accumulation period must be longer
than 40 years to justify an annual fee of 0.25% under the 2003 tax rates and an 8% pre-tax
return (with 2% from dividends and 6% from capital gains).
B. Risk-Based Capital Regulation
Insurance regulators and rating agencies use risk-based capital as an important metric
of an insurer’s ﬁnancial strength. Risk-based capital is the ratio of accounting equity to
required capital:
RBC =

Assets − Reserves
.
Required capital

(1)

Reserves in the numerator is an accounting measure of liabilities that may not coincide with
market value. Required capital in the denominator is a measure of how much equity could
7

be lost in an adverse scenario. For a suﬃciently high risk-based capital ratio, insurance
regulators view that equity capital is adequate to meet the insurer’s existing liabilities even
in an adverse scenario.
Variable annuity liabilities enter both reserves and required capital in risk-based capital.
As summarized in Junus and Motiwalla (2009), Actuarial Guideline 43 since December 2009
determines the reserve value of variable annuities, and the C-3 Phase II regulatory standard
since December 2005 determines the contribution of variable annuities to required capital.
Actuarial Guideline 43 is a higher reserve requirement than its precursor Actuarial Guideline
39, so insurers were given a phase-in period until December 2012 to fully comply with the
new requirement.
To compute reserves and required capital, insurance regulators provide various scenarios
for the joint path of Treasury, corporate bond, and equity prices. Insurers simulate the
path of equity deﬁciency for their variable annuity business (net of the hedging programs
and reinsurance) under each scenario and keep the highest present value of equity deﬁciency
along each path. Insurers then compute reserves as a conditional mean over the upper 30% of
equity deﬁciencies. This conditional tail expectation builds in a degree of conservatism that
is conceptually similar to a correction for risk premia, but reserves do not coincide with the
market value of liabilities. Insurers use the same methodology for required capital, except
that they compute a conditional mean over the upper 10% of equity deﬁciencies.
More generous guarantees with higher rollup rates or better coverage of downside market
risk relative to fees require higher reserves and more capital. Moreover, minimum return
guarantees are long-maturity put options on mutual funds whose value increases when the
stock market falls, interest rates fall, or volatility rises. Therefore, an adverse scenario like
the ﬁnancial crisis increases both reserves and required capital and puts downward pressure
on risk-based capital. Insofar as insurers want to avoid a rating downgrade or regulatory
action, an adverse shock to the valuation of existing liabilities could aﬀect their ability to
issue new liabilities. In Section III, we present a model that formalizes this mechanism
through which ﬁnancial frictions aﬀect variable annuity supply.
In addition to the risk-based capital constraint, the insurer could have an economic risk
constraint as part of risk management. An economic risk constraint works similarly to a
risk-based capital constraint, except that the relevant measure of assets and liabilities is
market value. For example, let  be a multiplicative shock to the leverage ratio due to risk
mismatch from variable annuities, whose cumulative distribution function is F . Consider a
value-at-risk constraint under which the probability that assets exceed liabilities must exceed

8

a threshold:

Pr

Liabilities
≤1
Assets




=F

Assets
Liabilities


≥ κ.

(2)

We can rewrite this constraint as
Assets − Liabilities
≥ 1,
(F −1 (κ) − 1)Liabilities

(3)

which is similar to risk-based capital (1). An insurer with more conservative risk management
has higher F −1 (κ), either through higher κ or lower risk reﬂected in the distribution of .
As a consequence of the ﬁnancial crisis, the insurer could learn that model uncertainty
is higher than previously recognized. In response, the insurer could make risk management
more conservative, tightening the economic risk constraint. Thus, an economic risk constraint
could work in conjunction with a risk-based capital constraint and aﬀect variable annuity
supply.
C. Reasons for Risk Mismatch
In theory, insurers could hedge uncertainty in the valuation of minimum return guarantees
through oﬀsetting derivative positions. In practice, insurers do not fully hedge variable
annuity risk for various economic and institutional reasons (Drexler et al., 2017, Koijen and
Yogo, 2017, Ellul et al., 2018, Sen, 2019).
Insurers may not be able to fully hedge because minimum return guarantees have longer
maturities than traded options. Insurers are exposed to unexpected changes in implied
volatility if they attempt to hedge minimum return guarantees by rolling over shorter maturity options. A dynamic hedging program would be subject to basis risk because of model
uncertainty, especially regarding long-run volatility (Sun, 2009, Sun et al., 2009). A deeper
economic question is why the market for long-maturity options is incomplete if insurers
would want to hedge such risks. A potential reason is that someone must bear aggregate
risk by market clearing, and insurers may have comparative advantage over other types of
institutions because their liabilities have a longer maturity and are less vulnerable to runs
(Paulson et al., 2012).
Insurers, especially stock rather than mutual companies, may not want to hedge because
of risk shifting motives that arise from limited liability and the presence of state guaranty
funds (Lee et al., 1997). Another reason that insurers may not want to hedge is that existing
regulation does not properly reward hedging of market equity, which is subject to interest
rate risk (Sen, 2019). Insurers report accounting equity under statutory accounting principles
9

at the operating company level and under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)
at the holding company level. Therefore, hedge positions diﬀer depending on whether the
insurer targets economic, statutory, or GAAP capital. A hedging program that smoothes
market equity could actually increase the volatility of accounting equity under statutory
accounting principles or GAAP (Credit Suisse, 2012).
Whether insurers target market or accounting equity depends on whether the more important friction is economic (i.e., value-at-risk constraint) or regulatory (i.e., risk-based capital
constraint). For reducing regulatory frictions, captive reinsurance with a less regulated and
unrated reinsurer within the same insurance group is more eﬃcient than hedging (Koijen
and Yogo, 2016). Consistent with this view, Section IV shows that insurers used reinsurance
to move variable annuity reserves oﬀ balance sheet during the ﬁnancial crisis.
D. Evidence on Risk Mismatch
If the minimum return guarantees have higher duration and higher convexity than the
general account assets, the overall balance sheet is potentially exposed to interest rate risk.
Equity capital decreases with unexpected decreases in interest rates, especially when the
level of interest rates is low. Consistent with this hypothesis, Hartley et al. (2017) ﬁnd that
the stock returns of U.S. life insurers have signiﬁcant negative exposure to long-term bond
returns in the prolonged period of low interest rates after the ﬁnancial crisis. We update
their results with a longer sample and later refer to this evidence as a potential explanation
for why the variable annuity market never fully recovered after the ﬁnancial crisis.
We construct monthly returns on a value-weighted portfolio of publicly traded U.S. variable annuity insurers, which are listed in Appendix B. We regress excess portfolio returns,
relative to the 1-month T-bill rate, onto excess stock market returns and excess 10-year
Treasury bond returns. Table I reports the betas and the monthly alpha from the factor
regression.
Over the sample period from January 1999 to December 2017, the stock market beta
is 1.36, and the 10-year Treasury beta is −0.01 and statistically insigniﬁcant. On average,
insurers do not have signiﬁcant exposure to interest rate risk, controlling for exposure to the
overall stock market. However, the 10-year Treasury beta varies over time when we break
the sample into three periods: pre-crisis (1999–2007), ﬁnancial crisis (2008–2009), and postcrisis (2010–2017). In the post-crisis subsample, the 10-year Treasury beta is −1.28 with a
t-statistic greater than 7. That is, unexpected decreases in interest rates are bad news for
U.S. life insurers during this prolonged period of low interest rates. A coeﬃcient near −1
implies that the negative duration gap is close to the duration of the 10-year Treasury bond.
Hartley et al. (2017) show that property-casualty insurers and U.K. life insurers (that do
10

not have variable annuities) do not have such exposure to interest rates. They conclude that
U.S. life insurers are uniquely exposed to interest rate risk because of negative duration and
negative convexity from variable annuities.
The COVID-19 crisis has again exposed the fragility of variable annuity insurers. We
compare the drawdown, which is the maximum fall in the cumulative stock return, from
January 2 to April 2, 2020. As reported in Panel A of Figure 1, the drawdown on a valueweighted portfolio of U.S. variable annuity insurers was −51% during this period.2 This
drawdown was substantially larger than −34% for the S&P 500 index and −43% for the
Financial Select Sector SPDR Fund, which is the subset of ﬁnancial sector stocks in the
S&P 500 index. In fact, the drawdown on U.S. variable annuity insurers was only slightly
smaller than −62% for the U.S. Global Jets ETF, which tracks the U.S. airline industry.
Panel B of Figure 1 reports the drawdowns on individual insurers that make up the portfolio
in Panel A. AIG, Brighthouse Financial, and Lincoln National have suﬀered the largest
drawdowns exceeding −65%.
II.
A.

Data on the Variable Annuity Market

Data Construction

We use three sources to construct a comprehensive panel data set on the variable annuity market at the contract level. The ﬁrst data source is Morningstar (2016a), which has
quarterly sales of variable annuities at the contract level since 1999. Morningstar provides
a textual summary of the prospectus for each contract, from which we extract the history
of fees and contract characteristics. The key contract characteristics are the base contract
expense, the number of investment options, and the types of guaranteed living and death
beneﬁts that are oﬀered.3 For each guaranteed living beneﬁt, the key characteristics are the
type (i.e., GLWB, GMWB, GMIB, or GMAB), the fee, the rollup rate, and the withdrawal
rate. Morningstar provides the open and close dates for each contract and guaranteed living
beneﬁt, from which we construct the history of when diﬀerent beneﬁts were oﬀered.
Sales are available at the contract level but not at the beneﬁt level. Therefore, we must
aggregate fees and rollup rates over all guaranteed living beneﬁts that a contract oﬀers to
construct a panel data set on sales, fees, and characteristics at the contract level. For each
2

We compute the portfolio return as a buy-and-hold portfolio with ﬁxed weights at December 31, 2019.
Otherwise, a continuously rebalanced portfolio would imply decreasing weights for insurers that suﬀered the
lowest returns, even though the market value of their liabilities presumably increased.
3
We use assets under management by subaccount from Morningstar (2016b) to compute a measure of
investment options that adjusts for the non-uniform distribution of assets across subaccounts within a contract. Our measure is the inverse of the Herﬁndahl index over the subaccount shares within each contract,
which is the number of investment options when the subaccounts are uniformly distributed.

11

date and contract, we ﬁrst average the fees and the rollup rates by the type of guaranteed
living beneﬁt. We then use the average fee and rollup rate in the order of GLWB, GMWB,
GMIB, and GMAB, based on availability. For example, if a contract does not oﬀer a GLWB
but oﬀers a GMWB, we use the average fee and rollup rate on the GMWB. Because GLWB
is the most common type of guaranteed living beneﬁt and a GMWB is the closest substitute
to a GLWB, our procedure yields a representative set of fees and rollup rates that are
comparable across contracts.
The second data source is the annual ﬁnancial statements of insurers, which are ﬁled
with the NAIC (National Association of Insurance Commissioners, 2005–2015). General
Interrogatories Part 2 Table 9.2 of the ﬁnancial statements reports the total related account
value, the gross amount of variable annuity reserves, and the reinsurance reserve credit on
variable annuities. As we described in Section I, the total related account value is the market
value of the mutual funds. The gross amount of variable annuity reserves is the accounting
value of the minimum return guarantees net of the hedging programs. We deﬁne variable
annuity liabilities as total related account value plus gross amount of variable annuity reserves
minus reinsurance reserve credit on variable annuities. For each insurer, we deﬁne the reserve
valuation as the ratio of gross amount of variable annuity reserves to total related account
value. The reserve valuation measures the value of the minimum return guarantees per dollar
of underlying mutual funds. In the cross section, reserve valuation is higher for insurers that
have sold more generous guarantees. In the time series, reserve valuation increases when
the stock market falls, interest rates fall, or volatility rises. We deﬁne the reinsurance share
of variable annuities as the ratio of reinsurance reserve credit on variable annuities to gross
amount of variable annuity reserves.
The third data source is A.M. Best Company (2006–2016), which provides a cleaned
and organized version of the main parts of the annual ﬁnancial statements. Following A.M.
Best’s deﬁnition of ﬁnancial groups, we aggregate insurance companies’ balance sheets up to
the group level. Total liabilities are aggregate reserves for life contracts plus liabilities from
the separate account statement. Total equity is capital and surplus. We convert the A.M.
Best ﬁnancial strength rating (coded from A++ to D) to a cardinal measure (coded from
175% to 0%) based on risk-based capital guidelines (A.M. Best Company, 2011, p. 24).
We merge the A.M. Best data and the NAIC data by the NAIC company code. We then
merge the Morningstar data and the NAIC data by company name. The ﬁnal data set is a
quarterly panel on the variable annuity market from 2005:1 to 2015:4, where the start date
is dictated by the availability of the NAIC data. For some of the summary statistics that
only involve the Morningstar data, we use a longer sample from 1999:1.

12

B. Summary of the Variable Annuity Market
Table II summarizes the variable annuity market. In 2005, variable annuity liabilities
across all insurers were $1.071 trillion or 35% of total liabilities. Variable annuity liabilities
have ranged from 34% to 41% of total liabilities as its value ﬂuctuates with the market value
of the mutual funds. Most recently in 2015, variable annuity liabilities were $1.499 trillion
or 35% of total liabilities. The variable annuity market is fairly concentrated as measured
by the number of insurers. The total number of insurers decreased from 44 in 2008 to 38 in
2015.
As we explained previously, the reserve valuation (i.e., the ratio of gross amount of
variable annuity reserves to total related account value) measures the value of the minimum
return guarantees per dollar of underlying mutual funds. Table II shows that the reserve
valuation aggregated across all insurers increased sharply from 0.8% in 2007 to 4.1% in 2008.
Since 2008, the reserve valuation is volatile and remains high relative to the level prior to
the ﬁnancial crisis.
Table III reports the top insurers ranked by their variable annuity liabilities in 2007.
Eight of these insurers (Aegon, Allianz, AXA, Delaware Life, Hartford, Jackson National,
Metropolitan Life, and Voya) suﬀered large increases in the reserve valuation ranging from
2.9 to 7.6 percentage points. These increases in the reserve valuation are signiﬁcant shocks
because these insurers have high leverage (i.e., the ratio of total liabilities to total assets)
that range from 92% to 97%. For ﬁve of the eight insurers, the increases in variable annuity
reserves are a signiﬁcant share of total equity, ranging from 29% to 125%.
The top nine insurers with the largest variable annuity liabilities in Table III coincide
almost perfectly with the top nine insurers that suﬀered the largest drawdowns in Figure 1.
AXA and John Hancock (part of Manulife Financial) in Table III are foreign insurers that
are not part of Figure 1, which focuses on U.S. life insurers. Brighthouse Financial was
spun oﬀ from Metropolitan Life in 2017, so it was part of Metropolitan Life at the time of
Table III in 2007. Therefore, Principal Financial Group is the only insurer that breaks the
otherwise perfect correspondence of the top nine between Table III and Figure 1. Because the
COVID-19 crisis occurred three years after the ﬁrst draft of this paper, we view Figure 1 as
out-of-sample evidence. Variable annuity insurers remain sensitive to a falling stock market,
falling interest rates, and rising volatility.
Figure 3 reports quarterly sales of variable annuities across all contracts from 1999:1 to
2015:4. Sales grew robustly from $22 billion in 2005:1 to its peak at $41 billion in 2007:4.
Sales subsequently decreased during the ﬁnancial crisis to $27 billion in 2009:2, picked up
again to $34 billion in 2011:2, and are $20 billion most recently in 2015:4. For comparison,
the same ﬁgure shows the aggregate sales of U.S. open-end stock and bond mutual funds
13

(excluding money market funds and funds of funds), which is a larger market and shown on
a diﬀerent scale. Interestingly, sales of variable annuities and mutual funds moved closely
together through 2008, but the two time series diverge thereafter as mutual fund sales grew.
The decrease in variable annuity sales after 2008 is partly explained by insurers that
have stopped oﬀering minimum return guarantees. Figure 4 reports the number of insurers
and contracts oﬀering minimum return guarantees from 1999:1 to 2015:4. Eleven insurers
stopped oﬀering minimum return guarantees from 2008 to 2015, during which six insurers
stopped selling variable annuities altogether as reported in Table II. This means that some
insurers have opted to remain in the variable annuity market but to stop oﬀering minimum
return guarantees. Without minimum return guarantees, variable annuities are essentially
mutual funds with longevity insurance and a potential tax advantage.
Panel A of Figure 5 reports the average annual fee on open (for sale) minimum return
guarantees from 1999:1 to 2015:4. The increase in fees during the ﬁnancial crisis coincides
with the decrease in sales, suggesting an important role for a supply shock. The average
annual fee on minimum return guarantees increased from 0.59% of account value in 2007:4
to 0.97% in 2009:2. Including the base contract expense, the total annual fee increased from
2.04% in 2007:4 to 2.38% in 2009:2. Since then, fees have remained stable. The average
annual fee on minimum return guarantees was 1.08% (2.33% including the base contract
expense) in 2015:4.
Panel B of Figure 5 summarizes the rollup rates on open contracts from 1999:1 to 2015:4.
Conditional on oﬀering a minimum return guarantee, the average rollup rate increased from
2.4% in 2005:1 to 4.0% in 2007:4, coinciding with the period of robust sales growth. The
average rollup rate remained high through the ﬁnancial crisis and decreased only after 2011.
However, the share of contracts with minimum return guarantees decreased after the ﬁnancial
crisis from 36% in 2007:4 to 20% in 2011:4, consistent with Figure 4. That is, many insurers
responded to the ﬁnancial crisis through the extensive margin by not oﬀering contracts with
minimum return guarantees, rather through the intensive margin of lowering rollup rates.
To summarize Figures 3–5, variable annuity sales decreased, fees increased, and many
insurers stopped oﬀering minimum return guarantees during the ﬁnancial crisis. As we
discussed in Section I, this evidence is consistent with a supply shock as a consequence of
tightening risk-based capital and economic risk constraints. As we also discussed in Section I,
two factors could explain why variable annuity supply did not fully recover long after the
ﬁnancial crisis. The primary factor is interest risk mismatch that reduced equity capital
during the prolonged period of low interest rates. A secondary factor is a higher capital
requirement under Actuarial Guideline 43. Despite the enormous attention that it received
in the industry, the actual impact of Actuarial Guideline 43 on variable annuity supply is
14

diﬃcult to identify because of its gradual implementation from 2009 to 2012.
III.

A Model of Variable Annuity Supply

As we discussed in Section I, risk-based capital and economic risk constraints are important determinants of variable annuity supply and explain the aggregate facts in Section II.
Insurers suﬀered an adverse shock to risk-based capital from the increased valuation of
existing liabilities during the ﬁnancial crisis. Moreover, insurers could have made risk management more conservative in response to higher model uncertainty. As the shadow cost of
capital increased, insurers raised fees to pass through a higher marginal cost. Insurers also
lowered rollup rates or stopped oﬀering minimum return guarantees to reduce risk exposure. Higher fees and lower rollup rates make variable annuities less attractive to investors,
explaining the decrease in sales.
We formalize this narrative through a model of how an insurer chooses the fee and
the rollup rate in the presence of ﬁnancial frictions and market power. Insurers compete
in an oligopolistic market and have market power because of product diﬀerentiation along
contract characteristics other than the fee and the rollup rate, which we parameterize through
a diﬀerentiated product demand system in Section IV. To simplify the exposition in this
section, we present the optimization problem of a single insurer with the understanding that
all insurers solve the same problem. To simplify the notation, we suppress subscripts that
denote the identity of the insurer.
Also to simplify the exposition, we model the optimization problem as a one-time choice.
We refer to our previous work for a dynamic version in which the insurer chooses the optimal
price in every period (Koijen and Yogo, 2015, 2016). Relative to our previous work, the
novel modeling ingredient is the optimal choice of contract characteristics, and the novel
insight is that the insurer changes contract characteristics or stops oﬀering minimum return
guarantees to reduce risk exposure. Thus, we develop a more complete theory of the supply
side of insurance markets that explains pricing, contract characteristics, and the degree of
market incompleteness.
A.

Variable Annuity Market

There is a mutual fund whose price evolves exogenously over time. To simplify the
notation, we assume no portfolio expense on the mutual fund. Let St be the mutual fund
price per share in period t. By the absence of arbitrage, there exists a strictly positive
stochastic discount factor Mt,t+s that discounts a payoﬀ in period t + s to its price in period
t. For example, the mutual fund price satisﬁes St = Et [Mt,t+s St+s ].
15

In period t, an insurer sells a variable annuity, which is a combination of the mutual
fund and a minimum return guarantee. The variable annuity fee is Pt per dollar of account
value, which we assume is paid upfront in a lumpsum for simplicity. The minimum return
guarantee is over two periods, and the rollup rate rt is the guaranteed return per period.
Thus, the payoﬀ of the minimum return guarantee in period t + 2 is


Xt,t+2


St+2
= max (1 + rt ) −
,0 .
St
2

(4)

The minimum return guarantee is a long-maturity put option whose strike price is the cumulative rollup rate. When rt = −1, the variable annuity is a mutual fund because the put
option is always worthless. We assume that the investor cannot insure downside market risk
over long horizons outside of variable annuities, so the insurance market is incomplete when
rt = −1.
The option value of the minimum return guarantee in period t is
Vt,t = Et [Mt,t+2 Xt,t+2 ]

(5)

per dollar of account value. More generally, Vt−s,t denotes the option value in period t of a
minimum return guarantee that was issued in period t − s. Although this notation is slightly
cumbersome, it will be important to distinguish the option value of existing liabilities Vt−1,t
from the option value of new contracts Vt,t .
For the purposes of our theory, we do not need parametric assumptions about the option
pricing model (e.g., Black and Scholes, 1973). We simply assume that the partial derivatives
of option value have the usual signs. Namely, the put option value decreases in the mutual
fund price, decreases in the riskless interest rate, increases in volatility, and increases in the
rollup rate. In the language of Greeks in the option pricing literature, delta is negative, rho
is negative, vega is positive, and dual delta is positive. Furthermore, we assume that the
second partial derivative of option value with respect to the rollup rate is positive.
We also do not need parametric assumptions about variable annuity demand. We simply
assume that demand is continuous, continuously diﬀerentiable, strictly decreasing in the
fee, and strictly increasing in the rollup rate. In an oligopolistic market, demand for a
contract depends on the fees and the rollup rates of all other competing contracts. To
simplify the notation, we denote demand for a contract as Qt with the understanding that
it depends on the fees and the rollup rates of all other contracts. An institutional feature of
the variable annuity market is that the rollup rate is always positive (i.e., rt ≥ 0) or rt = −1
in the case of mutual funds without minimum return guarantees. That is, insurers never

16

oﬀer a variable annuity with a negative rollup rate in the range rt ∈ (−1, 0), presumably
because investors have a psychological aversion to “negative interest rates”. To model this
institutional feature, we simply assume that the choice of the rollup rate is constrained to

be in the set R = {−1} [0, ∞).
B. Balance Sheet Dynamics
Let Bt be the total account value of mutual funds, or separate accounts in actuarial
terms, at the end of period t. Let At be the general account assets at the end of period
t. Let Lt be the general account liabilities, which represents the option value of existing
minimum return guarantees, at the end of period t. The following T account summarizes
the balance sheet.
Assets
Bt

Liabilities
Bt

(separate account)

At

Lt
At − Lt

(general account)
(equity)

There is no risk mismatch for mutual funds in the separate account. The insurer’s equity
ﬂuctuates because of risk mismatch between assets and minimum return guarantees in the
general account.
We now describe how variable annuity sales aﬀect the balance sheet. Let Qt be the
account value of new contracts, excluding the option value of minimum return guarantees,
that the insurer sells in period t. The account value evolves according to
Bt =

St
Bt−1 + Qt .
St−1

(6)

Current account value is the previous account value revalued at the current mutual fund
price plus the account value of new contracts.
The general account assets evolve according to
At = RA,t At−1 + Pt Qt ,

(7)

where RA,t is an exogenous gross return on assets in period t. Current assets are the gross
return on previous assets plus the fees on new contracts. Section I discussed economic and
institutional reasons why insurers do not fully hedge variable annuity risk. Following that
discussion, we assume that RA,t could be imperfectly correlated with the option value of
existing liabilities, leading to risk mismatch.

17

The general account liabilities evolve according to
Lt =

Vt−1,t
Lt−1 + Vt,t Qt .
Vt−1,t−1

(8)

Current liabilities are previous liabilities revalued at current option value plus the cost of new
contracts. The principle of reserving requires that the cost Vt,t be recorded on the liability
side to back the fees Pt on the asset side.
C. Financial Frictions
We deﬁne statutory capital at the end of period t as
φL
Kt = At − Lt −
.
 
t t
equity required capital

(9)

Statutory capital is equity minus required capital that is proportional to liabilities.4 For
simplicity, we assume that φt > 0 is an exogenous parameter that does not depend on the
fee or the rollup rate. Following the discussion in Section I, 1 + φt represents the ratio
of reserve to market value under Actuarial Guideline 43. Alternatively, φt represents the
risk weight on minimum return guarantees under the C-3 Phase II regulatory standard.
As equation (8) shows, required capital increases in the option value of existing liabilities
Vt−1,t . Therefore, required capital increases when the stock market falls, interest rates fall,
or volatility rises. Required capital also increases in the option value of new contracts Vt,t .
Therefore, required capital for new contracts increases in the rollup rate, decreases in interest
rates, and increases in volatility.
Following the discussion in Section I, low statutory capital could lead to a rating downgrade or regulatory action, which have adverse consequences in both retail and capital markets. We model the cost of ﬁnancial frictions through a cost function:
Ct = C(Kt ),

(10)

which is continuous, twice continuously diﬀerentiable, strictly decreasing, and strictly convex.
The cost function is decreasing because higher statutory capital reduces the likelihood of a
rating downgrade or regulatory action. The cost function is convex because these beneﬁts
4

This formulation of statutory capital as a diﬀerence rather than as a ratio is for mathematical convenience
in the derivations that follow. Koijen and Yogo (2015) show that the two formulations are similar because a
t
constraint on statutory capital such as Kt ≥ 0 can be rewritten as a risk-based capital constraint Aφtt−L
Lt ≥ 1.

18

of higher statutory capital have diminishing returns.5 Statutory capital would not matter if
equity issuance were costless. Therefore, implicit in the speciﬁcation of the cost function are
ﬁnancial frictions that make equity issuance costly.
An alternative interpretation of equation (9) is that the insurer has an economic risk
constraint, such as the value-at-risk constraint described in Section I. As a consequence
of the ﬁnancial crisis, the insurer learned that model uncertainty is higher than previously
recognized and made risk management more conservative. An increase in φt could capture a
tighter economic risk constraint. A permanent increase in φt could lead to persistent eﬀects
on variable annuity supply that is consistent with the evidence in Section II.
D. Optimal Pricing and Contract Characteristics
Firm value is the proﬁt from variable annuity sales minus the cost of ﬁnancial frictions:
Jt = (Pt − Vt,t )Qt − Ct .

(11)

The insurer chooses the fee Pt and the rollup rate rt ∈ R on the variable annuity to maximize
ﬁrm value in an oligopolistic market. To simplify the exposition, we present the optimality conditions for a single insurer with the understanding that all insurers have the same
optimality conditions in a Nash equilibrium.
To simplify the notation, we deﬁne the semi-elasticity of demand to the fee as P,t =
∂ log(Qt )
t)
. We also deﬁne the marginal cost of
− ∂Pt and to the rollup rate as r,t = ∂ log(Q
∂rt
statutory capital as
ct = −

∂Ct
> 0.
∂Kt

(12)

This partial derivative represents the importance of ﬁnancial frictions, which decreases in
statutory capital by the convexity of the cost function. The following proposition, which we
prove in Appendix C, characterizes the optimal fee and rollup rate.
PROPOSITION 1: The optimal fee is
Pt =

1
P,t

+

,
λt Vt,t

marginal cost

5

(13)

We refer to Ellul et al. (2015) and Koijen and Yogo (2015) for evidence that asset allocation and liability
pricing decisions are especially sensitive to risk-based capital at low levels, which implies that the cost
function is convex.

19

where the shadow cost of capital is
λt =

1 + ct (1 + φt )
> 1.
1 + ct

(14)

At an interior optimum, the rollup rate satisfies
∂Vt,t
r,t
= λt
.
P,t
∂rt

(15)

Otherwise, rt ∈ {−1, 0} is optimal.
The optimal fee (13) is the sum of two terms. The ﬁrst term represents Bertrand pricing
due to market power, under which the optimal fee decreases in the semi-elasticity of demand
to the fee. The second term is the marginal cost of issuing contracts, which is the product
of the shadow cost of capital and the option value. Marginal cost is greater than the option
value because of ﬁnancial frictions. The shadow cost of capital decreases in statutory capital
through ct and increases in the risk weight φt .
We clarify two potential points of confusion in relation to Koijen and Yogo (2015). First,
equation (13) in this paper is identical to Koijen and Yogo (2015, equation 21). The reason
that they may appear diﬀerent is that P,t is the semi-elasticity of demand in this paper,
while it is the full elasticity of demand in the earlier work. Semi-elasticity is the natural
formulation in this paper because fees are already in percentages of account value. Second,
equation (13) implies that marginal cost decreases in the shadow cost of capital if φt < 0.
In Koijen and Yogo (2015), the prices of traditional annuities decreased during the ﬁnancial
crisis because the eﬀective φt was negative for those products.
The optimal rollup rate depends on three terms in equation (15). On the left side is
the demand channel through which the insurer optimally chooses the rollup rate to exploit
market power. The ﬁrst term on the right side is the shadow cost of capital. The second
term on the right side is the partial derivative of option value to the rollup rate, which
2

increases in the rollup rate (i.e., ∂∂rV2t,t > 0). The intuition behind equation (15) is especially
t
clear when the left side is constant, which is the case for a special case of the diﬀerentiated
product demand system in Section IV. In this case, the optimal rollup rate decreases in the
shadow cost of capital. An insurer that faces a higher shadow cost of capital must reduce
risk exposure by lowering the rollup rate on new contracts. When the shadow cost of capital
is suﬃciently high, the insurer oﬀers mutual funds without minimum return guarantees (i.e.,
rt = −1). That is, the insurer stops oﬀering minimum return guarantees to avoid additional
risk exposure. The general insight is that ﬁnancial frictions aﬀect contract characteristics
and could even lead to market incompleteness in the extreme case.
20

Proposition 1 provides a narrative for the aggregate facts in Figures 3–5. Insurers suffered an adverse shock to risk-based capital during the ﬁnancial crisis and could have made
risk management more conservative in response to higher model uncertainty. As the shadow
cost of capital increased, insurers raised fees to pass through a higher marginal cost. Insurers also lowered rollup rates or stopped oﬀering minimum return guarantees to reduce
risk exposure. Higher fees and lower rollup rates make variable annuities less attractive to
investors, explaining the decrease in sales.
E.

Evidence from the Cross Section of Insurers

We now provide reduced-form evidence from the cross section of insurers that is consistent
with Proposition 1. A measurement challenge is that the shadow cost of capital is not directly
observed. However, the reserve valuation is a relevant empirical proxy that we described in
Section II. The reserve valuation most closely corresponds to (1 + φt )Vt−1,t in the model,
which is positively related to the shadow cost of capital:
∂ct
∂λt
φt Lt−1
=−
2
∂(1 + φt )Vt−1,t
(1 + ct ) Kt−1 Vt−1,t−1 ∂Kt
φt Lt−1
∂ 2 Ct
=
> 0.
(1 + ct )2 Kt−1 Vt−1,t−1 ∂Kt2

(16)

We look for broad patterns at the insurer level that could be summarized by a scatter plot
and leave more formal analysis at the contract level for Section IV.
Depending on the contract characteristics of existing liabilities, diﬀerent insurers could
experience diﬀerent shocks to the reserve valuation during the ﬁnancial crisis. Insurers that
sold more generous guarantees prior to the ﬁnancial crisis would have suﬀered larger increases
in the reserve valuation than those that sold less generous guarantees. Moreover, insurers
that sold more generous guarantees could have made risk management more conservative
after the ﬁnancial crisis as they learned that model uncertainty is higher than previously
recognized. Thus, changes in the reserve valuation should be negatively related to sales
growth in the cross section of insurers.
Panel A of Figure 6 is a scatter plot of sales growth versus the change in the reserve
valuation from 2007 to 2010. The linear regression line shows that sales growth is negatively
related to the change in the reserve valuation. On the bottom right are insurers like AXA
and Genworth that essentially closed their variable annuity business as they suﬀered large
increases in the reserve valuation. On the left side of the ﬁgure are a cluster of six insurers (Fidelity Investments, MassMutual, New York Life, Northwestern, Ohio National, and
Thrivent Financial) that did not oﬀer a GLWB in 2007, which tends to be the most generous
21

guarantee among guaranteed living beneﬁts. The reserve valuation did not change much for
these insurers because they sold less generous guarantees.
Under Actuarial Guideline 43, variable annuity reserves under statutory accounting principles increases relative to that under GAAP after a period of high volatility (Credit Suisse,
2012). Therefore, insurers could relax a risk-based capital constraint through captive reinsurance with a less regulated and unrated reinsurer within the same insurance group (Koijen
and Yogo, 2016).6 If insurers that suﬀered large increases in the reserve valuation were in
fact constrained, they should move variable annuity reserves oﬀ balance sheet. Panel B of
Figure 6 is a scatter plot of the change in the reinsurance share of variable annuities versus
the change in the reserve valuation from 2007 to 2010. The linear regression line shows that
the change in the reinsurance share of variable annuities is positively related to the change
in the reserve valuation. On the one hand, AXA increased the reinsurance share of variable
annuities by 61 percentage points as its reserve valuation increased by 11 percentage points
from 2007 to 2010. On the other hand, the six insurers that did not oﬀer a GLWB in 2007
did not experience any change in the reserve valuation or reinsurance activity. This evidence
suggests an important role for a risk-based capital constraint rather than an economic risk
constraint.
IV.

Importance of Financial Frictions

Variation in fees across insurers and over time could come from supply- or demandside eﬀects. A model of variable annuity demand is necessary to disentangle these eﬀects
and to quantify the importance of ﬁnancial frictions in explaining variable annuity supply.
Therefore, we estimate a diﬀerentiated product demand system for the variable annuity
market at the contract level, which provides an internally consistent framework to model
market equilibrium and to decompose fees into markups versus marginal cost.
A.

A Model of Variable Annuity Demand

A life-cycle model of consumption and portfolio choice is a fully structural approach to
modeling variable annuity demand (Horneﬀ et al., 2009, 2010, Koijen et al., 2011). These
models could explain the demand for variable annuities relative to other savings products,
but they are not designed to explain heterogeneous demand across insurers and contracts.
Moreover, we do not have data on the demographics of investors that purchase variable
annuities at the contract level. For these reasons, we take a diﬀerent approach and model
6

A hedging program that smoothes accounting equity under GAAP could actually increase the volatility
under statutory accounting principles (Credit Suisse, 2012). Thus, insurers may have an additional incentive
for captive reinsurance in order to implement a hedging program under GAAP capital.

22

variable annuity demand through the random coeﬃcients logit model (Berry et al., 1995),
which is a tractable and micro-founded model of product diﬀerentiation and market power.
Let Pi,t be the annual fee and ri,t be the rollup rate on contract i in period t. Let xi,t be
a vector of other observable characteristics of contract i in period t, which are determinants
of demand. Let ξi,t be an unobserved (to the econometrician) characteristic of contract i
in period t. The probability that an investor with a realized coeﬃcient αP on the fee buys
contract i in period t is
qi,t (αP ) =

exp{αP Pi,t + αr ri,t + β  xi,t + ξi,t }
1+

I
j=1

exp{αP Pj,t + αr rj,t + β  xj,t + ξj,t}

,

(17)

where I is the total number of contracts across all insurers. The denominator of equation
(17) captures how demand for a contract depends on the fees and characteristics of all other
competing contracts. If the investor does not buy a variable annuity, she buys an “outside
asset” instead, which occurs with probability 1 − Ii=1 qi,t (αP ).
Let F (αP ) be the cumulative distribution function for the coeﬃcient on the fee. The
negative of the coeﬃcient on the fee −αP is lognormally distributed, ensuring a positive
demand elasticity. Integrating equation (17) over the distribution of investors, the market
share for contract i in period t is
Qi,t =

qi,t (αP ) dF (αP ).

(18)

The semi-elasticity of demand to the fee for contract i in period t is
P,t =

1
Qi,t

−αP qi,t (αP )(1 − qi,t (αP )) dF (αP ).

(19)

Through equation (13), the markup is inversely related to the semi-elasticity of demand.
We assume that the coeﬃcient on the fee is independently and identically distributed
over time. However, the semi-elasticity of demand to the fee can vary over time through the
changing distribution of market shares. To see this, consider a special case of equation (19)
for the logit model, for which the coeﬃcient on the fee is constant (i.e., αP = αP < 0). The
semi-elasticity of demand to the fee simpliﬁes to
P,t = −αP (1 − Qi,t ) > 0.

(20)

The semi-elasticity of demand to the fee decreases as the market share increases, implying
a higher markup through equation (13). Thus, one mechanism through which fees could

23

increase (see Figure 5) is increasing market concentration as insurers exit the variable annuity
market after the ﬁnancial crisis (see Figure 4).
The estimation sample is all variable annuity contracts from 2005:1 to 2015:4. Because
sales are at the contract level, we measure the total annual fee as the sum of the annual base
contract expense and the annual fee on the minimum return guarantee. We assign a type of
minimum return guarantee to each contract following the procedure described in Section II.
The rollup rate is 0% for contracts with minimum return guarantees but no step ups and
−100% for contracts without minimum return guarantees. This treatment of the rollup rate
is consistent with the model of variable annuity supply in Section III, in which we assumed
that demand is continuously diﬀerentiable in the rollup rate. We specify the outside asset as
sales of open-end stock and bond mutual funds (excluding money market funds and funds
of funds).
The other contract characteristics in our speciﬁcation are the number of investment
options, a dummy for whether the contract oﬀers a GLWB, and share class ﬁxed eﬀects.
The number of investment options captures the menu or the complexity of options within
contracts (Célérier and Vallée, 2017). A GLWB is the most common type and tends to be
the most generous guarantee among guaranteed living beneﬁts. The share class (i.e., A, B,
C, I, L, O, or X) determines whether there is an initial sales charge or a surrender charge
for early withdrawal. For example, B is the most common share class, and it has a no sales
charge but has a surrender charge. The share class also determines the commission schedule
for the investment advisor that sells the variable annuity. For example, investment advisors
do not earn a commission on the I share class.
We also include the A.M. Best rating and insurer ﬁxed eﬀects to capture reputation in
the retail market, which could vary across insurers and over time. Investors could substitute
across insurers based on ratings, or they could substitute from variable annuities to mutual
funds (i.e., the outside asset) if they are concerned about the stability of the insurance sector.
The unobserved characteristic ξi,t in equation (17) captures other demand factors that are
diﬃcult to measure such as a relative tax advantage. Finally, the intercept captures the
attractiveness (such as a tax advantage) of variable annuities relative to mutual funds.
B. Identifying Assumptions
According to the model of variable annuity supply in Section III, the insurer optimally
chooses the fee and the rollup rate, so they are jointly endogenous with demand. We start
with the usual identifying assumption that observed characteristics other than the fee and
the rollup rate are exogenous. Furthermore, we assume that the reserve valuation and the
reinsurance share of variable annuities are valid instruments that aﬀect marginal cost, but
24

they do not enter demand directly. To ensure exogeneity, we construct both instruments
in year t based only on contracts that the insurer sold in prior years but are still on the
balance sheet in year t. Thus, the instruments do not depend directly on sales or contract
characteristics in year t. Because our speciﬁcation includes insurer ﬁxed eﬀects, the demand
elasticities are identiﬁed from the time-series variation in the instruments within each insurer.
We motivate the reserve valuation as a relevant and valid instrument, based on the
model of variable annuity supply in Section III. According to equation (16), the reserve
valuation (1 + φt )Vt−1,t is a relevant instrument that is positively related to the shadow cost
of capital. The reserve valuation depends on the option value of existing liabilities Vt−1,t ,
which is diﬀerent from the option value of new contracts Vt,t . Even if the option value of
existing liabilities were collinear with the option value of new contracts because the contract
characteristics happen to be identical, 1 + φt is another source of variation in the reserve
valuation that could break the collinearity. Recall that 1+φt represents the ratio of reserve to
market value under Actuarial Guideline 43. Therefore, the reserve valuation is an accounting
value that does not coincide with the market value or the investors’ valuation that enters
demand. As we discussed in Section I, insurers compute reserves and required capital as
a conditional tail expectation using the insurance regulators’ scenarios, which ultimately
depend on contract characteristics. However, investors value these characteristics diﬀerently
than insurers because their marginal utility depends on the usefulness of variable annuities
for aggregate risk sharing, insuring longevity risk, and tax management. Therefore, contract
characteristics enter demand diﬀerently than how they enter the insurer’s conditional tail
expectation. Thus, we have plausibly exogenous variation in the reserve valuation that
aﬀects demand only through marginal cost, conditional on contract characteristics in our
speciﬁcation.
We have a similar motivation for the reinsurance share of variable annuities as an instrument. Koijen and Yogo (2016) show that most of reinsurance is with less regulated and
unrated reinsurers within the same insurance group, which relaxes regulatory constraints
and reduces tax liabilities. Thus, insurers reinsure a higher share of variable annuity reserves when marginal cost is high, leading to a positive relation between the reinsurance
share of variable annuities and marginal cost for a given insurer. We assume that the reinsurance share of variable annuities does not aﬀect demand directly conditional on contract
and insurer characteristics in our speciﬁcation. This assumption is plausible insofar as investors have little motive or knowledge to condition demand on reinsurance activity beyond
what is already reﬂected in ratings.
We estimate the random coeﬃcients logit model by two-step generalized method of moments. In addition to the reserve valuation and the reinsurance share of variable annuities,
25

we use the square of these instruments to help identify the variance of the random coeﬃcient
on the fee. We approximate the integral over the distribution of the coeﬃcient on the fee
through a simulation with 500 draws.
C. Estimating Variable Annuity Demand
Table IV reports the estimated mean and standard deviation of the random coeﬃcients
for the model of variable annuity demand. The mean coeﬃcient on the fee is −3.37 with a
standard error of 0.13. The standard deviation of the random coeﬃcient on the fee is 0.30
and statistically signiﬁcant. The coeﬃcient on the rollup rate is 0.18 with a standard error
of 0.01. The signs of the coeﬃcients conﬁrm that demand decreases in the fee and increases
the rollup rate.
Demand also increases in the number of investment options, the GLWB dummy, and
the A.M. Best rating. The coeﬃcient on the number of investment options is 0.18 with a
standard error of 0.01. The coeﬃcient on the GLWB dummy is 17.02 with a standard error
of 2.64. The coeﬃcient on the I share class is −13.82 with a standard error of 2.34. This
meas that the demand for the I share class is lower than that for the B share class. The
coeﬃcient on the A.M. Best rating, which is standardized, is 0.73 with a standard error of
0.10. This means that demand increases by 73% per one standard deviation increase in the
rating.
We compute the semi-elasticity of demand for each contract through equation (19). For
contracts with minimum return guarantees, the semi-elasticity of demand to the fee has a
mean of 16.4 and a standard deviation of 0.8 across contracts in 2007:4. The average semielasticity of demand to the fee falls to 15.4 in 2009:2 and ultimately to 14.8 in 2015:4. The
decrease in demand elasticity is consistent with increasing market concentration as insurers
exit the variable annuity market after the ﬁnancial crisis. However, the increase in market
concentration is too small to generate a large decrease in the demand elasticity.
A semi-elasticity of 16.4 means that demand decreases by 16.4% per one basis point
increase in the fee. In comparison, the average semi-elasticity of demand to the fee is 7
for S&P 500 index funds, implied by the average fee and estimated marginal cost during
1995–2000 (Hortaçsu and Syverson, 2004). The demand elasticity for variable annuities is
higher than that for S&P 500 index funds, which is consistent with the fact that variable
annuity investors are wealthier and less risk averse than the average household (Brown and
Poterba, 2006). We also conjecture that variable annuity investors are more likely to shop
around, especially given the irreversible nature of their investment.
For contracts with minimum return guarantees, the semi-elasticity of demand to the
rollup rate has a mean of 0.18 across contracts in 2007:4. This demand elasticity does not
26

vary signiﬁcantly across contracts or over time since the coeﬃcient on the rollup rate is
constant in our speciﬁcation. A semi-elasticity of 0.18 means that demand decreases by 18%
per one percentage point increase in the rollup rate.
Our baseline speciﬁcation limits the random coeﬃcients to the fee. For robustness, we
have estimated a richer model in which the coeﬃcients on the rollup rate or the A.M. Best
rating are also random. However, the standard deviation of the random coeﬃcient converged
to zero or had large standard errors that indicated that the richer model is poorly identiﬁed.
The identiﬁcation problem arises from the fact that the variation in market shares can only
identify a limited covariance structure for the random coeﬃcients.
D. Parameterizing Variable Annuity Supply
For contract i sold by insurer n in period t, equation (13) for the optimal fee in logarithms
is


1
= log(Vi,t ) + log(λn,t ).
log Pi,t −
P,i,t

(21)

This equation provides a decomposition of marginal cost into the option value and the shadow
cost of capital. The option value explains within-insurer variation in marginal cost along
contract characteristics, while the shadow cost of capital explains between-insurer variation
in marginal cost along insurer characteristics.
For contract i sold by insurer n in period t, equation (15) for the optimal rollup rate in
logarithms is

log

r,i,t
P,i,t




= log

∂Vi,t
∂ri,t


+ log(λn,t ) + Ωi,t ,

(22)

where Ωi,t denotes deviations from the optimality condition when the optimal rollup rate is
−100% (i.e., a contract without a minimum return guarantee). At an interior optimum, the
marginal beneﬁt of a higher rollup rate through demand is equal to the marginal cost of a
higher rollup rate through ﬁnancial frictions. Because the same shadow cost of capital enters
both equations (21) and (22), both fees and rollup rates contribute toward the identiﬁcation
of the shadow cost of capital. Intuitively, a high shadow cost of capital must simultaneously
lead to a high fee and a low rollup rate across all contracts that an insurer oﬀers.
To transform equations (21) and (22) into estimation equations, we take four steps. First,
we parameterize the option value to depend on the rollup rate and a vector yi,t of other
contract characteristics, which are the number of investment options, a GLWB dummy, and

27

share class ﬁxed eﬀects. The option value of contract i in period t is
Vi,t = exp{δ  yi,t + exp{Δ yi,t + νi,t }ri,t + ηi,t }.

(23)

This speciﬁcation implies that the partial derivative of option value with respect to the rollup
rate is
∂Vi,t
= exp{Δ yi,t + νi,t }Vi,t .
∂ri,t

(24)

The coeﬃcients δ determine the level of option value, and the coeﬃcients Δ determine the
slope of option value with respect to the rollup rate. The residuals ηi,t and νi,t represent how
unobserved (to the econometrician) contract characteristics aﬀect the level of option value
and the slope of option value with respect to the rollup rate, respectively.
An alternative to our econometric approach in equation (23) is an option pricing model
(Milevsky and Salisbury, 2006, Bauer et al., 2008). However, long-horizon volatility is a key
input into option pricing, which we cannot estimate from traded options that have much
shorter maturity than the minimum return guarantees. An insight that we oﬀer to this
literature is that fees actually include markups and the shadow cost of capital, according
to equation (13). Therefore, one should not estimate an option pricing model directly on
fees without ﬁrst taking out markups and the shadow cost of capital. An interesting area of
future research is to estimate long-horizon implied volatility using our estimates of option
value for a large cross section of contracts.
Second, we parameterize the shadow cost of capital to depend on a vector zn,t of insurer
characteristics, which are the A.M. Best rating, log reserve valuation, and the reinsurance
share of variable annuities. The shadow cost of capital for insurer n in period t is
λn,t = exp{Γ zn,t + γn },

(25)

where γn are insurer ﬁxed eﬀects. These ﬁxed eﬀects capture permanent diﬀerences in the
shadow cost of capital across insurers. For example, stock companies have a more complex
ﬁnancial structure than mutual companies that allows for captive reinsurance (Koijen and
Yogo, 2016). We do not have time ﬁxed eﬀects so that the only time-series variation in the
shadow cost of capital comes from insurer characteristics. This assumption is conservative
in that we do not over-attribute time-series variation in marginal cost to the shadow cost of
capital rather than the option value.
Third, we model a corner solution for the rollup rate by transforming a moment inequality
into a moment equality (Luttmer, 1996). Let ½{ri,t =−1} be a dummy that is equal to one for a
28

contract with a minimum return guarantee (i.e., the rollup rate is not −100%). In equation
(22), we model the deviations from the optimality condition as
Ωi,t = ω ½{ri,t =−1} .

(26)

Note that this speciﬁcation is equivalent to having the complement indicator ½{ri,t =−1} instead
of ½{ri,t =−1} . Our choice is more convenient in what follows for deﬁning the share of contracts
with minimum return guarantees.
Fourth, we derive equations (13) and (15) under the assumption that the insurer oﬀers
only one contract. In reality, the insurer oﬀers multiple contracts and presumably chooses the
fees and the rollup rates accounting for demand elasticities across contracts. In Appendix C,
we derive a more general version of equations (13) and (15) for a multi-product insurer and
describe how to compute semi-elasticities of demand from the estimated model of variable
annuity demand.
Taking these four steps, the estimation equations are

log Pi,t −



r,i,t
log
− log Pi,t −
P,i,t

1


=δ  yi,t + exp{Δ yi,t + νi,t }ri,t + ηi,t + Γ zn,t + γn ,

P,i,t

1
=Δ yi,t + νi,t + ω ½{ri,t =−1} .
P,i,t

(27)
(28)

Equation (27) for the optimal fee identiﬁes the level of option value and the shadow cost of
capital. After subtracting marginal cost, equation (28) for the optimal rollup rate identiﬁes
only the slope of option value with respect to the rollup rate. This clean separability comes
from the fact that the optimal rollup rate depends on the shadow cost of capital only through
marginal cost, given our parametric assumptions. We plug in point estimates of demand
elasticities in the left side of equations (27) and (28) and estimate the coeﬃcients on the
right side by two-step generalized method of moments.
The intercept in equation (27) is the unconditional mean of marginal cost, from which
we cannot separately identify the unconditional mean of the option value versus the shadow
cost of capital. This issue is inconsequential for our main ﬁndings, which concern the timeseries variation in the option value and the shadow cost of capital. For the purposes of
presentation, we normalize the unconditional mean of the shadow cost of capital so that
log(λn,t ) = 0 for the lowest realized value in our sample. This procedure leads to an upper
bound of the option value and a lower bound of the shadow cost of capital for each contract.

29

E.

Estimating Variable Annuity Supply
Table V reports estimates of equations (27) and (28). The signs of the coeﬃcients on the

insurer characteristics are consistent with the hypothesis that they capture the shadow cost
of capital. That is, the shadow cost of capital decreases in the A.M. Best rating and increases
in log reserve valuation and the reinsurance share of variable annuities. These estimates also
validate the “ﬁrst stage” of the demand estimation in Table IV, which relies on log reserve
valuation and the reinsurance share of variable annuities as relevant instruments for fees and
rollup rates.
The average value of the shadow cost of capital is λt = 1.48 for the cross section of insurers
in 2008:4. We oﬀer a back-of-the-envelope calculation to check the internal consistency of this
estimate to an estimate of the marginal cost of statutory capital in Koijen and Yogo (2015).
In equation (14), the shadow cost of capital depends on the marginal cost of statutory capital
ct and the risk weight φt , which is an unknown value that depends on the overall risk proﬁle
of minimum return guarantees. Based on a relevant case study (Junus and Motiwalla, 2009,
Table 9) that provides a sense of magnitudes, the required capital for a GLWB under the
C-3 Phase II regulatory standard is 8.2% of account value, while the required capital under
Actuarial Guideline 43 is 4.4% of account value. Assuming that the reserve value under
Actuarial Guideline 43 is conservative and greater than the market value, a lower bound on
the risk weight is φt = 8.2/4.4 − 1 = 0.86. This implies that the marginal cost of statutory
capital is
ct =

λt − 1
= 1.26
φ t − λt + 1

(29)

when λt = 1.48 and φt = 0.86. According to Koijen and Yogo (2015, Figure 7), the average
value of the marginal cost of statutory capital is ct = 0.96 for the cross section of insurers in
2008:4. Moreover, 1.26 is well within the range of estimates for the cross section of variable
annuity insurers (Koijen and Yogo, 2015, Table 4).
Through the estimated model for the optimal fee, we decompose the total annual fee
for contracts with minimum return guarantees, averaged across contracts with sales weights.
Panel A of Figure 7 reproduces the total annual fee from Panel A of Figure 5 and reports
its decomposition into the markup, the option value, and the shadow cost of capital. The
total annual fee was 2.04% of account value in 2007:4, which is the sum of 0.07% for the
markup, 1.33% for the option value, and 0.64% for the shadow cost of capital. Thus, the
proﬁt was 0.71% of account value, of which most is earned from ﬁnancial frictions (0.64%)
rather than market power (0.07%). The total annual fee increased by 34 basis points from
2.04% of account value in 2007:4 to 2.38% in 2009:2. This increase reﬂects an increase of 1
30

basis point in the markup, 15 basis points in the option value, and 18 basis points in the
shadow cost of capital. Thus, ﬁnancial frictions are more important than the option pricing
channel for explaining the increase in fees during the ﬁnancial crisis.
Rearranging equation (22) for the optimal rollup rate and taking the expectation across
contracts,
1
E − log
E[½{ri,t =−1} ] =
−ω



r,i,t
P,i,t




+ log

∂Vi,t
∂ri,t




+ log(λn,t ) ,

(30)

where ω < 0. Through this equation, we decompose the share of contracts with minimum
return guarantees. Panel B of Figure 7 reproduces the share of contracts with minimum
return guarantees from Panel B of Figure 5 and reports its decomposition into relative
demand elasticities, the partial derivative of option value with respect to the rollup rate,
and the shadow cost of capital. The share of contracts with minimum return guarantees
decreased after the ﬁnancial crisis from 36% in 2007:4 to 20% in 2011:4. Although the
shadow cost of capital increased during this period after the ﬁnancial crisis, the derivative of
option value with respect to the rollup rate decreased to lower the right side of equation (30)
overall. Exactly according to a prediction of the model in Section III, insurers stop oﬀering
minimum return guarantees to avoid additional risk exposure when they face a higher shadow
cost of capital. After 2011, the share of contracts with minimum return guarantees remain
low because of a falling semi-elasticity of demand to the fee, which is the ﬁrst term on the
right side of equation (30).
In Section II, we discussed two factors that could explain why variable annuity supply did
not fully recover long after the ﬁnancial crisis. The primary factor is interest risk mismatch
that reduced equity capital during the prolonged period of low interest rates. A secondary
factor is a higher capital requirement under Actuarial Guideline 43. These two factors
ultimately drive up the shadow cost of capital, which is consistent with the evidence in
Figure 7.
V.

Conclusion

The traditional insurance literature focuses on products such as life annuities, life insurance, and health insurance that insure idiosyncratic risk. This literature shows that
informational frictions lead to variation in prices and contract characteristics across diﬀerent
types of individuals (Finkelstein and Poterba, 2004). However, the main business of life insurers is now savings products that insure market risk through minimum return guarantees.
Although we focus on the U.S. because of data availability, guaranteed return products are

31

important globally and represent a major share of life insurer liabilities in Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Netherlands, and Sweden (European Systemic Risk Board, 2015,
Hombert and Lyonnet, 2017). The key frictions in this market are ﬁnancial frictions and
market power, which lead to variation in prices and contract characteristics across insurers
and over time.
This paper also has important implications for the literature on ﬁnancial intermediation. Mutual funds are traditionally pure pass-through institutions without risk mismatch.
However, an important and growing part of the mutual fund sector that is sold through life
insurers is subject to risk mismatch through minimum return guarantees. In that sense, life
insurers are becoming more like pension funds because they have risky assets and guaranteed
liabilities. The persistent under-funding of pension funds may foreshadow similar problems
for life insurers in the future (Novy-Marx and Rauh, 2011). The fact that life insurers are
publicly traded and subject to market discipline could lead to additional challenges that are
not present for under-funded pension funds.

32

REFERENCES
Acharya, Viral V., Thomas Philippon, and Matthew Richardson, 2017, Measuring systemic
risk for insurance companies, in Felix Hufeld, Ralph S. J. Koijen, and Christian Thimann,
eds., The Economics, Regulation, and Systemic Risk of Insurance Markets, chapter 5,
100–123 (Oxford University Press, Oxford).
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1997, Financial markets, intermediaries, and intertemporal smoothing, Journal of Political Economy 105, 523–546.
A.M. Best Company, 2006–2016, Best’s Statement File: Life/Health, United States (A.M.
Best Company, Oldwick, NJ).
A.M. Best Company, 2011, Best’s credit rating methodology: Global life and non-life insurance edition, A.M. Best Methodology.
Ball, Laurence, and N. Gregory Mankiw, 2007, Intergenerational risk sharing in the spirit of
Arrow, Debreu, and Rawls, with applications to Social Security design, Journal of Political
Economy 115, 523–547.
Bauer, Daniel, Alexander Kling, and Jochen Russ, 2008, A universal pricing framework for
guaranteed minimum beneﬁts in variable annuities, Astin Bulletin 38, 621–651.
Bergstresser, Daniel, and James Poterba, 2002, Do after-tax returns aﬀect mutual fund
inﬂows?, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 381–414.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, 1995, Automobile prices in market equilibrium, Econometrica 63, 841–890.
Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes, 1973, The pricing of options and corporate liabilities,
Journal of Political Economy 81, 637–654.
Brown, Jeﬀrey R., and James M. Poterba, 2006, Household ownership of variable annuities,
in James M. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, volume 20, chapter 5, 163–191
(MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
Calvet, Laurent, Paolo Sodini, Claire Célérier, and Boris Vallée, 2019, Can ﬁnancial innovation solve household reluctance to take risk?, Working paper, EDHEC Business School.
Célérier, Claire, and Boris Vallée, 2017, Catering to investors through security design: Headline rate and complexity, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1469–1508.

33

Chan, Yeung Lewis, and Leonid Kogan, 2002, Catching up with the Joneses: Heterogeneous
preferences and the dynamics of asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 110, 1255–1285.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to
incentives, Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167–1200.
Credit Suisse, 2012, US variable annuities, Credit Suisse Connections Series.
Cutler, David M., 1996, Why don’t markets insure long-term risk?, Working paper, Harvard
University.
Drexler, Alejandro, Thanases Plestis, and Richard J. Rosen, 2017, How much risk do variable
annuity guarantees pose to life insurers?, Chicago Fed Letter 384.
Dumas, Bernard, 1989, Two-person dynamic equilibrium in the capital market, Review of
Financial Studies 2, 157–188.
Ellul, Andrew, Chotibhak Jotikasthira, Anastasia Kartasheva, Christian T. Lundblad, and
Wolf Wagner, 2018, Insurers as asset managers and systemic risk, Working paper, Indiana
University.
Ellul, Andrew, Chotibhak Jotikasthira, Christian T. Lundblad, and Yihui Wang, 2015, Is historical cost accounting a panacea? Market stress, incentive distortions, and gains trading,
Journal of Finance 70, 2489–2538.
European Systemic Risk Board, 2015, Issues note on risks and vulnerabilities in the EU
ﬁnancial system, Working paper, European Systemic Risk Board.
Finkelstein, Amy, and James Poterba, 2004, Adverse selection in insurance markets: Policyholder evidence from the U.K. annuity market, Journal of Political Economy 112, 183–208.
Froot, Kenneth A., 2007, Risk management, capital budgeting, and capital structure policy
for insurers and reinsurers, Journal of Risk and Insurance 74, 273–299.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2007, The U.S. Treasury yield
curve: 1961 to the present, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291–2304.
Hartley, Daniel, Anna Paulson, and Richard J. Rosen, 2017, Measuring interest rate risk
in the life insurance sector: The U.S. and the U.K., in Felix Hufeld, Ralph S. J. Koijen,
and Christian Thimann, eds., The Economics, Regulation, and Systemic Risk of Insurance
Markets, chapter 6, 124–150 (Oxford University Press, Oxford).

34

Hombert, Johan, and Victor Lyonnet, 2017, Intergenerational risk sharing in life insurance:
Evidence from France, Working paper, HEC Paris.
Horneﬀ, Wolfram J., Raimond H. Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Michael Z. Stamos, 2009,
Asset allocation and location over the life cycle with investment-linked survival-contingent
payouts, Journal of Banking and Finance 33, 1688–1699.
Horneﬀ, Wolfram J., Raimond H. Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Michael Z. Stamos, 2010,
Variable payout annuities and dynamic portfolio choice in retirement, Journal of Pension
Economics and Finance 9, 163–183.
Hortaçsu, Ali, and Chad Syverson, 2004, Product diﬀerentiation, search costs, and competition in the mutual fund industry: A case study of S&P 500 index funds, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 119, 403–456.
Junus, Novian, and Zohair Motiwalla, 2009, A discussion of Actuarial Guideline 43 for
variable annuities, Milliman Research Report.
Kashyap, Anil K., 2002, Sorting out Japan’s ﬁnancial crisis, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Economic Perspectives 26, 42–55.
Koijen, Ralph S. J., Theo E. Nijman, and Bas J. M. Werker, 2011, Optimal annuity risk
management, Review of Finance 15, 799–833.
Koijen, Ralph S. J., and Motohiro Yogo, 2015, The cost of ﬁnancial frictions for life insurers,
American Economic Review 105, 445–475.
Koijen, Ralph S. J., and Motohiro Yogo, 2016, Shadow insurance, Econometrica 84, 1265–
1287.
Koijen, Ralph S. J., and Motohiro Yogo, 2017, Risk of life insurers: Recent trends and
transmission mechanisms, in Felix Hufeld, Ralph S. J. Koijen, and Christian Thimann,
eds., The Economics, Regulation, and Systemic Risk of Insurance Markets, chapter 4,
79–99 (Oxford University Press, Oxford).
Lee, Soon-Jae, David Mayers, and Cliﬀord W. Smith, Jr., 1997, Guaranty funds and risktaking: Evidence from the insurance industry, Journal of Financial Economics 44, 3–24.
Luttmer, Erzo G. J., 1996, Asset pricing in economies with frictions, Econometrica 64,
1439–1467.
MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company, 2008, MetLife Series VA prospectus.
35

Milevsky, Moshe A., and Thomas S. Salisbury, 2006, Financial valuation of guaranteed
minimum withdrawal beneﬁts, Insurance: Mathematics and Economics 38, 21–38.
Morningstar, 2016a, Morningstar Annuity Intelligence (Morningstar, Inc., Chicago, IL).
Morningstar, 2016b, Morningstar Direct (Morningstar, Inc., Chicago, IL).
National Association of Insurance Commissioners, 2005–2015, Annual Life InfoPro (National
Association of Insurance Commissioners, Kansas City, MO).
Novy-Marx, Robert, and Joshua Rauh, 2011, Public pension promises: How big are they
and what are they worth?, Journal of Finance 66, 1211–1249.
Paulson, Anna, Richard Rosen, Zain Mohey-Deen, and Robert McMenamin, 2012, How
liquid are U.S. life insurance liabilities?, Chicago Fed Letter 302.
Roberts, Richard, 2012, Did anyone learn anything from the Equitable Life? Lessons and
learning from ﬁnancial crises, Working paper, King’s College London.
Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1976, Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An essay on the economics of imperfect information, Quarterly Journal of Economics
90, 630–649.
Sen, Ishita, 2019, Regulatory limits to risk management, Working paper, Harvard Business
School.
Sialm, Clemens, and Laura Starks, 2012, Mutual fund tax clienteles, Journal of Finance 67,
1397–1422.
Sirri, Erik R., and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly search and mutual fund ﬂows, Journal of
Finance 53, 1589–1622.
Sun, Peter, 2009, The VA industry: An analysis of recent activities, Milliman Research
Report.
Sun, Peter, Ken Mungan, Joshua Corrigan, and Gary Finkelstein, 2009, Performance of
insurance company hedging programs during the recent capital market crisis, Milliman
Research Report.
Wermers, Russ, 2003, Is money really “smart”? New evidence on the relation between mutual
fund ﬂows, manager behavior, and performance persistence, Working paper, University of
Maryland.
36

Table I
Risk Exposure of U.S. Life Insurers
We construct monthly returns on a value-weighted portfolio of publicly traded U.S. variable annuity insurers,
which are listed in Appendix B. This table reports the betas and monthly alpha from a factor regression
of excess portfolio returns, relative to the 1-month T-bill rate, onto excess stock market returns and excess
10-year Treasury bond returns. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The
sample period is January 1999 through December 2017.

By subsample
Factor
Stock market
10-year Treasury
Alpha (%)
Observations

1999–2007 2008–2009 2010–2017
1.36
(0.19)
-0.01
(0.32)
-0.22
(0.46)
228

0.56
(0.15)
-0.38
(0.29)
0.35
(0.47)
108

37

2.56
(0.22)
1.14
(0.66)
-1.14
(1.70)
24

1.11
(0.08)
-1.28
(0.16)
0.41
(0.29)
96

Table II
A Summary of the Variable Annuity Market
The reserve valuation is the ratio of gross amount of variable annuity reserves to total related account value.

VA liabilities
Year
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015

% of total
Number
Billion $ liabilities of insurers
1,071
1,276
1,435
1,068
1,195
1,344
1,358
1,434
1,606
1,599
1,499

35
38
41
34
35
36
35
36
37
37
35

38

45
47
46
44
43
43
42
39
40
38
38

Reserve
valuation (%)
0.9
0.8
0.8
4.1
3.4
2.5
4.9
3.9
1.8
2.3
2.9

Table III
Top Insurers by Variable Annuity Liabilities
The reserve valuation is the ratio of gross amount of variable annuity reserves to total related account value.
The change in gross amount of variable annuity reserves is reported as a share of total equity in 2007. The
sample includes all insurers with at least $1 billion of variable annuity sales in 2007.

VA liabilities
Insurer
AXA
Metropolitan Life
Prudential
Voya
Hartford
AIG
Lincoln
John Hancock
Ameriprise
Aegon
Paciﬁc Life
Nationwide
Jackson National
Delaware Life
Allianz
New York Life
Genworth
Northwestern
Ohio National Life
Fidelity Investments
Security Beneﬁt
MassMutual
Thrivent Financial

Change from 2007 to 2008

in 2007
Reserve
Reserves
(billion $) valuation (%) (% of equity)
140
129
122
121
120
99
97
95
81
63
56
46
33
24
23
19
17
12
11
10
10
6
3

39

7.6
2.9
1.4
4.2
2.9
0.8
1.3
1.8
1.0
7.3
1.5
1.7
3.6
3.7
5.3
2.2
0.5
0.2
2.2
1.0
1.3
1.7
0.4

125
6
13
42
13
2
15
27
13
29
13
18
13
44
35
2
1
0
22
8
12
0
0

Table IV
Estimated Model of Variable Annuity Demand
The random coeﬃcients logit model of demand is estimated by two-step generalized method of moments. The
speciﬁcation includes insurer ﬁxed eﬀects whose coeﬃcients are not reported for brevity. The instruments
are log reserve valuation, the reinsurance share of variable annuities, and the squares of these variables.
For reporting purposes, the rollup rate is orthogonalized with respect to the number of investment options,
a GLWB dummy, and share class ﬁxed eﬀects. B is the omitted category for share class ﬁxed eﬀects.
Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The sample includes all contracts
from 2005:1 to 2015:4.

Variable

Mean

Fee

-3.37
(0.13)
0.18
(0.01)
0.11
(0.01)
17.02
(2.64)

Rollup rate
Investment options
GLWB
Share class
A

-9.01
(1.60)
2.01
(0.62)
-13.82
(2.34)
4.99
(1.05)
-5.60
(1.03)
3.86
(0.82)
0.73
(0.10)
32,419

C
I
L
O
X
A.M. Best rating
Observations

40

Standard
deviation
0.30
(0.05)

Table V
Estimated Model of Variable Annuity Supply
A model of variable annuity supply, based on equations (27) and (28), is estimated by two-step generalized
method of moments. Both the level and the slope of option value with respect to the rollup rate depend
on contract characteristics (i.e., the number of investment options, a GLWB dummy, and share class ﬁxed
eﬀects). The shadow cost of capital depends on the A.M. Best rating, log reserve valuation, the reinsurance
share of variable annuities, and insurer ﬁxed eﬀects whose coeﬃcients are not reported for brevity. For
reporting purposes, the rollup rate is orthogonalized with respect to these contract characteristics. B is
the omitted category for share class ﬁxed eﬀects. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. The sample includes all contracts from 2005:1 to 2015:4.

Variable

Coeﬃcient

Standard
error

Panel A: Level of option value
Investment options
GLWB
Share class
A
C
I
L
O
X

0.19
49.93

(0.02)
(0.28)

-42.64
10.41
-81.65
18.93
-20.31
15.59

(0.96)
(0.39)
(1.32)
(0.29)
(0.98)
(0.32)

Panel B: Slope of option value
Investment options
GLWB
Share class
A
C
I
L
O
X

-0.01
-12.29

(0.01)
(0.31)

44.32
-8.86
77.34
-15.11
21.08
-14.15

(1.00)
(0.36)
(1.29)
(0.20)
(1.08)
(0.21)

Panel C: Shadow cost
A.M. Best rating
Reserve valuation
Variable annuities reinsured

-3.10
1.16
1.44

(0.26)
(0.24)
(0.20)

Panel D: Constraint on rollup rate
Guaranteed living beneﬁt
Observations

41

-33.27
32,419

(0.28)

A. Industry
0

Drawdown (%)

−10
−20
−30
−40
−50
−60

s
ne
rli
Ai

rs
re
su
in
VA

Fi

na

nc

ia

S&

ls

P

ec

50

to

0

r

−70

B. Insurer
0

Drawdown (%)

−10
−20
−30
−40
−50
−60

Ka

H

ns
a
or s C
ac
e ity L
M
an ife
n
G Lif
en e
w
or
Al th
ls
ta
C te
IG
Am
er As NA
ic
s
Fa an ura
rm Na nt
Bu tio
re na
au l
Li
fe
V
M Am oy
et
ro erip a
Pr
po ri
in
lit se
ci
an
pa
lF
L
in Ha ife
an
r
ci tfo
al
rd
G
Pr rou
Br
ud p
ig
en
ht
tia
ho
l
us
e
Fi AIG
na
nc
i
Li al
nc
ol
n

−70

Figure 1. Stock returns during the COVID-19 crisis. Panel A reports the drawdowns
on the S&P 500 index, the Financial Select Sector SPDR Fund, a value-weighted portfolio of
U.S. variable annuity insurers, and the U.S. Global Jets ETF. Panel B reports the drawdowns
on individual insurers that make up the portfolio in Panel A. The drawdowns are based on
stock returns from January 2 to April 2, 2020.
42

Withdrawal at 5%
Account value
Rollup rate of 5%
Guaranteed amount

1.6

Dollars

1.4

1.2

1

.8
2008:4

2010:4

2012:4
Date

2014:4

2016:4

Figure 2. An example of a GLWB. The evolution of account value and the guaranteed
amount are shown for MetLife Series VA with a GLWB from 2008:3 to 2016:4. The investment option is the American Funds Growth Allocation Portfolio. The investor is assumed
to annually withdraw 5% of the highest guaranteed amount after 2013:3. For simplicity, this
example abstracts from the impact of fees on account value and the guaranteed amount.

43

Variable annuity sales (billion $)
Mutual fund sales (billion $)

400

350

40

300
35
250
30
200
25

Mutual fund sales (billion $)

Variable annuity sales (billion $)

45

150

20

100
1999:4

2002:4

2005:4
2008:4
Year: Quarter

2011:4

2014:4

Figure 3. Variable annuity sales. The left axis reports quarterly sales of variable
annuities across all contracts from 1999:1 to 2015:4. The right axis reports the aggregate
sales of U.S. open-end stock and bond mutual funds (excluding money market funds and
funds of funds).

44

35

300

Number of insurers
Number of contracts

250

200
25
150

20

Number of contracts

Number of insurers

30

100

50
15
1999:4

2002:4

2005:4
2008:4
Year: Quarter

2011:4

2014:4

Figure 4. Number of insurers and contracts with minimum return guarantees.
The sample includes all contracts with minimum return guarantees from 1999:1 to 2015:4.

45

A. Fee
2.5

Total fee
Fee on MRG

% of account value

2

1.5

1

.5

0
1999:4

2002:4

2005:4
2008:4
Year: Quarter

2011:4

2014:4

B. Rollup rate
5

4
.3

3
.2

Rollup rate (%)

Share of contracts with MRG

.4

2
Share of contracts with MRG
Rollup rate (%)

.1
1999:4

2002:4

2005:4
2008:4
Year: Quarter

2011:4

1

2014:4

Figure 5. Fees and rollup rates on minimum return guarantees. Panel A reports
the annual fee on open minimum return guarantees, averaged across contracts with sales
weights. The total annual fee includes the base contract expense. Panel B reports the rollup
rate on open minimum return guarantees, averaged across contracts with sales weights, and
the share of contracts with minimum return guarantees. The sample includes all contracts
with minimum return guarantees from 1999:146to 2015:4.

A. Sales growth
100

Prudential

Offered GLWB in 2007:
Yes
No

Jackson National

Sales growth (%)

50
Thrivent Financial
Northwestern

0

Delaware Life
Metropolitan Life
Aegon

Lincoln
Nationwide
New York Life
Fidelity
Investments
Ohio
National
Life
AIG
Allianz
MassMutual
Ameriprise

−50

AXA

Genworth

Pacific
Life
John Hancock
SecurityVoya
Benefit
Hartford

−100
−1

0

1

2
3
Change in reserve valuation

4

5

6

B. Variable annuity reinsurance

Change in reinsurance share (%)

60

Offered GLWB in 2007:
Yes
No

AXA

Voya
Aegon

30

Genworth

AIG
Metropolitan Life
Nationwide
John Hancock
Prudential
Allianz
New
Northwestern
YorkAmeriprise
LifeMassMutual
Benefit
PacificSecurity
Life
Delaware Life
Lincoln

0

Hartford

−30
Jackson National

−60
−1

0

1

2
3
Change in reserve valuation

4

5

6

Figure 6. Cross section of insurers during the financial crisis. Panel A is a scatter
plot of sales growth versus the change in the reserve valuation from 2007 to 2010. Panel B is
a scatter plot of the change in the reinsurance share of variable annuities versus the change in
the reserve valuation from 2007 to 2010. Both panels report a linear regression line through
the scatter points. The sample includes all insurers with at least $1 billion of variable annuity
47
sales in 2007.

A. Fee
2.5

% of account value

2

1.5

1

.5

Markup
Shadow cost
Option value

0
2005:4

2008:4

2011:4
Year: Quarter

2014:4

B. Minimum return guarantees
.4

Shadow cost
Derivative of option value
Demand elasticities

Share of contracts with MRG

.3
.2
.1
0
−.1

2005:4

2008:4

2011:4
Year: Quarter

2014:4

Figure 7. Decomposition of fees and rollup rates. In Panel A, an estimated model
for the optimal fee is used decompose the total annual fee into the markup above marginal
cost, the option value, and the shadow cost of capital. In Panel B, an estimated model for
the optimal rollup rate is used to decompose the share of contracts with minimum return
guarantees into relative demand elasticities, the partial derivative of option value with respect
48
to the rollup rate, and the shadow cost of capital.
The sample includes all contracts from
2005:1 to 2015:4.

Appendix A.

A Caution on Interpreting the Rollup Rate

The guaranteed amount at the end of the accumulation period can be written as a sum of
the cumulative rollup rate and the payoﬀ of a call option. Thus, we derive a lower bound on
fees based only on the rollup rate to assess whether an annual fee such as 1.8% on MetLife
Series VA with a GLWB is justiﬁed by a rollup rate of 5%. We show that the implied fee
based on the rollup rate is actually negative because the time value of money during the
withdrawal period more than oﬀsets the high rollup rate during the accumulation period.
Therefore, the high fees cannot be explained by the high rollup rate and must instead be
attributed to the call option value, market power, or ﬁnancial frictions.
Following the notation in the paper, let St be the mutual fund price per share at time
t. Let Mt,t+s be a strictly positive stochastic discount factor that discounts a payoﬀ at time
t + s to its price at time t. Then the term structure of riskless interest rates is given by the
usual pricing formula: Et [Mt,t+s ] = (1 + yt,t+s )−s . That is, yt,t+s is the annually compounded
yield on an s-year zero-coupon bond at time t.
Consider a GLWB with an annual fee P per dollar of account value, an annual rollup rate
of r, an annual withdrawal rate of w, an accumulation period of Ta years, and a withdrawal
period of Tw years. For simplicity, we assume that the withdrawal rate, the accumulation
period, and the withdrawal period are all ﬁxed. We also assume that there are no step-ups
during the withdrawal period. For a contract issued at time t, the guaranteed amount at
the end of the accumulation period at time t + Ta is


Xt,t+Ta

St+Ta
= max (1 + r) ,
St
Ta




St+Ta
Ta
.
+ max 0,
− (1 + r)
St


call option


= (1 + r)

Ta

(A1)

For each dollar of account value, the zero-proﬁt condition equates one plus the present value
of fees to the present value of guaranteed income:

1 + Et


T

w

P St+s
= 1 + Ta P = Et
Mt,t+s
Mt,t+Ta +s wXt,t+Ta .
S
t
s=1
s=1

Ta


(A2)

Because Xt,t+Ta ≥ (1 + r)Ta , a lower bound on fees based only on the rollup rate is
T

w
Ta

w(1 + r)
1
−1 .
P ≥
Ta s=1 (1 + yt,t+Ta +s )Ta +s

(A3)

This equation shows that the rollup rate in the numerator is oﬀset by the time value of

49

money in the denominator because the guaranteed amount is only payable as annual income
over Tw years. We show the empirical relevance of this issue by computing the lower bound
on fees, based on the historical zero-coupon Treasury yield curve (Gürkaynak et al., 2007).
Figure A.1 reports the lower bound on fees for an annual rollup rate of 5%, an annual
withdrawal rate of 5%, and a withdrawal period of 20 years. To see the sensitivity of the
results to the accumulation period, the ﬁgure reports the lower bound for an accumulation
period of 10 and 20 years. The lower bound on fees is negative for most of the sample period
and becomes positive only after 2011:4 for the 20-year accumulation period. This means
that the high fees cannot be explained by a rollup rate of 5% and must instead be attributed
to the call option value, market power, or ﬁnancial frictions.
2

Accumulation period:
20 years
10 years

Fee (%)

0

−2

−4

−6
1999:4

2002:4

2005:4

2008:4

2011:4

2014:4

Date

Figure A.1. A lower bound on fees based on the rollup rate. The lower bound is
based on an annual rollup rate of 5%, an annual withdrawal rate of 5%, and a withdrawal
period of 20 years. The calculation uses an average of the zero-coupon Treasury yield curve
within each quarter from 1999:1 to 2015:4, assuming that the yield curve is ﬂat beyond 30
years.

50

Appendix B.

Portfolio of U.S. Life Insurers

We construct monthly returns on a value-weighted portfolio of publicly traded U.S. variable annuity insurers, based on the following list.
Table B.I
Publicly Traded U.S. Life Insurers
This table reports the ﬁrst observation for which monthly stock returns are available from January 1999 to
December 2017.

Insurer

First observation

AIG
Allstate
American National
Ameriprise
Assurant
Brighthouse Financial
CIGNA
Farm Bureau Life
Genworth
Hartford
Horace Mann Life
Kansas City Life
Lincoln
Metropolitan Life
Nationwide
Phoenix Life
Principal Financial Group
Protective Life
Prudential
Symetra Life
Voya

January
January
January
November
March
September
January
January
June
January
January
January
January
May
January
July
November
January
January
February
June

51

1999
1999
1999
2005
2004
2017
1999
1999
2004
1999
1999
1999
1999
2000
1999
2001
2001
1999
2002
2010
2013

Appendix C.

Proof of Proposition 1

This proof covers the case of a multi-product insurer that oﬀers multiple contracts and
chooses the fees and the rollup rates, accounting for demand elasticities across contracts.
Let bold letters denote vectors corresponding to their scalar counterparts. Let 1 be a vector
of ones, I be an identity matrix, and diag(·) be a diagonal matrix (e.g., diag(1) = I). The
insurer sets a vector of fees Pt and rollup rates rt to maximize ﬁrm value:
Jt = (Pt − Vt,t ) Qt − Ct ,

(C1)

which generalizes equation (11). Substituting equations (7) and (8) into equation (9), the
law of motion for statutory capital is
Kt = RK,tKt−1 + (Pt − Vt,t − φt Vt,t ) Qt ,

(C2)

where
RK,t


Qt−1
At−1
(1 + φt )Lt−1 Vt−1,t
=
RA,t −

Kt−1
Kt−1
Vt−1,t−1
Qt−1

(C3)

is the return on statutory capital.
The partial derivative of ﬁrm value with respect to the fee is
∂Kt
∂Jt ∂(Pt − Vt,t ) Qt
=
+ ct
∂Pt
∂Pt
∂Pt



∂Qt
∂Qt
=Qt +
(Pt − Vt,t ) + ct Qt +
(Pt − Vt,t − φt Vt,t )
∂Pt
∂Pt
∂Qt
=(1 + ct )Qt +
((1 + ct )(Pt − Vt,t ) − ct φt Vt,t ).
∂Pt

(C4)

The optimal fee satisﬁes
∂Jt
= 0 ⇔ Pt +
∂Pt



∂Qt
∂Pt

−1
Qt =

1 + ct (1 + φt )
Vt,t .
1 + ct

Equation (13) follows from the deﬁnition of semi-elasticity of demand to the fee.

52

(C5)

The partial derivative of ﬁrm value with respect to the rollup rate is
∂Kt
∂Jt ∂(Pt − Vt,t ) Qt
=
+ ct
∂rt
∂rt
∂rt


∂Vt,t
∂Qt
=−
Qt +
(Pt − Vt,t )
∂rt
∂rt



∂Vt,t
∂Qt
Qt +
(Pt − Vt,t − φt Vt,t )
+ ct −(1 + φt )
∂rt
∂rt

∂Vt,t
∂Qt
Qt +
((1 + ct )(Pt − Vt,t ) − ct φt Vt,t )
= − (1 + ct (1 + φt ))
∂rt
∂rt

−1

∂Vt,t
∂Qt ∂Qt
= − (1 + ct (1 + φt ))
Qt − (1 + ct )
Qt ,
∂rt
∂rt ∂Pt

(C6)

where the last line follows from substituting equation (C4). At an interior optimum, the
rollup rate satisﬁes
∂Qt
∂Jt
=0⇔−
∂rt
∂rt
Because


∂Vt,t
∂rt



∂Qt
∂Pt

−1


1 + ct (1 + φt ) ∂Vt,t
Qt =
Qt .
1 + ct
∂rt

(C7)

is a diagonal matrix, we can rewrite this equation as
−diag(Qt )


−1 ∂Qt

∂rt



∂Qt
∂Pt

−1
Qt =


1 + ct (1 + φt ) ∂Vt,t
1.
1 + ct
∂rt

(C8)

Equation (15) follows from the deﬁnition of semi-elasticities of demand to the fee and the
rollup rate.
The left side of equations (C5) and (C8) correspond to the left side of equations (27)
and (28) for a multi-product insurer. For the random coeﬃcients logit model, we denote the
vector of demand for all contracts that an insurer sells as
Qt =

qt (αP ) dF (αP ).

(C9)

The partial derivative of demand with respect to the vector of fees is
∂Qt
=
∂Pt

αP (diag(qt (αP )) − qt (αP )qt (αP ) ) dF (αP ).

(C10)

The partial derivative of demand with respect to the vector of rollup rates is
∂Qt
=
∂rt

αr (diag(qt (αP )) − qt (αP )qt (αP ) ) dF (αP ).

53

(C11)

Thus, the estimated model of variable annuity demand in Table IV directly implies the left
side of equations (C5) and (C8).

54

