NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE LEMONS SOLD FIRST? DYNAMIC SIGNALING IN THE MORTGAGE MARKET
Manuel Adelino
Kristopher Gerardi
Barney Hartman-Glaser
Working Paper 24180
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24180

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018, revised March 2018

We thank the editor Toni Whited, the anonymous referee, Darren Aiello, Brendan Daley, Stuart
Gabriel, Brett Green, Joseph Mason, Christopher Palmer, Anthony Pennington-Cross, Tim
Riddiough, Hongfei Tang, Nancy Wallace, Paul Willen, Basil Williams, James Vickery,
conference participants at the AFA, AREUEA National Conference, Annual CEPR Symposium,
CHUM, FIRS, and NBER Corporate Finance, and seminar participants at Columbia, Duke, MIT
(Sloan), Minnesota (Carlson), Northwestern (Kellogg), Pittsburgh (Katz), Virginia (McIntire),
University of Colorado at Boulder, UNC Charlotte, and Wharton for their helpful comments and
discussions. We thank Valeria Vargas-Sejas for her outstanding research assistance. This paper
was previously circulated under the title “A Test of Dynamic Signaling Models: Evidence from
Mortgage Securitization.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Manuel Adelino, Kristopher Gerardi, and Barney Hartman-Glaser. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Are Lemons Sold First? Dynamic Signaling in the Mortgage Market
Manuel Adelino, Kristopher Gerardi, and Barney Hartman-Glaser
NBER Working Paper No. 24180
January 2018, revised March 2018
JEL No. D0,G0
ABSTRACT
A central result in the theory of adverse selection in asset markets is that informed sellers can
signal quality and obtain higher prices by delaying trade. This paper provides some of the first
evidence of a signaling mechanism through trade delays using the residential mortgage market as
a laboratory. We find a strong relationship between mortgage performance and time to sale for
privately securitized mortgages. Additionally, deals made up of more seasoned mortgages are
sold at lower yields. These effects are strongest in the ”Alt-A” segment of the market, where
mortgages are often sold with incomplete hard information, and in cases where the originator and
the issuer of mortgage-backed securities are not affiliated.

Manuel Adelino
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
manuel.adelino@duke.edu
Kristopher Gerardi
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
1000 Peachtree St. NE
Atlanta, GA 30309
kristopher.gerardi@atl.frb.org

Barney Hartman-Glaser
University of California at Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Suite C421
Los Angeles, CA 90095
barney.hartman-glaser@anderson.ucla.edu

1. Introduction
One of the most widely studied market settings in economics is that of a seller with private information about the quality of an asset facing less-informed buyers. In this kind of setting with
adverse selection, sellers can take actions to reveal their private information, as in the classic signaling model of Spence (1973). This notion of signaling has been successfully applied in theoretical
models of financial markets to explain a variety of phenomena, from the optimality of debt (DeMarzo and Duffie (1999)) to the temporary freezing of asset markets (Daley and Green (2012)).
While many commonly observed behaviors are consistent with signaling, such as the attainment
of education or the propensity of underwriters to retain equity in an initial public offering, there
is little empirical evidence that agents actually engage in these activities to signal rather than
for other reasons. The fundamental challenge for a test of signaling theory is that it requires the
econometrician to observe agents’ private information or hidden “types.” We address this challenge
by using unique features of the U.S. mortgage market.
We first present a simple model of mortgage sales to motivate our empirical work. In the model,
sellers privately observe mortgage quality, and sellers of high-quality mortgages have a lower cost
of waiting because they face lower probabilities of default. We assume that default is publicly
observable and eliminates the possibility of a sale. A separating equilibrium emerges in which the
time to sale of a mortgage increases in quality, a relationship often referred to as the skimming
property. Many recent studies (e.g., Fuchs and Skrzypacz (2013) and Fuchs et al. (2015)) find that
the skimming property can emerge in dynamic adverse selection models of financial markets, and a
number of others (e.g., Daley and Green (2012) and Daley and Green (2016)) find that the timing
of sales in asset markets can serve as a signal of quality. More broadly, the idea that the timing of
actions can reveal private information is a central prediction of many adverse selection models.1
The mortgage market is well-suited for testing the skimming property and, more generally, trade
delay as a signal of quality. Mortgages are durable assets characterized by an objective measure
of quality based on the probability of default. Detailed micro data are available to investors, originators, and the econometrician on the characteristics of borrowers and mortgage contracts, which
together serve as a good proxy for observable mortgage quality at the time of sale. Crucially, while
future default is not known at the time of sale, it is known to the econometrician ex-post. These
ex-post outcomes are (i) unknown to the buyer (ii) known to the econometrician and (iii) correlated
with unobserved heterogeneity in asset quality known privately by the seller, as previous studies
of the mortgage market show (Demiroglu and James (2012a), Jiang et al. (2014b), Griffin and
Maturana (2016), and Piskorski et al. (2015)). The most relevant type of private information that
originators collect is knowledge about borrower ability to repay, including future income prospects
1

See also Noldeke and Van Damme (1990), Swinkels (1999), Janssen and Roy (2002), Grenadier and Wang (2005),
Kremer and Skrzypacz (2007), Guerrieri et al. (2010), Grenadier and Malenko (2011), Chang (2014), and Williams
(2016).

2

or stability of employment, or even measures of liquid wealth, none of which are included in data
sources available to investors. The distinction between observable and unobservable characteristics
is central to our tests and is one of the main reasons that adverse selection models are particularly
difficult to test empirically. In fact, most models predict that assets that are observably better
should trade faster, not slower.
This paper uses data on mortgages securitized in the non-agency, private-label securitization
(PLS) market, which was very active in the middle of the last decade. In this market, investors
in mortgage-backed securities (the buyers) purchased claims on large portfolios of mortgages from
originators (the sellers). We measure delay of trade from the creation of the asset (the date of
origination of each mortgage) up to the issuance of the securities that ultimately receive cash flows
on those mortgages. The fact that we have a natural starting point for measuring time to sale is
another advantage of using mortgages as a laboratory. While there is a chain of intermediaries
between the originators of mortgages and the ultimate buyers of the securities (as Stanton et al.
(2014) and Stanton et al. (2015) show), this in general would bias our tests against effectively
capturing the role of signaling in transmitting information. We are also able to (imperfectly)
observe the prices at which mortgage-backed securities were sold. While most of our analysis
focuses on trade delays and mortgage quality, the combination of the availability of observed and
unobserved quality measures and prices is rarely available in other contexts.
We find a negative relation between time to sale and the component of mortgage performance
that is not explained by observable mortgage characteristics. After conditioning on underwriting
characteristics, PLS loans sold five months or more after origination are approximately 5 percentage points less likely to default relative to loans sold immediately after origination. This is an
economically meaningful difference, as it is approximately 30% of the average default rate in our
sample (16%).
Interpreting these magnitudes through the lens of our model indicates that adverse selection
is an economically meaningful friction in this market. The difference between the best and worst
possible realizations of the originator’s private information is almost one third of the average
outcome. We provide a quantitative interpretation of our reduced form results by using a simple
calibrated version of our model. The cost of signaling is approximately $540 for a mortgage of
$300, 000. This corresponds to a spread of 18 basis points that originators would charge borrowers
to compensate for expected signaling costs, a substantial magnitude when compared to the other
costs that borrowers pay when taking out a new mortgage.
The results on ex-post default are in contrast to those using ex-ante measures of credit risk. We
construct predicted probabilities of default using only information available to mortgage investors
at the time that mortgages are sold into PLS deals. We then explore whether ex-ante observable
credit risk is related to time to sale. We find a positive relation between ex-ante observable risk
and time to sale for loans sold in the first 6 months after origination, the opposite of what we
find for ex-post default, despite the fact that the predicted default measure is highly correlated
3

with observed performance. The relation becomes insignificant for loans sold more than 6 months
after origination. Put differently, while unobserved quality is positively related to trade delays,
observable risk measures are (weakly) negatively related to time to sale. One interpretation for this
finding is that there may be more investor demand for observably safe mortgage-backed securities.
A potential alternative explanation for our findings is that mortgages that do not default in
the first months after origination are simply of better quality regardless of the originator’s private
information. If there is random delay in time to sale, and if delinquent mortgages are less likely
to be sold, a longer time to sale may mechanically reflect better quality rather than an intention
to signal on the part of the originator. We address this concern by restricting our analysis to
mortgages that do not default in the first nine months following origination independently of when
they were securitized, so that all mortgages in the sample are current by the time the last mortgage
is securitized. In this sample, observing time to sale does not contain additional public information
about default history. Our core result is unchanged in this subsample: it is still the case that
mortgages with a longer time to sale have lower default rates ex-post.
In contrast to the findings in the PLS segment of the market, we find no evidence of a negative relation between time to sale and mortgage default in a large sample of loans sold to the
government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. This is consistent with
the institutional features of the GSE market, in which automated underwriting and the credit guarantees provided by the agencies essentially eliminate asymmetric information on mortgage credit
quality (although not necessarily about prepayment risk) between investors in GSE securities and
originators.
Using a second loan-level data set (from CoreLogic) that contains information on the identities
of originators and security issuers, we separately estimate the correlations between time to sale
and default for issuers and originators that are affiliated entities, i.e. they share the same parent
company (as in Demiroglu and James (2012a) and Furfine (2014)). This helps distinguish signaling
behavior from “unilateral” concerns about warehousing loans on the part of the seller. If our
results simply reflected originator reluctance to hold on to bad loans without an intention to signal
unobserved quality to buyers, we would expect no differences across affiliated and unaffiliated
entities. Instead, we find a significantly weaker negative correlation between time to sale and
default risk for the sample of mortgages in which the issuer and originator are affiliated with each
other. These results indicate that a key component of information asymmetry leading to a delay
in trade is between the originator of the mortgage and the issuer of the security.
The relation between time to sale and default is strongest in the “Alternative-A” (or “Alt-A”)
segment of the market, which is mostly comprised of low-documentation loans or loans with risk
characteristics that prevent them from being securitized in the conforming market.2 While the
2

Jiang et al. (2014a), Jiang et al. (2014b), Begley and Purnanandam (2017), and Saengchote (2013) discuss the
role of private information in low documentation loans.

4

subprime segment of the market is riskier than the Alt-A segment, subprime mortgages are more
homogeneous in their (potentially unobserved) risk characteristics, lending further credence to an
adverse selection, signaling interpretation. While signaling of default risk did not play an important
role in the context of subprime loans, there is a significant relation between time to sale and ex-post
prepayment behavior (consistent with Agarwal et al. (2014), who find that prepayment risk was
an important concern in this particular segment of the market).
The Corelogic data also allow us to include originator and issuer fixed effects in the regressions.
This helps us account for differences in funding sources across originators, such as the use of very
short-term warehouse loans and repurchase agreements that might prevent a signaling mechanism
from operating. Stanton et al. (2014) and Ganduri (2016) show that some originators, particularly
independent mortgage companies, rely almost exclusively on these types of funding sources. As
such, originator fixed effects allow us to investigate within-originator variation in time to sale that
is not driven by variation in funding sources. The results are similar to the baseline specifications
that do not control for originator and issuer identities.
We then turn to the pricing dimension to determine whether prices rise with time to sale, as
predicted by the signaling model. Data on prices paid for individual mortgages are not available (to
our knowledge), so we conduct an analysis of mortgage-backed security (MBS) prices. If signaling
plays an important role in the market, we should see a positive relation between average time to
sale of mortgages included in a deal and security prices. We do not observe prices at origination, so
we use spreads of floating rate securities as our measure of pricing (consistent with, among others,
Ashcraft et al. (2011), He et al. (2012), and Begley and Purnanandam (2017)). We find that
securities backed by loans that take longer to sell (more seasoned loans) are sold at lower yields.
One additional month of average seasoning is associated with a 1.5–2.0 basis-point reduction in the
yield of triple-A securities (the average spread is 28 basis points). Consistent with the evidence
on mortgage performance, the pricing results are non-linear in seasoning and are strongest in the
Alt-A segment of the market.
In addition to leading to a loss in efficiency in the secondary market for mortgages, asymmetric
information between mortgage originators and MBS issuers can have important implications for
the allocation of credit in the primary market. Chemla and Hennessy (2014), Vanasco (2017),
and Daley et al. (2017) show that the anticipation of signaling costs can increase or decrease an
originator’s incentive to screen new borrowers. Since our findings demonstrate the importance of
signaling in the secondary market for mortgages, these papers indicate that a potentially fruitful
avenue for future empirical investigation would be how signaling through delayed trade affects
originators’ screening efforts.
This paper relates to the extant literature on adverse selection and signaling. The seminal
work of Akerlof (1970) is the first to show that markets can break down when some participants
have valuable private information. In related work, Spence (1973) shows that informed agents can
take actions to credibly reveal their private information. These actions then lead to a separating
5

equilibrium where the agent’s private information is revealed. Leland and Pyle (1977) are the first
to apply this insight to financial markets and show that the issuers of IPOs can signal information
by retaining an equity stake in the IPO. DeMarzo and Duffie (1999) use the equilibrium relation
between retention and asset quality to show that debt minimizes the costs associated with the
separating equilibrium and is hence an optimal security design. DeMarzo (2005) builds on this
idea to show that it is optimal to first pool assets to minimize adverse selection and then to create
tranches to minimize signaling costs.
This paper also contributes to the empirical literature on the effects of asymmetric information.
The seminal work of Genesove (1993) finds weak evidence of adverse selection in the used car
market. Garmaise and Moskowitz (2004) use commercial real estate transactions to test a number
of theories of asymmetric information, including the prediction that securities issuers retain a stake
to signal their information. In contrast to our paper, they find no evidence that informed sellers
of commercial real estate signal their information through retention. Downing et al. (2009) also
consider retention and find that mortgages sold to special purpose vehicles (SPVs) tend to be of
lower quality than mortgages not sold to SPVs. Agarwal et al. (2012) find no systematic differences
between subprime mortgages sold in the secondary market and those retained on banks’ balance
sheets. Closest to our setting, Begley and Purnanandam (2017) find that higher levels of equity
tranches in PLS deals (a measure of retention) are associated with lower delinquency rates and
higher prices. Aiello (2016) finds evidence that borrower payment behavior during the warehouse
period can be a source of private information for originators. An et al. (2011) find that information
asymmetries in the secondary commercial mortgage market can lead to market break down. They
argue that conduit lenders exist to mitigate asymmetric information. Fuchs et al. (2015) find
evidence consistent with the skimming property in the IPO market.
Two studies document misrepresentation in the private mortgage market. Piskorski et al.
(2015) finds that lenders often misrepresent loan-to-value ratios when selling mortgages and Garmaise (2015) finds that borrowers often misreport the value of their personal assets on mortgage
applications. These studies suggest there is significant scope for private information in the mortgage
market.
2. A model of signaling through delayed trade
To motivate our empirical tests, we present a simple model of adverse selection and delayed
trade in the secondary market for mortgages. Time is infinite, continuous, and indexed by t. The
model consists of a mortgage originator and a competitive market of mortgage investors. All agents
are risk neutral. At time t = 0, the seller originates a mortgage for potential sale to the market.
This mortgage produces a cash flow of c dollars per unit of time until it defaults at some random
time τ . The default time τ is an exponential random variable with parameter λ distributed on
the compact interval [λ` , λh ] according to the continuous density f (λ). The parameter λ is the
6

annualized expected default rate for the mortgage. the While f (λ) is common knowledge, the seller
privately observes λ at the origination of the mortgage. As is common in such settings, we refer
to λ as the seller’s type.
While both the seller and potential investors are risk-neutral, gains from trade are generated
by a difference in discount rates used by the two classes of agents. Specifically, the seller discounts
cash flows at rate γ and the investors discount cash flows at rate r < γ. This difference in discount
rates proxies for the difference in the investment opportunity sets of the seller and the investors.
The seller has the technology to originate mortgages. In contrast, investors can only purchase
mortgages in a competitive market once they have already been originated. Modeling these gains
from trade as a difference in discount rates is convenient for the analysis that follows, but not
necessary. Provided the gains from trade between the seller and investors are weakly positive for
all seller types, the predictions of the model remain qualitatively unchanged.
We assume that mortgage default is publicly observable such that if the mortgage defaults
before the seller has sold it to the investors, no sale occurs. In choosing when to sell the mortgage,
the seller takes the market price function P (t) as given. Note that the lowest possible value of a
mortgage to investors is
∞

Z
ph = E
t


e−r(s−t) 1(s ≤ τ )cds|λh =

c
,
r + λh

while the highest possible value is
Z
p` = E

∞

e
t

−r(s−t)



1(s ≤ τ )cds|λ` =

c
;
r + λ`

thus, P (t) ∈ [ph , p` ].
An outcome of this game is a triple (λ, t, p) ∈ [λ` , λh ] × [0, ∞) × [ph , p` ], where λ is a realization
of the seller’s type and t and p respectively correspond to the time and price at which trade takes
place if the mortgage has not defaulted by time t. The value for the seller of an outcome of the
game is then given by
Z
U (λ, t, p) = E
0

t


e−γs 1(s ≤ τ )cds + e−γt 1(t ≤ τ )p λ =


c 
1 − e−(γ+λ)t + e−(γ+λ)t p.
γ+λ

An important feature of the seller’s payoff function is the so-called single-crossing property: fixing
a price p, it is less costly for better (lower default risk) sellers to delay trade. Intuitively, the lower
the default risk, the greater the private value of the cash flows that accrue to the seller from the
mortgage before the sale, and the greater the probability that the mortgage will remain current
so that it can be sold in the future. This feature of the model gives rise to the common skimming
property, which is present in much of the literature on dynamic trading and asymmetric information (for example, the literature on sequential bargaining with one-sided incomplete information
7

following Fudenberg and Tirole (1983)) and which is more broadly related to the literature on
costly signaling with adverse selection (for example, Spence (1973) and Leland and Pyle (1977)).
In our model, the skimming property can be expressed as follows: For a given price function P (t),
better sellers wait (weakly) longer to trade, and thus, a trade delay can act as a signal of quality.
An equilibrium of the game is a pair of functions (T, P ), where T (λ) is the time at which a
seller of type λ trades and P (t) is the price of a mortgage sold at time t such that the following
conditions hold:
1. Seller optimality: T (λ) ∈ arg maxt U (λ, t, Ph(t), ).
c
r+λ̃

2. Zero profit for the investors: P (T (λ)) = E

An equilibrium is separating if P (T (λ)) =

i
T (λ) .

c
r+λ .

We focus on characterizing a separating equilibrium. Other equilibria, such as pooling equilibria, are eliminated by standard refinement criteria, such as the D1 refinement of Cho and Kreps
(1987). The following proposition characterizes the unique separating equilibrium of the game.
Proposition 1. The unique separating equilibrium of the game is given by
T ∗ (λ) =

log(r + λh ) − log(r + λ)
,
γ−r

P ∗ (t) = ph e(γ−r)t .

(1)

The method for deriving the equilibrium of Proposition 1 is as follows: First, fix some candidate
price function P (t) and take a first-order condition for the seller’s problem, which yields,
c − (γ + λ)P ∗ (t) +

d ∗
P (t) = 0.
dt

(2)

Next, use the fact that for any separating equilibrium,
P ∗ (T (λ)) =

c
,
r+λ

and substitute into equation (2) to obtain the following ordinary differential equation for P ∗ (t):
d ∗
P (t) = (γ − r)P ∗ (t).
dt

(3)

Finally, because the highest expected default rate type does not benefit from delaying trades in a
separating equilibrium, we must have T ∗ (λh ) = 0 and, hence, P ∗ (0) = ph . The functions given in
Proposition 1 solve Equations (2) and (3) with this initial condition.
To connect the equilibrium given in Proposition 1 to our empirical analysis, it is useful to
consider how the type of seller changes with time to sale. We let λ∗ (t) denote the type of seller
that chooses to sell at time t. Applying Proposition 1, we have
λ∗ (t) = (r + λh )e−(γ−r)t − r.
8

(4)

Our empirical results relate to the following key properties of the equilibrium given in Proposition 1.
1. The expected default rate of the mortgage decreases with time to sale,

d ∗
dt λ (t)

< 0. This

means that asymmetric information creates a negative relation between time to sale and
expected default rate.
2. The price of the mortgage increases with time to sale,

d ∗
dt P (t)

> 0. This means that asym-

metric information creates a positive relation between price and time to sale.
3. The maximum time to sale for a mortgage is increasing in the difference in default risk between
the safest and riskiest mortgage,

d
∗
d(λh −λ` ) T (λ` )

> 0. This means that a more severe adverse

selection problem, such as when the uncertainty about mortgage default risk is greater, leads
to longer trade delays.
Although the separating equilibrium we detail above is the unique equilibrium selected by D1,
a discussion of other possible equilibria is in order. In particular, many pooling equilibria can exist
in which all seller types sell at the same time. For example, if investors believe that any mortgage
sold after time t = 0 is the riskiest type, then all seller types find it optimal to sell their mortgages
at t = 0 because delaying the sale only leads to forgoing gains from trade and does not increase the
sale price. However, imposing D1 refinement eliminates this equilibrium. If investors observe an
off-equilibrium-path action, such as a seller delaying a trade when investors expect an immediate
sale, then D1 requires that they only place positive weight on those seller types who would gain
from deviating given the largest set of prices. This set is always largest for sellers of the least
risky mortgages because it is less costly for them to delay trades than for any other seller type.
As such, D1 requires that investors must believe that the seller is the least risky type if she even
slightly delays a trade. These beliefs thus imply that sellers of the least risky type have a profitable
deviation, eliminating the simple pooling equilibrium. Thus, we focus our empirical analysis on
the separating equilibrium detailed above.
Before proceeding further, we situate our model in the extant literature. For the sake of
simplicity, we have assumed that the seller can commit to a time to sale, and in that sense our game
is essentially static as in the model of Spence (1973) in which students commit to a particular period
of education. Swinkels (1999) shows that without commitment, Spence’s signaling equilibrium
might not exist. However, a number of authors, for example Daley and Green (2012), argue that
dynamic concerns can restore delay in trade as a signal of quality. In a dynamic version of our
model in the spirit of Fuchs and Skrzypacz (2013) and Fuchs et al. (2015), the qualitative results
are unchanged.
2.1. Random delay, default, and prices
To impose further discipline on our empirical analysis, we consider a plausible variation to
our model in which a correlation between delayed trades and ex-post performance need not be
indicative of signaling or adverse selection. Intuitively, if a trade is randomly delayed, then some
9

higher-risk mortgages may default before they can be sold. As a result, mortgages that take longer
to sell are positively selected (i.e., they are of higher quality than those that could not be sold).
This selection mechanism would then lead to a positive correlation between time to sale and ex-post
performance (a negative correlation between time to sale and realized default rates). Investors who
understand this selection issue believe that mortgages that sell after a longer period of seasoning
are of higher quality and so prices increase with seasoning. Importantly, this effect does not arise
from signaling, as mortgages are sold randomly into pools by assumption, but rather through a
learning process. As such, a simple model with random delay of trade and the associated selection
mechanism may appear observationally equivalent to our signaling model. This is a key difficulty in
operationalizing models of asymmetric information: they often make similar predictions to models
with symmetric information. We can overcome this difficulty in our setting by observing that
the selection mechanism can be undone by conditioning the analysis on mortgages that do not
subsequently (after origination) default up to a pre-specified period.
To bring some precision to this intuition, suppose that the mortgage seller detailed above has
the same information as potential investors. Specifically, she knows that the mortgage she wants
to sell has an exponential default time with an intensity λ̃ uniformly distributed on [λl , λh ]. When
she chooses to sell the mortgage, there is a delay between the point at which she lists the mortgage
for sale and the moment at which the transaction is recorded, which is exponentially distributed
with parameter µ. If the mortgage defaults before the transaction can be recorded, then no sale
takes place. As a result, observing that the mortgage transacts at time t reveals that the mortgage
did not default prior to t. Thus, the expected quality of a mortgage that transacts at time t is
given by the following expression:
h
i
h
i
1
λh − λl
E λ̃|sold at time t = E λ̃|τ > t = λh + −
,
t
1 − e−t(λh −λl )
which is increasing in sale time t. Hence, a model with random delay of trade and symmetric
information is consistent with negative correlations between both time to sale and ex-post default
outcomes and time to sale and ex-ante prices. These predictions are essentially the same as properties 1 and 2 of the signaling model described above. In order to empirically test the predictions
of the signaling model we need to overcome this selection effect.
A simple way to account for this selection effect is to condition the analysis on loans that do
not default until some exogenously specified time s, which needs to be after the period of sale, t.
For loans that do not default before s, the fact that the mortgage was sold at time t < s does not
contain any additional information about the default risk of the mortgage. The expected quality
of a mortgage that has not defaulted by time s and is sold at time t < s is given by the following

10

expression:
h
i
h
i
1
λh − λl
E λ̃|sold at time t < s and τ > s = E λ̃|τ > s = λh + −
,
s 1 − e−s(λh −λl )
which is independent of the time of sale t. Thus, in a model with random delay and no signaling
mechanism, there is no correlation between time to sale and ex-post default outcomes if we condition
on a sample of mortgages that do not default before s, where s > t. This is in stark contrast to
our model of signaling, in which time to sale always reveals information about ex-post default risk.
We explore whether such a model can explain our results in the empirical tests below.
Finally, it is likely that even if there is delay due to the signaling of private information, there is
also some delay that is random and uncorrelated with private information. We do not incorporate
this possibility in the model at this stage, as doing so complicates the intuition without leading to
new insights that we can benefit from empirically. In Section 6, we use our model to assess the
quantitative impact of signaling in the data. To ensure realistic estimates of the magnitudes of
the cost of signaling given our empirical findings, we use a version of the model that incorporates
random delay.
3. Background on the U.S. mortgage market
Our primary focus herein is loans that were sold and then securitized by private financial
institutions (or issuers). This segment of the market, often referred to as the PLS (private-label
securitization) market, was the initial source of the mortgage foreclosure crisis in 2007, which led
to the broader financial crisis and the Great Recession. The PLS market grew rapidly during the
housing boom of the mid-2000s, reaching a peak share of approximately 56% of the securitization
market in 2006, before completely shutting down in the summer of 2007 when subprime mortgage
defaults dramatically increased.
The PLS market is split into segments according to the degree of credit risk. The “Alt-A”
segment, also commonly referred to as “near prime,” is typically characterized by loans to borrowers
with credit scores that are comparable to average credit scores in agency pools, but where borrower
income and/or assets are less than fully documented (i.e., low-documentation mortgages). These
loans are also more likely to finance investor or vacation properties. The collateral underlying
subprime private-label securities is made up of loans given to borrowers with low credit scores and
includes a large fraction of cash-out refinance mortgages. The majority of subprime PLS loans did
not meet underwriting standards in the agency market and were broadly viewed as low-quality
mortgages by market participants. Our primary data set (from McDash Analytics, described in
more detail below) includes loans from both segments of the PLS market, while our secondary
source of data (CoreLogic’s LoanPerformance database, also described below) includes loans from
the subprime and Alt-A segments of the market.
11

There is significant variation in the funding and operational models of mortgage originators
in the PLS space, including independent mortgage companies, affiliated mortgage companies, and
others. We refer the reader to Stanton et al. (2014) and Ganduri (2016) for detailed descriptions of
the structure of this market. Stanton et al. (2014) show that repurchase agreements and warehouse
lines of credit with very short maturities are a large funding source in the PLS market. This
limits the originators’ ability to delay mortgage sales. Our tests require that either originators of
mortgages or issuers of PLS (or both) have the ability to hold on to mortgages and delay trades,
even if some are limited by contractual features because of their funding sources. Even though
we find that the majority of loans in the PLS market were securitized within the first two months
after origination, consistent with the evidence provided in Stanton et al. (2014) that warehouse
loans and repurchase agreements had 30 to 45 days’ maturity, the variation that is most relevant
for our tests comes from sales past this time period (up to 9 months after origination).
4. Testing for dynamic signaling using mortgage data
We implement empirical tests of Predictions 1 and 2 of the signaling model developed in Section 2. Prediction 1 is that time to sale and default propensities should be negatively related.
Although we do not observe the expected default rate of any one particular mortgage, i.e., the
λ of the mortgage we describe in the model, we do observe the ex-post conditional performance
of mortgages. As we argue in the introduction, ex-post realized default rates conditional on the
observable characteristics that we have available are correlated with the unobserved component of
ex-ante expected default rates (observed, at least partially, by the seller). Thus, a testable version
of Prediction 1 is that conditional realized default rates are negatively associated with time to sale.
Prediction 2 is that there should be a positive relationship between time to sale and mortgage
prices. Given superior data and the ability to perform much richer cross-sectional tests, we focus
primarily on an analysis of default rates. However, we do briefly discuss the setup of the pricing
tests in this section and show results in Section 5.6.
4.1. Time to sale and mortgage default
A key issue in implementing an empirical test of the skimming property is distinguishing between observable and unobservable asset quality. Signaling in general and the skimming property
in particular refer specifically to quality that the seller is informed about but is unobservable to
the buyer.
We implement a strategy similar to Adelino et al. (2017) that uses conditional measures of
loan performance to isolate aspects of loan quality that are unobservable to investors at the time
of purchase but are correlated with the originators’ information set (and which, by virtue of the
passage of time, become observable to the econometrician). Specifically, we condition performance
on a large set of loan and borrower characteristics used in mortgage underwriting models that
12

are readily available to issuers and institutional investors in the MBS market. Our empirical
specifications take the following general form:
Def aultijt = α + β1 ∗ Months to Saleij + β2 ∗ Xijt + ijt

(5)

where i indexes the individual mortgage, j indexes the geographic area in which each mortgage is
originated, and t indexes the horizon over which we calculate the realized default rates. Xijt is a
vector of control variables. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by
state-quarter (of origination).
Months to Saleij measures the time between mortgage origination and sale into the secondary
market (and securitization). The availability of a natural starting point (the date of origination)
for measurement of delay of trade is an additional benefit of focusing on the secondary market for
mortgages. In many other asset markets there is no such “date 0” to start measuring delay. We show
in the Online Appendix (Figure A.4) that the typical prospectus of a private-label deal included
average seasoning (average time to sale) in the first table showing the mortgage characteristics
included in the deal. We restrict the analysis to loans sold up to 9 months after origination, but
Section A.3 of the Online Appendix shows robustness tests for longer sale horizons.
To relate the regression in Equation (5) to the model we present in Section 2, note that the lefthand-side variable, Def aultijt , is an estimate of the probability (after accounting for observables)
that a loan defaults within the first t months. For a mortgage with expected default rate λ, this
probability is given by 1 − e−λt . Prediction 1 of our model is that λ∗ is decreasing in time to sale,
and hence so is 1 − e−λt . Thus, in the context of the regression in Equation (5), Prediction 1 is
β1 < 0. This is a joint test of two hypotheses: that (i) the seller’s private information, Iseller ,
is correlated with loan quality, i.e. the expected default rate, after accounting for underwriting
characteristics,
Corr[(E(Def aulti |Xi , Iseller ) − E(Def aulti |Xi )), Def aulti )] 6= 0

(6)

and that (ii) sellers signal asset quality by delaying trades.
4.1.1. Observable characteristics and default measurement
Xijt in equation 5 is a vector of mortgage-level control variables that includes the relevant
observable borrower, loan, and geographic characteristics, including detailed fixed effects. Section
A.1 and Table A.9 of the Online Appendix contain a list of all variables included in our set of
controls. According to Stearns (2006), all issuers and most PLS investors have access to detailed
information at the loan level, including original loan balance, FICO score, combined loan-to-value
ratio, documentation type, occupancy type, loan purpose (refinance or purchase), property type,
loan size, amortization schedule, interest rate, loan type (ARM vs. FRM), and information on the
geographic location of the property. Thus, we include these variables in our covariate set. This
13

contrasts with the agency market, as the GSEs, partly because they absorb all credit risk, do not
disclose as much detailed information about the mortgages that back their securities.
We do not include debt-to-income (DTI) ratios in the regressions because this variable is missing
for about 50% of loans in McDash and over one third of loans in Corelogic. In addition, this
variable is reported inconsistently across servicers, as it sometimes measures “front-end” DTI
(which includes only mortgage expenses), and other times the “back-end” ratio (which includes all
debt-related expenses). We show regressions including DTI ratios, as well as a longer discussion of
the reasons for exclusion from the analysis, in Section A.4 of the Online Appendix.
Given the poor quality of the DTI variable, and the different definitions used in the industry,
it is likely that originators have an information advantage over investors with regard to borrower
ability to repay. This can include not just current front- and back-end DTIs, but also future
income prospects, occupation, self-employed status, stability of employment, measures of liquid
wealth, among others. All of these dimensions are plausibly related to credit quality and are not
included in any standard data source that is available to buyers of the mortgages.
Our vector of controls also includes variables that measure conditions in the local housing
market, including the county-level unemployment rate and the level and changes of the countylevel house price index (normalized by setting the index value for January 2000 to 100 for each
county). We include a full set of state-level fixed effects and fixed effects corresponding to the
year-quarter of origination and the year-quarter of loan sale. We have also experimented with
a specification that includes zip code-level fixed effects and found that the results were largely
unaffected. Because including such a large number of fixed effects is parametrically expensive and
computationally demanding, we use state fixed effects in all of the tests in the paper.
We consider two default horizons, 36 and 60 months, in our primary specifications; these are
measured relative to the month of loan origination. We also consider a mortgage to be in default if
the borrower is either two payments behind (60+ days delinquent) or three payments behind (90+
days delinquent) at any point between origination and each default horizon.
We use 60-day and 90-day delinquency cutoffs rather than the initiation of foreclosure proceedings so that our default definition reflects borrower behavior that is not confounded by the decisions
of mortgage servicers. Unlike other debt markets where monitoring by lenders is common (e.g.,
bank loans), mortgage servicers do not monitor borrowers prior to serious delinquency. In fact,
servicers do not obtain additional information about borrowers after origination other than their
payment history, which is observable to any buyer of the mortgage. If servicers did acquire additional information, the tests below might reflect differences in the observable information across
borrowers due to a longer horizon for acquiring that information. This is not a plausible mechanism
for the findings in the case of the mortgage market.

14

4.2. Time to sale and mortgage spreads
We do not have access to data on individual mortgage prices, so we conduct our pricing analysis
at the security level. The analysis focuses on the average spread (quoted as a spread over the onemonth LIBOR rate) of floating rate securities in the PLS market. We calculate a weighted average
spread at the deal-level, where spreads are weighted by the face value of securities. If a security is
linked to more than one pool, it contributes to each pool’s weighted average yield spread.
The analysis focuses primarily on floating rate securities to minimize the possibility that securities were not issued at par. We do not have information on prices at issuance, but floating rate
securities were almost always issued at par, in contrast to fixed rate ones. In addition, private-label
floating rate securities have very short durations (typically one month), so we can ignore interest
rate risk and the negative convexity problem that arises with fixed-rate mortgage-backed securities.
We show results using only triple-A securities as well as using all tranches in a deal. Aggregation of
spreads over pools of mortgages becomes noisier when we include tranches below triple-A because
these were more likely to have claims on more than one pool in the same deal. In addition, the
sample becomes smaller because junior tranches were also more likely to be issued at fixed rates
(causing deals to be dropped from the analysis).
Our empirical analysis considers the relation between average yield spreads and mortgage seasoning. The seasoning variable, which is calculated as the average months to sale in the pool, and
all controls are constructed from loan-level data and aggregated to the pool level. Our specifications
take the following form:
Spreadi = α + β1 ∗ Seasoningi + β2 ∗ Xi + i

(7)

where i represents a pool and Xi includes the pool averages of all relevant loan and borrower
characteristics used in the loan-level tests and the quarter of issuance fixed effects. Prediction 2 of
our model is that average seasoning is positively related to price, and hence negatively related to
mortgage spreads, so that β1 < 0.
4.3. McDash data
In this section, we describe the two loan-level data sets used in this paper. While both loanlevel data sets are similarly structured monthly mortgage panels, there are important differences
in the scope of their coverage and in some of the underlying variables that produce advantages and
disadvantages in the context of our analysis.
The pricing data at the individual security level were obtained from Bloomberg and cover over
90% of all subprime PLS issued in the U.S. between 2002 and 2007. We are able to combine the
CoreLogic and Bloomberg data sets by merging individual security CUSIPs.

15

4.3.1. Lender processing services data
Our primary data set is from McDash Analytics. The McDash data set covers between 60%
and 80% of the U.S. mortgage market and contains detailed information on the characteristics and
performance of both purchase-money mortgages and refinance mortgages. The McDash data set is
constructed using information from mortgage servicers, financial institutions that are responsible
for collecting payments from borrowers. Each loan is tracked at a monthly frequency from the
month of origination until it is paid off voluntarily or involuntarily via the foreclosure process. We
focus on loans originated during the housing boom, from January 2002 through December 2007.
Importantly, the data set includes a time-varying variable, “investor type,” which identifies
whether a mortgage is held in a bank’s portfolio, is privately securitized, or is securitized by GSEs.
This variable allows us to identify if and when a loan is securitized or sold to a GSE.
The main advantage of using McDash data to test the skimming property is the ability to
consider sales to both PLS and the GSEs. The GSE market provides us with an important counterfactual exercise because loans are approved based solely on observable characteristics (typically
through automated systems). The biggest drawback, however, is the lack of information on the
identity of the financial institution that originates the mortgage. In addition, there is some concern
that the McDash data set may under-represent the PLS market during our sample period, and
that it overweights the Alt-A segment of the market (we discuss this in more detail in Section 4.4
below). For these reasons, we also use data from CoreLogic’s LoanPerformance database.
4.3.2. CoreLogic data
Our second source of mortgage data is CoreLogic’s LoanPerformance (CL) database, which
covers virtually the entire subprime and Alt-A segments of the private-label securitization market.
Like the McDash data set, CL contains detailed information on underwriting characteristics and
monthly loan performance, but unlike McDash, it does not have information on portfolio-held loans
or loans securitized by the GSEs.
The CL database includes virtually the same mortgage and borrower characteristics (at the time
of loan origination) as the McDash database, but, importantly, about 50% of the CL database includes the identity of the originating institution. This allows us to include originator fixed effects
in our regressions, and hence purge any time-invariant, unobserved heterogeneity in originator
underwriting practices and funding sources from the analysis. In addition to the identity of the
originator, CL provides information on the identity of the mortgage servicer and on security identifiers (CUSIPs) and deal identifiers, which allows us to obtain information on the identity of the
securitizer (issuer) for most of the loans in the sample and to merge the loan-level data to yield
spread data from Bloomberg. Finally, CoreLogic also allows us to distinguish between the subprime
and Alt-A segments of the PLS market.

16

4.4. Summary statistics
Table 1 shows the distribution of the number of months between origination and sale for the
McDash data. It is clear from the table that the majority of both PLS and GSE securitized
mortgages are sold very quickly, either immediately or only one month after origination. Few GSE
loans (about 8%) are sold more than two months after origination, but a non-trivial fraction of
PLS loans are sold later (about 22% are sold more than two months after origination). We impose
a maximum threshold of nine months between the origination and sale of a loan to ensure that we
have power to identify non-parametric regression specifications by month and to ensure that the
loans in the sample were originated with the intention of being sold. Section A.3 of the Online
Appendix includes results using higher thresholds of months to sale. This leaves us with a sample
of over 5.7 million loans sold to PLS issuers and over 14 million loans sold to the GSEs.
Table 3 displays summary statistics for many of the control variables in the empirical models.
In general, PLS loans are characterized by riskier attributes than are GSE loans. For example,
there are more interest-only loans, more adjustable-rate loans, more low-documentation loans, more
subprime loans, and more loans that carried prepayment penalties in the PLS sample.
Table 2 displays the distribution of months to sale in the CoreLogic data set, while Table 4
provides some basic summary statistics. There are many more PLS loans in CoreLogic than in
McDash, reflecting the differences in coverage across the two data sets. The distribution of months
to sale in CL is generally similar to McDash, particularly in the case of Alt-A loans.
Note that the McDash sample size of 5.7 million loans listed in the tables understates the total
number of PLS loans, as some seasoned mortgages are eliminated from the sample because we only
include loans for which we have a full history of performance. In total, there are approximately 8
million PLS loans originated between 2002 and 2007 (inclusive) in the McDash database.
Table 4 shows that the CL sample is characterized by significantly lower credit scores (FICOs),
higher interest rates, and lower loan amounts relative to the McDash data set. However, the Alt-A
loan characteristics in CL are generally close to the McDash sample.
Table A.8 in the Online Appendix shows summary statistics for all of the pool-level characteristics used in the pricing analysis. The average spread of triple-A securities in the data is 28 basis
points, with a standard deviation of 23 basis points. This spread is computed as the pool-level
average of all triple-A securities drawing cash flows from a given pool, and the sample is limited
to pools with only floating rate triple-A securities. The average pool-level seasoning in the data is
3.3 months, and it is truncated at 9 months following the approach used for the default analysis.
Figure 4 shows a histogram and cumulative distribution of the pool-level seasoning variable. Pools
are made up of 2,355 loans on average (the median is 1,911), with an average FICO score of 640,
and a combined loan-to-value ratio of 84%.

17

5. Results
In this section, we present results on the relation between time to sale, default, and prices.
We first implement tests using linear specifications so that Months to Saleij (for the loan-level
default analysis) and Average Seasoningi (the pool-level average used in the pricing regressions)
take values from 0 to 9. We then consider specifications that allow for potential non-linearities. For
the loan-level default regressions, we estimate a non-parametric specification in which we include
separate indicator variables for each value of the months to sale variable. Because we cannot
distinguish between loans with values of 0 and 1 months to sale, the omitted baseline category for
the regressions estimated on McDash data includes both.
5.1. Default and time to sale
Panel A of Table 5 displays results for the linear regression estimated on loans in the McDash data set. We use two different default definitions (60+ DQ and 90+ DQ, 60- and 90-day
delinquency, respectively) and two different default horizons (36 months and 60 months relative to
the month of origination). The results show a negative, statistically significant relation between
default risk and time to sale. The magnitude of the coefficient in the linear specification is approximately −0.01, which implies that a one-month increase in time to sale is associated with a
1-percentage-point decrease in the average realized default rate. The results are consistent over
different horizons and default definitions. Table A.3 in the Online Appendix presents results for
when the maximum horizon for time to sale is extended from 9 months to 12 and 24 months. The
results are consistent with the main analysis (for details see the discussion in Section A.3 of the
Online Appendix). Table A.9 in the Online Appendix displays coefficient estimates for all of the
variables in our covariate set.
Table 6 explores whether there is a non-linear relationship between time to sale and default.
Columns 1–2 (“Full Sample”) show that average realized default rates are decreasing in time
to sale until the 5th month after origination, at which point these rates begin to rise moderately.
Mortgages sold in the 5th month after origination have realized default rates that are approximately
5 percentage points lower than loans sold in either the month of origination or the month after
origination, while mortgages sold in the 9th month after origination have realized default rates that
are lower by 3–4 percentage points on average. Again, the estimation results are consistent across
alternative default definitions and across different horizons (but are omitted for brevity). Panel A
of Figure 1 plots the estimated coefficients from Column 1 in Table 6.
Overall, the results in Tables 5 and 6 provide evidence of a negative relation between time
to sale and conditional ex-post default risk, which supports the presence of signaling in the PLS
market.

18

5.2. Accounting for “mechanical” effects of random delays
One potential concern in the default analysis above is the role of early payment defaults in
generating a mechanical relation between time to sale and ex-post default risk due to institutional
features of the PLS market. We discuss this possibility in Section 2.1 in the context of our model.
In short, delinquent loans may be harder to sell into a securitized pool of loans, which could create
a selection effect of loans sold late relative to loans sold immediately. This in turn could create a
negative relation between time to sale and default that is independent from private information
and signaling. Random delays would mean that loans sold quickly would be representative of
the population of eligible loans, whereas loans that take longer to sell would be of higher average
quality than the population of eligible loans.
To address this issue, we undo this potential selection effect by including in the analysis only
those loans that do not default within the first 9 months of origination. Put differently, we drop
all loans that are securitized between months 0 and 9 and become delinquent by month 9. We
refer to this sample as the “restricted sample.” This restriction forces the sample of sold loans
to be homogeneous in terms of early payment defaults irrespective of when they were sold into
securitization pools. Thus, a negative relation between time to sale and default risk in this restricted
sample cannot be explained by the selection effect described above.
While this correction directly addresses potential selection bias, it is possible that signaling
behavior is precisely about the likelihood of early-payment default. That is, if most of the private
information on loan quality concerns the likelihood of default within the first few years of origination, this “correction” would effectively eliminate the variation of greatest interest. For this reason,
we choose to display the correction as a robustness check rather than to adopt it as our baseline
specification.
Panel B of Table 5 and columns 3–4 in Table 6 display the same set of results for our restricted
sample, where we exclude all loans that default within 9 months of origination. We find that
the effects are virtually unchanged for the linear specification of the Months to Saleij variable,
but there are a few subtle differences for the non-linear specifications. This sample restriction
marginally mitigates the negative relation between time to sale and default for loans sold within 4
months, but it has the opposite effect for loans sold later. Overall, the sample correction appears
to have a minor effect on the results, which suggests that sample selection bias is not an important
issue.
5.3. Default and time to sale: agency loans
We next turn to the sample of loans sold to government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs). We
view this as an important counter-factual exercise. The GSE market is dominated by automated
underwriting systems in which agencies pre-commit to funding loans based on hard (observable)
characteristics of the loans, so that originators have no need to signal loan quality through sale
delays.
19

Table 7 displays results for loans sold to the GSEs. We find essentially no evidence of a relation
between time to sale and ex-post default risk in the GSE segment of the market. The estimates
are all close to zero and generally statistically insignificant. We plot the coefficients from a nonparametric specification in Panel B of Figure 1 (the same specification used to construct the PLS
graph in the top left panel). There is a stark difference in this pattern compared to the PLS
graph. While there is a clear downward trend in the PLS estimates that flattens out toward the
end of the time to sale distribution, the GSE coefficients are marginally positive until the end of
the distribution, when they begin to fall (although the sample size becomes significantly reduced
in these later months).
The GSE results are consistent with our hypothesis that private information does not play a
substantive role in the agency market compared to the PLS market.
5.4. Predicted default and time to sale
In this section, we estimate the empirical relation between time to sale and ex-ante credit risk;
that is, credit risk measured at the time of issuance based on observable characteristics only. As
with the regressions using GSE loans, we view this as another important counter-factual exercise.
If we found the same type of relation for ex-ante risk as we do for ex-post default (described above),
this would call into question our ability to isolate the observable and unobservable components of
risk.
We construct ex-ante default probabilities for each loan using the data available in McDash
and using only performance information available at the time of origination in a manner similar
to the method used in Ashcraft et al. (2010). We focus on 36- and 60-month horizons for the
default forecasts. For each quarter in our sample, we take all loans that were originated between
48 months and 36 months prior and track those mortgages over the subsequent 36 months. We
then estimate a discrete choice model (linear probability and logit, both shown in Table 8) using
variables that are available in McDash to predict 36-month defaults for these loans. We use an
analogous strategy for the 60-month horizon (i.e., we take all loans originated between 72 and 60
months prior and track them over the subsequent 60 months). The regressions include the same
set of covariates that are included in the ex-post default regressions above. We take the estimated
coefficients from each quarterly credit risk model and apply them to the characteristics of the loans
originated in the current quarter to create 36-month, loan-level, predicted default probabilities.
This leaves us with an ex-ante credit risk measure that uses only information available at the time
of issuance.
We take the predicted default probabilities and substitute them into Equation 5 to estimate
the relation between time to sale and observable default risk. Table 8 shows the results. We find
positive coefficients for all models in Panel A (PLS loans), which is consistent with the intuition
that observably better loans tend to transact faster. We observe no relation between ex-ante risk
and time to sale for GSE loans (Panel B). Figure 1 plots the non-parametric coefficients where ex20

ante risk is used as the outcome variable, and this again shows that loans sold later have a (weakly)
higher predicted default probability (not lower, as in the case of ex post default). These differences
could be driven by the demand side, in particular if there is higher demand for observably safer
securities. This would also be consistent with the fact that observably riskier PLS loans take longer
to sell than GSE loans.
These patterns are in stark contrast to the estimated relation between ex-post default rates
and time to sale in Section 5.1, and they confirm that the distinction between observable and
unobservable risk is crucial for our tests.
5.5. Default and time to sale in the CoreLogic data set
Table 9 displays results concerning the relation between ex-post default risk and time to sale
using the sample of PLS loans in CoreLogic. One of the main reasons for using CL data is the
ability to control for the identity of mortgage originators and security issuers. Panel A focuses on
the effect of controlling for originator heterogeneity, while Panel B focuses on issuer heterogeneity.
Issuer information corresponding to the private financial institution responsible for pooling and
securitizing the mortgages is obtained from Bloomberg. In each panel, we display results for the
full sample of PLS loans (columns (1)–(3)), the sample of Alt-A PLS loans (columns (4)–(6)), and
the sample of subprime PLS loans (columns (7)–(9)), and use a default definition of 60+ days
delinquency over a 36 month horizon.
In columns (1), (4), and (7) of Panel A, we do not control for originator heterogeneity, so these
results are directly comparable to the McDash results displayed in Table 5. In columns (2), (5), and
(8) we include a full set of originator fixed effects. Information on the originators is available for
slightly more than half of the loans in the CL data set, so we focus our analysis on this subsample
across all specifications. Finally, columns (3), (6), and (9) display results from a specification that
includes originator-by-year-quarter-of-origination fixed effects. This is a reasonably demanding
test, as it uses variation on months to sale and default from loans originated by the same institution
in the same year-quarter to estimate the regressions.
In the full sample of PLS loans, the estimates are negative and statistically significant, but
smaller in magnitude than the corresponding estimates obtained using McDash data. The coefficient in column (1), which corresponds exactly to our McDash specification (i.e., no originator
fixed effects) is -0.36 percentage points, roughly one-third of the magnitude of the estimate in
Table 5 (-0.94 percentage points). We return to this comparison below when we separate loans
into the Alt-A and subprime segments of the market. In column (2), we observe that the inclusion
of originator fixed effects slightly decreases (in absolute magnitude) the coefficient associated with
months to sale, while the inclusion of originator-by-year-quarter-of-origination fixed effects (column (3)) further decreases the magnitude, although the estimate remains negative and statistically
significant.
21

In column (1) of Panel B, we display results from a specification that includes both originator
and issuer fixed effects. Compared to the specification with only originator fixed effects (column (2)
in Panel A), the estimated effect increases (in absolute magnitude) from -0.28 to -0.41 percentage
points. In column (2), we add issuer-by-year-quarter-of-issuance fixed effects, which approximately
halves the magnitude of the coefficient. Finally, column (3) displays results from a specification
that includes both originator-by-year-quarter-of-origination and issuer-by-year-quarter-of-issuance
fixed effects. The estimated effect remains negative and statistically significant, and an additional
month of delay is associated with a 0.17-percentage-point decrease in the likelihood of default, all
else equal.
5.5.1. Alt-A PLS vs. subprime PLS
In addition to the information on the identities of originators, an advantage of using CL data
is the ability to analyze different segments of the PLS market. A priori, we expect signaling
unobservable mortgage quality to have a larger role in the Alt-A segment of the PLS market
because it is largely comprised of low-documentation mortgages. Table 4 shows that over 70% of
Alt-A mortgages were less than fully documented, compared to 35% of subprime loans. Industry
sources suggest that at least some of the Alt-A loans that appear as “fully documented” may
also suffer from documentation issues that prevent them from being sold in the GSE (conforming)
market.
Columns (4)–(9) in Table 9 display results from separately estimating regressions for the subprime and Alt-A segments of the PLS market, and Figure 2 plots results for the non-parametric
specifications.3 The differences between the subprime and Alt-A results are fairly striking, and
they help to explain the source of the differences between the McDash and CL results. There is a
significantly weaker relation between ex-post default risk and time to sale among subprime loans,
while for Alt-A loans the magnitudes are similar to those estimated in the McDash sample. As
discussed above, when we compare summary statistics between McDash and CL (Tables 3 and 4),
it appears that the McDash sample of PLS loans is more similar to the Alt-A mortgage sample than
the subprime sample in CL. This can rationalize the differences in the quantitative magnitudes of
the estimates derived from each subsample in CL. In addition, the Alt-A results are much less
sensitive to the inclusion of originator-by-time and issuer-by-time fixed effects. In contrast, results
for the subprime sample are highly sensitive and even disappear in some specifications.
In the Online Appendix (Table A.10) we present results following restriction of the sample of
Alt-A and subprime loans to those that have not become delinquent 9 months after origination.
This is the same correction that we implemented and discussed in Section 5.2. We find that the
coefficient on Alt-A loans is slightly reduced in magnitude relative to the whole sample case (for
example, without originator or issuer fixed effects, the coefficient moves from 0.072 in Table 9
3

In the Online Appendix we also show results for estimations where we extend the maximum horizon for time to
sale to 12 and 24 months (Section A.3). The results are robust to these changes.

22

to 0.054. All specifications (with and without originator and issuer fixed effects) are still highly
statistically significant. The results for subprime loans are similarly affected.
These results suggest that signaling of default risk did not play an important role in the subprime segment of the PLS market (as opposed to the Alt-A segment). However, there is evidence
from the literature that adverse selection with respect to prepayment risk may have played a role
in this market (Agarwal et al. (2014)) and that prepayment risk was an important concern for PLS
investors in the pre-crisis period. For example, in a 2006 primer on mortgage-backed securities, the
American Securitization Forum wrote, “Prepayment risk is the key source of cash flow uncertainty
in RMBS [Residential Mortgage Backed Securities]. ” (ASF (2006)). As a final test, we regress
prepayment risk for hybrid adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs) on our time to sale variable. We
discuss these results in detail in Section A.6 the Online Appendix. A negative prepayment event
is defined as a borrower prepaying more than six months before the date on which the mortgage
resets. We find a negative relation between time to sale and the likelihood of an early prepayment
(Table A.7 of the Online Appendix). The majority of the hybrid ARMs that we consider are in
the subprime segment of the market, which suggests that asymmetric information on prepayment
risk may have been a more relevant factor in that market rather than that on credit risk.
5.5.2. Affiliation results
In this section, we test whether an affiliation between the originator (seller) and the issuer
(buyer) plays a role in the relation between time to sale and default risk. Many issuers and
originators in the PLS market share direct relationships. In some cases, the originator and issuer
are the same institution, while in others they are part of the same vertically integrated corporation
(in which case the originator is typically a subsidiary of the issuer). A priori, we expect that the
scope for private information between an originator and issuer who are affiliated is less than that
between an originator and issuer that are independent entities (Demiroglu and James (2012b),
Furfine (2014)). Thus, if signaling is driving our results, we expect a weaker negative relation
between time to sale and default risk for the sample of loans in which the issuer and originator are
affiliated with each other.
We obtain information on the identity of issuers from Bloomberg and supplemented this with
hand-collected data from the pooling and service agreements (PSA) associated with the PLS deals.4
There is some uncertainty about whether the originator field in the CoreLogic database actually
corresponds to the lender of record (i.e., the institution that underwrote and originated the loan)
or to another institution in the intermediation chain (Stanton et al. (2014)). In Section A.2.2.1 in
the Online Appendix we discuss an external check we performed to ensure that the originator we
observe is, indeed, the lender of record.
We focus only on loans that are in deals in which either all of the loans were made by affiliated
originators or all of the loans were made by unaffiliated originators. Table 10 and Figure 3 display
4

PSAs are available at the SEC’s EDGAR website: http://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html.

23

the results. As in our analysis of documentation status above, we stratify our sample of all PLS
loans and our separate Alt-A and subprime samples by affiliation status.
The negative correlation between time to sale and default risk does not appear to be sensitive
to affiliation status in the full sample (columns 1–2 in Table 10). However, the difference between
affiliated and unaffiliated issuers and originators is significant in the Alt-A segment of the market.
Loans sold six months after origination by affiliated originators are approximately 3 percentage
points less likely to default compared to loans sold in the month of origination (column 3 of
Panel B in Table 10), while this effect increases to almost 9 percentage points for loans originated
by unaffiliated originators. Panel A in Figure 3 shows that this difference is highly statistically
significant over the entire distribution of time to sale.
There is some ambiguity regarding the exact places in the mortgage funding chain in which
asymmetric information might play an important role. One possibility is that it occurs between
the originator and the issuer, while a second possibility is that it occurs between the issuer and the
ultimate PLS investors. The affiliation results shed light on this issue because the two possibilities
yield different predictions. If asymmetric information is present between the originator and issuer,
we would expect to find a weaker relationship between time to sale and default for affiliated
institutions. However, if asymmetric information is present between the issuer and PLS investors,
then we might expect to find a stronger relationship for affiliated originators and issuers because
investors may perceive that issuers are more likely to obtain private information on mortgage
quality when they have an affiliation with the originators. Our finding of a weaker relationship
shown in Table 10 suggests that asymmetric information between originators and issuers plays a
more important role.
5.5.3. Documentation results
We further explore the role of documentation standards by stratifying our PLS sample into loans
with full documentation of income and assets and loans with less than full documentation (“low
doc”). We stratify by documentation type for the full sample of PLS loans and for our separate
subprime and Alt-A samples. The results are displayed in Table 11, with Panel A containing
the results for the linear specifications and Panel B containing the results for the non-parametric
specifications.
The results are mixed. In the sample of all PLS loans (subprime and Alt-A combined), there
appears to be a stronger negative relation between time to sale and default for low-documentation
loans compared to full-documentation loans. This negative relation is approximately 50% larger (in
absolute value) in the sample of low-documentation PLS loans (columns 1–2). However, the results
in columns 3–6 (breaking down loans into Alt-A and subprime) show that there are essentially
no differences between full-documentation and low-documentation loans within each of the two
subsamples.

24

5.6. Security spreads and time to sale
We now turn to the empirical relation between time to sale and security prices. The unit of
observation for this analysis is a pool, i.e., a group of loans from which different securities in each
private-label deal derive cash flows. We focus our attention on floating rate securities and show
results using two security samples: (i) only triple-A tranches, and (ii) all tranches, including lowerrated securities. Including securities below triple-A makes aggregation less straightforward and
reduces the sample used in the regressions because many of these securities were issued at fixed
rates (see the discussion in Section 4.2).
Table 12 displays results from regressing the average pool-level spreads on average pool-level
seasoning. We include pool-level averages of FICO and CLTV as covariates, as well as the fraction
of loans in each pool that fall into various FICO and CLTV categories (displayed in Table A.8).
Panel A shows the results when we focus on triple-A securities and we include only a linear term
for average seasoning; Panel B also focuses on triple-A securities and includes a quadratic term
to capture potential non-linearities; and Panel C extends the analysis to all securities, including
those in lower-rated tranches. The results on ex-post realized default rates discussed above were
significantly different in the sample of mortgages that collateralized Alt-A securities than in the
sample of loans that backed subprime securities. Thus, in all panels, we show results for the full
sample of floating-rate securities (columns 1–3) and results for Alt-A (columns 4–6) and subprime
(columns 7–9) securities separately to determine whether similar patterns emerge on the pricing
dimension.
In Table 12, we display results for three different regression specifications. The first specification
includes the quarter of issuance fixed effects but no other control variables. The second specification
includes the list of pool-level controls listed in the Online Appendix (Table A.8) along with the
quarter of issuance fixed effects. The third specification includes a full set of issuer fixed effects in
addition to the pool-level controls and month of issuance fixed effects.
Column (1) in Panel A shows that one additional month of average mortgage seasoning is
associated with a 1.5-basis-points lower yield spread, which is about 5% of the average spread in
the sample (28 basis points). When pool-level controls and both issuer and month of issuance fixed
effects are included (column (3)), the coefficient estimate declines slightly but remains statistically
significant. Similar to our findings in the default analysis above, we see in columns (4)–(9) that this
effect is concentrated in the Alt-A sample. For Alt-A securities, one additional month of average
mortgage seasoning is associated with a 2.4-basis-points lower yield spread. The results in Panel
C using all tranches are consistent with those in Panel A, although we find a larger magnitude of
the effects for the Alt-A sample (to 3.4 basis points per month of seasoning).
For the non-linear specification results reported in Panel B, both the linear and the quadratic
terms are significant in the full sample and the Alt-A sample. The linear terms are negative and the
quadratic terms are positive, which implies a non-linear relation between time to sale and security
spreads similar to the relation that we documented above between time to sale and mortgage
25

default. Figure 5 displays the predicted security spreads as a function of the average pool-level
seasoning calculated using the estimation results from the specification reported in column (6) in
Panel B. The figure includes 95% confidence intervals calculated using the delta method. The plot
reveals several notable points. First, the minimum spread as a function of average seasoning is
achieved between four and five months. Second, after five months, the spread begins to increase in
seasoning; however, the confidence bands show that we begin to lose precision for seasoning greater
than five months because there are so few securities in the data set with high values of average
seasoning (Figure 4).
6. Quantifying the cost of signaling
In this subsection, we use a calibrated version of our theoretical model to quantify the economic
magnitude of the signaling costs borne by originators. The model we present in Section 2 is
somewhat unrealistic in two important respects, which need to be addressed for this exercise. First,
the model assumes that there is zero recovery in the event of default. Second, the baseline model
assumes that there is no delay in trade that is unrelated to signaling. However, we observe that,
even in the case of GSE mortgages for which there is limited or no scope for private information,
mortgages do not always sell immediately. Thus, we make two changes to our model. First, to
address recovery in default, we assume that, in the event of default, the mortgage returns θ < 1 of
its initial face value B0 . Second, to accommodate the possibility of delay in trade that is unrelated
to private information, we assume that there is an exogenous random delay between the time
at which an originator offers a mortgage to the market and when a trade actually occurs. For
simplicity, we assume that this delay, denoted ν, is an exponential random variable with parameter
η and is publicly observable. One interpretation of this element of delay is that, once the originator
offers the mortgage to the market, a random amount of time passes before she is matched with a
set of buyers. Importantly, these buyers observe the time at which the originator chose to offer
the mortgage to the market. In the Online Appendix, we show that, under these assumptions,
the equilibrium strategy of the originator remains the same as in Proposition 1. The price for a
mortgage is now pinned down by the date at which the originator first offers the mortgage to the
market and not the date at which the actual sale takes place.
6.1. Calibration
This subsection describes the procedure used to calibrate the parameters of the model. First,
we assume the payment c is set so that
c = rm B0

(8)

where rm is the annualized percentage rate (APR) of the mortgage. Calculating the payment this
way ignores amortization, but given that the effects we document are in the first nine months of
the mortgage or less, amortization will not have an important quantitative impact on the results.
26

We first describe how we measure the parameters that we can directly obtain from the data or
from prior work. We set B0 and rm to match the summary statistics reported in Table 4. We set θ
to be consistent with observed recovery rates on foreclosed loans. An and Cordell (2017) estimate
recovery rates on foreclosed agency (GSE) loans of between 75% and 95% in the 2002–2007 period
(see Figure 2 in their paper). Figure 1 in Adelino et al. (2013) shows that self-cure rates were
between 50% and 60% for PLS loans that became 60 days delinquent between 2005 and 2007,
which implies a probability of foreclosure conditional on 60-day delinquency of about 50%. Given
that our default event is 60+ days delinquent and not foreclosure, we choose a value of 0.90 for
θ. This is the combination of a 50% likelihood that a delinquent loan terminates in foreclosure
and the average recovery rate conditional on foreclosure of about 80%. We set the rate of delay
unrelated to signaling to be η = 9.73 (in annual units) to be consistent with the average delay in
trade of 1.2 months found in the GSE market implied by the distribution of time to sale in Table
1 (using loans sold up to month 9 to match our empirical exercise). Finally, we set the average
expected default rate to be λ̄ = 0.0621 by annualizing the expected default rates for the sample of
loans in Table 8.
Ideally, we would directly measure all of the model parameters. Unfortunately, data limitations
prevent the direct measurement of some of them. Specifically, the ex ante distribution of expected
mortgage default rates f (λ) and the discount rates for the seller γ and the buyer r are not directly
measurable, so we calibrate them by matching simulated data from our model to the empirical
estimates we report in Section 4 as follows.
To reduce the number of parameters, we assume that the distribution of expected default rates,
f (λ), is given by
f (λ) =

1
(λ − λ` )α1 −1 (λh − λ)α2 −1
(λh − λ` )α1 +α2 −1
B(α1 , α2 )

(9)

where B is the Beta function. This distribution is flexible enough to allow us to closely match the
empirical distribution of time to sale. We set
λ` =

α1
α1 +α2 λh
.
1
− α1α+α
2

λ̄ −
1

(10)

Equation (10) implies that E[λ] = λ̄, so that λ̄ pins down the level of the distribution, and thus
guarantees that the average quality of mortgages in our calibration matches the average quality in
the data.
To simulate a sample of mortgages given parameter values r, γ, λh , α and β, we proceed as
follows. First, we simulate a sample of loans using two million draws of λ and of ν. Each draw of
(λ, ν) represents a mortgage with the expected default rate λ that will face a delay of ν between
when the originator offers the mortgage for sale and the actual sale date. For each mortgage, we
simulate a default time τ given its expected default rate λ. Next, we apply the equilibrium strategy
27

for the originator for each mortgage given its expected default rate and the values of r and γ, and
then add ν to get a proposed sale date for the mortgage, S = T (λ) + ν. Finally, we form a sample
of mortgages for which the proposed sale date is prior to the simulated default time S ≤ τ .
With this simulated sample of mortgages, we then calculate the following moments. First, we
calculate the regression coefficient that is reported in Table 9, Panel A, column (4). That is, we
regress a dummy for whether an Alt-A mortgage has defaulted in the first 36 months on the date
at which it is sold (rounded down to the nearest month). We denote this estimate by βˆ1 . Next,
we calculate the cumulative distribution of sale times conditional on being sold and denote this
distribution by Φ̂(t). Finally, we calculate the sample average of the expected gross proceeds to
the originator given by


N
1 X
Dn
1 − Dn
L̂ =
+
B0 ,
(rm + λn θ)
N
γ+λ
r+λ

(11)

n=1

where


Dn =

1
γ + λn + νn



−



e

γ+λn
r−γ



log



(r+λn )(rm +θλh )
(rm +θλn )(r+λh )



(12)

is a discount factor that adjusts for signaling and random delay conditional on the type (λn , νn ).
We choose this set of moments as they naturally arise in our main empirical investigation.
We calibrate the remaining parameters of the model by minimizing the equally weighted sum
of squared differences between the moments of the simulated data and the empirical moments we
report in Section 4. Specifically, we solve the following problem:
(
min

λh ,α1 ,α2 ,r,γ

2

(β̂1 − β1 ) +

9
X

)
2

2

(Φ̂(t) − Φ(t)) + (L̂ − L)

,

(13)

t=0

where β1 is the regression coefficient reported in Table 9, Panel A, column (4), Φ(t) is the cumulative
distribution of time to sale reported in Table 2, columns (6) and (7), and L is the average original
principal balance for Alt-A loans in the CoreLogic sample reported in Table 4. By matching L̂ to
L, we are assuming that originators earn zero profits. Table 13 (Panel A) reports the calibrated
parameter values.
6.2. Model output
Table 13 (Panel B) and Figure 6 report how closely our simulations match the data. Importantly, we match the regression coefficient of default on time to sale from Table 9, column 4, and
the face value of the mortgage almost exactly. Figure 6 displays the simulated distribution of time
to sale compared to the actual distribution, which also matches quite closely.
We do not include the regression coefficient of pool yields on average seasoning in the list of data
moments that we match to calibrate our parameters. We omit this moment because the pricing
28

regressions use pools of loans (rather than individual loans) and require a variety of constraints for
measurement (described in detail in Section 5.6), so the coefficients are not directly comparable
to the loan-level regressions. However, as an illustration of the out of sample performance of
our model, we simulate our pricing regression by forming 400 pools of 2000 mortgages each and
regress the pool yield on time to sale with results reported in Table 13 (Panel B). Here our model
underestimates the effect somewhat.
To evaluate the economic magnitude of the cost of signaling, we calculate the expected loss in
surplus attributable to the incremental delay in trade due to signaling. Using our simulated data,
we calculate the average proceeds to the originator and compare this with the average proceeds
that the originator would collect without asymmetric information. Note that this latter quantity
still accounts for random delay ν. Table 13 (Panel C) reports the results of this exercise for our
calibrated parameters. The loss in value due to signaling is $536 per mortgage, or about 18 bps
of average principal balance of the mortgages in our sample. One way to interpret this number
is as the amount the originator would be willing to pay to transact with full information instead
of asymmetric information and signaling. To put this quantity in perspective, if we suppose that
this cost is passed on to borrowers, then the originator would charge 18 bps just to cover signaling
costs. A potentially important assumption in this analysis is that originators earn zero profits. To
investigate how robust our results are, we recalibrate our model assuming originators expect to
earn a 50 bps profit on each mortgage. The main effect of this change is to lower the investor’s
discount rate and thus increase the gains from trade. As a result, the loss in surplus increases to
20 basis points.
Although the procedure simultaneously calibrates r, γ, λh , α1 , α2 , we provide some intuition for
how the parameters are identified by computing elatisticies of the simulated moments of the model
to the parameters. For each parameter, we simulate the model with an upwards and downwards
shift equal to 20% of the parameter around the baseline holding other parameters constant, then
divide the change in the model moments by the change in the parameter. We then multiply this
quantity by the ratio of the baseline parameter to the baseline moment.
Table 13, Panel D presents the results of this exercise. The table reveals some key aspects of
our calibration procedure. First, the value of the mortgage to the originator is only sensitive to
the investors’ discount rate r, and as a result r is pinned down by this moment. This is because
mortgages are held by the investors for the vast majority of their lives. Next, the coefficient of
default on time to sale is highly sensitive to γ, and, in particular, the difference between γ and r.
Intuitively, higher gains from trade allow the originator to signal mortgage quality more quickly,
thus increasing the sensitivity of quality to time to sale. At the same time, the distribution of
time to sale is also sensitive to γ, since, all else equal, if the originator requires less time to signal
quality, more mortgages will be sold in the early months of their lives. As a result, γ is pinned
down by both the coefficient of default on time to sale and the distribution of time to sale. The
parameter λh − λ̄ determines the support of the distribution of mortgage default rates. When the
29

support of this distribution is larger, there is a greater proportion of low default rate mortgages.
As a result, the time to sale distribution shifts to the right. At the same time, this increase also
reduces the impact that random delay has on the coefficient of default on time to sale. Thus λh
is pinned down jointly by the distribution of time to sale and the coefficient of default on time to
sale. The remaining parameters determine the shape of the distribution of mortgage quality and
are thus largely pinned down by the time to sale distribution.
7. Conclusion
A general feature of models of asymmetric information and delayed trade is that the prices and
(unobserved) quality of goods increase over time. This paper provides some of the first empirical
evidence of this prediction in the context of the residential mortgage market. Using detailed loanlevel data on privately securitized mortgages, we find a statistically significant and economically
meaningful positive correlation between conditional ex-post mortgage performance and time to sale.
This finding is robust to different ways of measuring performance and, importantly, is not generated
by the component of mortgage performance that is predictable by buyers using ex-ante observable
information on underwriting characteristics. Using a calibrated version of our model, we find a
substantial loss in surplus due to asymetric information of around 18 bps of the average mortgage’s
face value. Furthermore, the positive relation between time to sale and mortgage performance is
not present in the agency securitization market, in which adverse selection between originators and
issuers along the credit dimension cannot take place. This estimated correlation is stronger for
deals where the originator and the issuer are not affiliated, and it is strongest in the Alt-A segment
of the market.
Taken together, the results both confirm the importance of private information in the nonagency securitization market and provide evidence consistent with a signaling mechanism by which
lenders in the market are able to reveal the quality of their loans by delaying trades.

30

Adelino, M., W. S. Frame, and K. Gerardi (2017). The effect of large investors on asset quality: Evidence from
subprime mortgage securities. Journal of Monetary Economics 87, 34–51.
Adelino, M., K. Gerardi, and P. S. Willen (2013). Why don’t lenders renegotiate more home mortgages? redefaults,
self-cures and securitization. Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (7), 835–853.
Agarwal, S., Y. Chang, and A. Yavas (2012). Adverse selection in mortgage securitization. Journal of Financial
Economics 105 (3), 640–660.
Agarwal, S., Y. Chang, and A. Yavas (2014). Adverse selection in mortgage securitization. Journal of Financial
Economics 105 (3), 640–660.
Aiello, D. (2016). Information exploitation? a pre-crisis rmbs issuer’s private information. Working paper, University
of California Los Angeles.
Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The market for lemons: Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 84 (3), 488–500.
An, X. and L. Cordell (2017). Regime shift and the post-crisis world of mortgage loss severities. Technical report,
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
An, X., Y. Deng, and S. A. Gabriel (2011). Asymmetric information, adverse selection, and the pricing of cmbs.
Journal of Financial Economics 100 (2), 304–325.
ASF (2006). American securitization institute: Residential mortgage-backed securities.
Ashcraft, A., P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, P. Hull, and J. Vickery (2011). Credit ratings and security prices in the
subprime mbs market. The American Economic Review 101 (3), 115–119.
Ashcraft, A. B., P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, and J. I. Vickery (2010). Mbs ratings and the mortgage credit boom. FRB
of New York Staff Report (449).
Begley, T. A. and A. Purnanandam (2017). Design of financial securities: Empirical evidence from private-label rmbs
deals. Review of Financial Studies 30 (1), 120–161.
Chang, B. (2014). Adverse selection and liquidity distortion. Working paper, University of Wisconsin.
Chemla, G. and C. A. Hennessy (2014). Skin in the game and moral hazard. The Journal of Finance 69 (4),
1597–1641.
Cho, I. and D. Kreps (1987). Signaling games and stable equilibria. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 179–221.
Daley, B. and B. Green (2012). Waiting for news in the market for lemons. Econometrica 80 (4), 1433–1504.
Daley, B. and B. Green (2016). An information-based theory of time-varying liquidity. Journal of Finance 71 (2),
809–870.
Daley, B., B. S. Green, and V. Vanasco (2017). Securitization, ratings, and credit supply. Working Paper .
DeMarzo, P. M. (2005). The pooling and tranching of securities: A model of informed intermediation. Review of
Financial Studies 18 (1), 1–35.
DeMarzo, P. M. and D. Duffie (1999). A liquidity-based model of security design. Econometrica 67 (1), 65–100.
Demiroglu, C. and C. James (2012a). How important is having skin in the game? originator-sponsor affiliation and
losses on mortgage-backed securities. Review of Financial Studies 25 (11), 3217–3258.
Demiroglu, C. and C. James (2012b). How important is having skin in the game? originator-sponsor affiliation and
losses on mortgage-backed securities. Review of Financial Studies 25, 3217–3258.
Downing, C., D. Jaffee, and N. Wallace (2009). Is the market for mortgage-backed securities a market for lemons?
Review of Financial Studies 22 (7), 2457–2494.
Fuchs, W., B. S. Green, and D. Papanikolaou (2015). Adverse selection, slow moving capital and misallocation.
Journal of Financial Economics.
Fuchs, W. and A. Skrzypacz (2013). Costs and benefits of dynamic trading in a lemons market. Working Paper .
Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole (1983). Sequential bargaining with incomplete information. The Review of Economic
Studies, 221–247.

31

Furfine, C. H. (2014). Complexity and loan performance: Evidence from the securitization of commercial mortgages.
Review of Corporate Finance Studies 2, 154–187.
Ganduri, R. (2016). Repo regret? Working paper, Emory University.
Garmaise, M. J. (2015). Borrower misreporting and loan performance. The Journal of Finance 70 (1), 449–484.
Garmaise, M. J. and T. J. Moskowitz (2004). Confronting information asymmetries: Evidence from real estate
markets. Review of Financial Studies 17 (2), 405–437.
Genesove, D. (1993). Adverse selection in the wholesale used car market. Journal of Political Economy, 644–665.
Grenadier, S. R. and A. Malenko (2011). Real options signaling games with applications to corporate finance. Review
of Financial Studies 24 (12), 3993–4036.
Grenadier, S. R. and N. Wang (2005). Investment timing, agency, and information. Journal of Financial Economics 75 (3), 493–533.
Griffin, J. M. and G. Maturana (2016). Who facilitated misreporting in securitized loans? The Review of Fianncial
Studies 29 (2), 384–419.
Guerrieri, V., R. Shimer, and R. Wright (2010). Adverse selection in competitive search equilibrium. Econometrica 78 (6), 1823–1862.
He, J. J., J. Q. Qian, and P. E. Strahan (2012). Are all ratings created equal? the impact of issuer size on the pricing
of mortgage-backed securities. The Journal of Finance 67 (6), 2097–2137.
Janssen, M. C. and S. Roy (2002). Dynamic trading in a durable good market with asymmetric information.
International Economic Review 43, 257–282.
Jiang, W., A. A. Nelson, and E. Vytlacil (2014a). Liar’s loan? effects of origination channel and information
falsification on mortgage delinquency. Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (1), 1–18.
Jiang, W., A. A. Nelson, and E. Vytlacil (2014b). Securitization and loan performance: A contrast of ex ante and
ex post relations in the mortgage market. Review of Financial Studies 27 (2), 454–483.
Kramer, B. and G. Sinha (2006). Bear stearns quick guide to non-agency mortgage-backed securities. Technical
report, Bear Stearns.
Kremer, I. and A. Skrzypacz (2007). Dynamic signaling and market breakdown. Journal of Economic Theory 133 (1),
58–82.
Leland, H. E. and D. H. Pyle (1977). Informational asymmetries, financial structure, and financial intermediation.
The Journal of Finance 32 (2).
Noldeke, G. and E. Van Damme (1990). Signalling in a dynamic labour market. The Review of Economic Studies 57 (1), 1–23.
Piskorski, T., A. Seru, and J. Witkin (2015). Asset quality misrepresentation by financial intermediaries: evidence
from the rmbs market. The Journal of Finance 70 (6), 2635–2678.
Saengchote, K. (2013). Soft information in the subprime mortgage market. In 26th Australasian Finance and Banking
Conference.
Sengupta, R. (2010). Alt-a: The forgotten segment of the mortgage market. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Review 92 (1), 55–71.
Spence, M. (1973). Job market signaling. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 355–374.
Stanton, R., J. Walden, and N. Wallace (2014). The industrial organization of the us residential mortgage market.
Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 6 (1), 259–288.
Stanton, R., J. Walden, and N. Wallace (2015). Mortgage loan-flow networks and endogenous financial norms.
Stearns, B. (2006). Bear stearns quick guide to non-agency mortgage-backed securities. Residential Mortgage Criteria
Report.
Swinkels, J. M. (1999). Education signalling with preemptive offers. The Review of Economic Studies 66 (4), 949–970.
Vanasco, V. (2017). The downside of asset screening for market liquidity. The Journal of Finance 72 (5), 1937–1982.

32

Williams, B. (2016). Search, liquidity, and retention: Signaling multidimensional private information. Technical
report, Working Paper, NYU.

33

Table 1: Distribution of Time to Sale in the McDash Sample
PLS Loans

GSE Loans

Months to Sale

# Loans

Cumulative %

# Loans

Cumulative %

0/1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
≥ 10

3,278,163
1,414,587
584,061
210,834
93,901
62,138
44,893
32,973
26,204
237,954

54.8
78.4
88.2
91.7
93.3
94.3
95.0
95.6
96.0
100.0

8,250,788
4,771,199
682,223
171,949
74,302
37,419
23,329
18,788
15,845
107,432

58.30
92.01
96.83
98.04
98.57
98.83
99.00
99.13
99.24
100.00

This table displays the distribution of the number of months between the time of origination and the time of sale
(months to sale) for privately securitized mortgages in the McDash data set. The McDash sample includes only firstlien mortgages originated between January 2002 and December 2007. The sample is further restricted to mortgages
that enter the data set in either the month of origination or the month following origination.

Table 2: Distribution of Time to Sale in the CoreLogic PLS Sample
All PLS

Subprime

Alt-A

Months to Sale

# Loans

Cum. % of Sample

# Loans

Cum. % of Sample

# Loans

Cum. % of Sample

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
≥ 10

2,446,106
3,675,646
2,952,576
2,064,585
1,149,410
571,103
286,959
140,231
87,131
56,839
228,536

17.9
44.8
66.4
81.6
90.0
94.2
96.3
97.3
97.9
98.3
100.0

1,079,646
2,296,307
2,026,277
1,521,350
861,916
415,989
201,827
86,683
51,849
32,197
85,146

12.4
38.7
62.0
79.4
89.3
94.1
96.4
97.4
98.0
98.4
100.0

1,366,460
1,379,339
926,299
543,235
287,494
155,114
85,132
53,548
35,282
24,642
143,390

27.7
55.6
74.3
85.3
91.1
94.3
96.0
97.1
97.8
98.3
100.0

This table displays the distribution of the number of months between the time of origination and the time of sale
(months to sale) for privately securitized mortgages in the CoreLogic data set. The CoreLogic sample includes only
first-lien mortgages backing subprime and Alt-A PLS that were originated between January 2002 and December
2007. The time of sale corresponds to the month in which the PLS security was issued.

34

Table 3: Summary Statistics: McDash Sample
PLS Loans
Mean
SD
Loan/Borrower Characteristics (continuous variables)
Term
351
52
Original Rate
5.91
1.90
Original Amount
297,898 201,098
LTV Ratio
72.7
15.1
FICO
702
67

GSE Loans
Mean
SD
325
6.05
171,454
73.4
714

Loan/Borrower Characteristics (dummy variables)
Mean

Mean

Purchase (d)
Cash Out Refinance (d)
Arm (d)
Balloon (d)
Interest Only (d)
“B” or “C” Grade (d)
Jumbo (d)
Low Doc (d)
Prepay Penalty (d)
Primary Residence (d)
Single Family (d)

0.463
0.156
0.119
0.004
0.052
0.011
0.004
0.134
0.099
0.892
0.853

0.471
0.196
0.497
0.007
0.222
0.166
0.304
0.151
0.261
0.871
0.823

71
0.80
87,557
18.5
63

Geographic Characteristics
Unemployment rate (county-level)
36 month unemployment growth (%)
Price Index (county-level)
36 month HPA (%)

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

4.9
0.7
184
42.9

1.5
40.9
53
26.1

5.1
14.8
158
30.7

1.5
46.4
44
22.0

Default Rates
60+
60+
60+
90+
90+

DQ,
DQ,
DQ,
DQ,
DQ,

36-month
36-month
60-month
36-month
60-month

horizon
horizon
horizon
horizon
horizon

# Loans

Mean

Mean

0.160
0.149
0.210
0.127
0.189

0.090
0.078
0.114
0.060
0.094

5,747,722

14,045,839

This table displays summary statistics for both privately securitized mortgages (PLS) and mortgages acquired by the
housing GSEs (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) in the McDash data set. The McDash sample includes only first-lien
mortgages originated between January 2002 and December 2007 that were sold to either PLS issuers or the GSEs
within nine months of origination (inclusive). All variables in the table are included as covariates in the regressions
below. For a full list of covariates, see Section A.1 of the Online Appendix.

35

Table 4: Summary Statistics: CoreLogic Sample
All PLS
Mean

SD

Loan/Borrower Characteristics (continuous variables)
Term
356
37
Original Rate
7.48
1.57
Original Amount
214,855 150,813
LTV Ratio
83.0
14.3
FICO
639
70

Subprime

Alt-A

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

355
7.87
190,628
83.7
617

33
1.33
125,503
14.0
61

358
6.26
291,003
80.8
710

47
1.62
192,566
15.1
48

Loan/Borrower Characteristics (dummy variables)
Mean

Mean

Mean

Purchase (d)
Cash Out Refinance (d)
Arm (d)
Balloon (d)
Interest Only (d)
Jumbo (d)
Low Doc. (d)
Prepay Penalty (d)
Primary Residence (d)
Single Family (d)

0.363
0.552
0.763
0.090
0.117
0.089
0.351
0.745
0.919
0.782

0.495
0.339
0.669
0.009
0.391
0.257
0.728
0.394
0.716
0.622

0.395
0.500
0.741
0.070
0.184
0.129
0.442
0.661
0.870
0.743

Geographic Characteristics
Unemployment rate (county-level)
36-month unemployment growth (\%)
36-month HPA (\%)

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

5.23
5.4%
42.3%

1.58
39.3%
26.3%

5.34
8.8%
40.7%

1.59
40.3%
26.1%

4.88
-5.2%
47.1%

1.49
33.7%
26.3%

Default Rates
60+
60+
90+
90+

Days
Days
Days
Days

# Loans

Delinquent,
Delinquent,
Delinquent,
Delinquent,

36-month
60-month
36-month
60-month

horizon
horizon
horizon
horizon

Mean

Mean

Mean

0.304
0.372
0.251
0.327

0.333
0.390
0.272
0.339

0.215
0.318
0.186
0.291

7,868,492

5,969,285

1,899,207

This table displays summary statistics for loans backing subprime and Alt-A PLS in the CoreLogic data set. The
CoreLogic sample includes only first-lien mortgages originated between January 2002 and December 2007. In addition, the sample only includes loans that were sold to PLS issuers within nine months of origination (inclusive). All
variables in the table are included in the regressions below.

36

Table 5: Baseline Parametric Results for the Sample of PLS Loans in McDash

Panel A: Full Sample
Default Horizon:

36 Months

60 Months

Default Definition:

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

Months to Sale

-0.0094
(10.75)

-0.0098
(11.69)

-0.0097
(11.47)

-0.0108
(13.13)

5,747,722
0.24

5,747,722
0.22

5,747,722
0.26

5,747,722
0.25

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
State FE
Sale Qtr FE
Other Controls

Panel B: Restricted Sample
Default Horizon:

36 Months

60 Months

Default Definition:

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

Months to Sale

-0.0095
(11.47)

-0.0092
(11.56)

-0.0101
(12.34)

-0.0104
(13.03)

5,574,463
0.2

5,574,463
0.19

5,574,463
0.24

5,574,463
0.23

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
State FE
Sale Qtr FE
Other Controls

This table displays results from the estimation of Equation 5 on PLS loans in the McDash data set originated in the
2002–2007 period. The dependent variable is an indicator variable for loans that default over a 36-month horizon
(columns 1 and 2) and over a 60-month horizon (columns 3 and 4). Default is defined as a loan that is 60+ days
delinquent (columns 1 and 3) and 90+ days delinquent (columns 2 and 4). Months to sale is defined as the number
of months that elapse between origination and sale to a PLS issuer. All regressions include origination year-quarter
fixed effects, state fixed effects, year-quarter of sale fixed effects, and the detailed list of covariates described in the
text and listed in Section A.1 of the Online Appendix. The first row for each variable shows the regression coefficient
and the second row shows the t-statistic. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by
state-quarter (of origination). The restricted sample only includes loans that do not default within 9 months of
origination.

37

Table 6: Baseline Non-Parametric Results for the Sample of PLS Loans in McDash

Default Horizon:

36 Months
Full Sample

Restricted Sample

Default Definition:

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

Months to Sale = 2

-0.018
(14.65)
-0.034
(15.63)
-0.051
(14.57)
-0.053
(11.79)
-0.046
(8.19)
-0.038
(6.95)
-0.022
(2.63)
-0.026
(2.86)

-0.018
(14.69)
-0.034
(16.03)
-0.053
(15.69)
-0.054
(12.48)
-0.048
(8.99)
-0.040
(7.94)
-0.027
(3.42)
-0.031
(2.93)

-0.011
(9.07)
-0.024
(11.17)
-0.043
(12.24)
-0.049
(11.32)
-0.052
(9.97)
-0.047
(9.90)
-0.042
(6.06)
-0.046
(5.18)

-0.011
(9.39)
-0.023
(11.42)
-0.041
(12.22)
-0.047
(11.28)
-0.049
(10.10)
-0.045
(10.17)
-0.041
(6.21)
-0.045
(5.27)

5,747,722
0.24

5,747,722
0.22

5,574,463
0.20

5,574,463
0.19

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Months to Sale = 3
Months to Sale = 4
Months to Sale = 5
Months to Sale = 6
Months to Sale = 7
Months to Sale = 8
Months to Sale = 9
# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
State FE
Sale Qtr FE
Other Controls

This table displays results from the estimation of Equation 5 on PLS loans in the McDash data set originated in the
2002–2007 period. The dependent variable is an indicator variable for loans that default over a 36-month horizon.
Default is defined as a loan that is 60+ days delinquent (columns 1 and 3) and 90+ days delinquent (columns 2 and
4). Months to sale is defined as the number of months that elapse between origination and sale to a PLS issuer. All
regressions include origination year-quarter fixed effects, state fixed effects, year-quarter of sale fixed effects, and the
detailed list of covariates described in the text and listed in Section A.1 of the Online Appendix. The first row for
each variable shows the regression coefficient estimates and the second row presents the t-statistics. The standard
errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by state-quarter (of origination). The restricted sample only
includes loans that do not default within 9 months of origination.

38

Table 7: Baseline Results for the Sample of GSE Loans in McDash
Panel A: Linear Specification
Default Horizon:
Default Definition:
Months to Sale
# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
State FE
Sale Qtr FE
Other Controls

36 Months

60 Months

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

0.0009
(2.78)

-0.0002
(0.80)

0.0009
(2.50)

-0.0003
(1.01)

14,045,839
0.14

14,045,839
0.14

14,045,839
0.17

14,045,839
0.16

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Panel B: Non-Parametric Specification
Default Horizon:

36 Months

60 Months

Default Definition:

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

Months to Sale = 2

-0.004
(8.40)
0.007
(11.47)
0.023
(19.53)
0.014
(8.54)
0.006
(2.50)
0.003
(0.93)
-0.013
(3.89)
-0.025
(3.54)

-0.004
(7.83)
0.005
(9.65)
0.007
(7.38)
0.007
(5.13)
0.001
(0.61)
-0.001
(0.40)
-0.012
(4.22)
-0.026
(3.82)

-0.005
(9.33)
0.007
(8.93)
0.024
(17.39)
0.014
(7.45)
0.009
(3.44)
0.005
(1.56)
-0.005
(1.41)
-0.019
(2.90)

-0.005
(9.11)
0.005
(7.32)
0.008
(6.73)
0.008
(4.40)
0.003
(1.45)
0.002
(0.53)
-0.007
(2.05)
-0.021
(3.29)

14,045,839
0.14

14,045,839
0.14

14,045,839
0.17

14,045,839
0.16

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Months to Sale = 3
Months to Sale = 4
Months to Sale = 5
Months to Sale = 6
Months to Sale = 7
Months to Sale = 8
Months to Sale = 9
# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
State FE
Sale Qtr FE
Other Controls

This table displays results from the estimation of Equation 5 on GSE loans in the McDash data set originated in the
2002–2007 period. The dependent variable is an indicator variable for loans that default over a 36-month horizon
(columns 1-2) and over a 60-month horizon (columns 3-4). Default is defined as a loan that is 60+ days delinquent
(columns 1 and 3) and 90+ days delinquent (columns 2 and 4). Months to sale is defined as the number of months
that elapse between origination and sale to a GSE. All regressions include origination year-quarter fixed effects, state
fixed effects, year-quarter of sale fixed effects, and a detailed list of the covariates described in the text and listed in
Section A.1 of the Online Appendix. The first row for each variable shows the regression coefficient and the second
row shows the t-statistic. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by state-quarter (of
origination).

39

Table 8: Ex-Ante Default Risk Results
Panel A: PLS Loans
Linear Probability

Model:
Default Horizon:
Default Definition:

36 Months

Logit

60 Months

36 Months

60 Months

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

0.0058
(8.15)

0.0045
(8.67)

0.0057
(8.74)

0.0040
(8.72)

0.0047
(2.80)

0.0015
(0.77)

0.0031
(6.08)

0.0010
(2.15)

# Loans
Adjusted R2

3,672,426
0.26

3,672,426
0.24

3,672,426
0.30

3,672,426
0.36

3,660,474
0.41

3,660,474
0.42

3,613,121
0.59

3,613,121
0.67

Orig Qtr FE
Sale Qtr FE

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Months to Sale

Panel B: GSE Loans
Linear Probability

Model:
Default Horizon:
Default Definition:

36 Months

Logit

60 Months

36 Months

60 Months

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

0.0004
(2.39)

0.0002
(2.08)

0.0021
(6.58)

0.0013
(6.90)

0.0001
(0.10)

-0.0004
(0.62)

0.0007
(1.42)

0.0002
(0.39)

# Loans
Adjusted R2

7,378,891
0.29

7,378,891
0.30

7,378,891
0.52

7,378,891
0.56

7,121,472
0.26

7,121,458
0.25

7,378,462
0.51

7,377,410
0.46

Orig Qtr FE
Sale Qtr FE

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Months to Sale

This table shows results for loan-level, OLS, and logit regressions, where the dependent variables are the 36-month
and 60-month ex-ante default rates at the time the loan was originated, where the ex-ante default rates are calculated
using data on loan and borrower characteristics at the time of origination for the previous three years for the 36month ex-ante rates and five years for the 60-month ex-ante rates. Default is defined as a loan being 60 days and
90 days delinquent or more at any point since origination. The independent variable of interest is months to sale,
which is defined as the number of months that elapse between origination and sale to a PLS issuer or GSE. All
regressions include origination year-quarter fixed effects and year-quarter of sale fixed effects. The standard errors
are heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by state-quarter (of origination). The first row for each variable shows
the regression coefficient and the second row shows the t-statistic.

40

41

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

7,855,810
0.22

-0.0015
(3.66)

(3)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

1,895,618
0.25

-0.0072
(10.55)

(4)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

1,894,861
0.26

-0.0063
(10.54)

Alt-A
(5)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

7,725,369
0.22

-0.0019
(4.15)

All PLS
(2)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

1,893,617
0.27

7,722,948
0.22

-0.0017
(3.79)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

1,849,905
0.26

-0.0063
(11.83)

(4)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

1,849,904
0.27

-0.0047
(9.28)

Alt-A
(5)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

1,848,674
0.27

-0.0051
(9.94)

(6)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

5,875,179
0.19

-0.0027
(6.16)

(7)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

5,964,881
0.19

-0.0020
(5.15)

(7)

Default Definition: 60+ DQ over 36 Months
(3)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(6)
-0.0057
(11.46)

Panel B: Including Issuer Fixed Effects

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

7,858,236
0.21

-0.0028
(6.41)

All PLS
(2)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

5,875,179
0.20

-0.0003
(0.70)

Subprime
(8)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

5,963,091
0.19

-0.0015
(3.65)

Subprime
(8)
(9)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

5,873,522
0.20

0.0005
(1.09)

(9)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

5,961,433
0.20

0.0005
(1.11)

and are clustered by state-quarter (of origination).

Section A.1 of the Online Appendix. The first row for each variable shows the regression coefficient and the second row shows the t-statistic. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust

to a PLS issuer. All regressions include origination year-quarter fixed effects, state fixed effects, year-quarter of sale fixed effects, and the detailed list of covariates described in the text and in

loans that default over a 36-month horizon. Default is defined as a loan that is 60+ days delinquent. Months to sale is defined as the number of months that elapse between origination and sale

This table displays results from the estimation of Equation 5 on PLS loans in the CoreLogic data set originated in the 2002–2007 period. The dependent variable is an indicator variable for

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

7,725,370
0.21

# Loans
Adjusted R2

Orig YQ FE
State FE
Issue YQ FE
Originator FE
Originator x Orig-YQ FE
Issuer FE
Issuer x Issue -YQ FE
Other Controls

-0.0041
(8.29)

Months to Sale

(1)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

7,860,499
0.21

# Loans
Adjusted R2

Orig YQ FE
State FE
Issue YQ FE
Originator FE
Originator x Orig-YQ FE
Other Controls

-0.0036
(8.57)

Months to Sale

(1)

Default Definition: 60+ DQ over 36 Months

Panel A: Including Originator Fixed Effects

Table 9: Baseline Parametric Results for the Sample of CoreLogic PLS Loans

Table 10: Affiliation Results for the Sample of CoreLogic PLS Loans
Panel A: Parametric Results
Default Definition:

60+ DQ over 36 Months
All PLS

Months to Sale
# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
Originator FE
Issue Qtr FE
Issuer FE
State FE
Other Controls

Alt-A

Subprime

Affiliation

No Affiliation

Affiliation

No Affiliation

Affiliation

No Affiliation

-0.0046
(6.93)

-0.0049
(8.02)

-0.0049
(7.12)

-0.0100
(10.84)

-0.0029
(4.96)

-0.0031
(5.21)

3,176,715
0.20

3,473,338
0.21

603,234
0.24

735,374
0.26

2,573,481
0.19

2,737,861
0.20

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Panel B: Non-Parametric Results
Default Definition:

60+ DQ over 36 Months
All PLS

Months to Sale = 1
Months to Sale = 2
Months to Sale = 3
Months to Sale = 4
Months to Sale = 5
Months to Sale = 6
Months to Sale = 7
Months to Sale = 8
Months to Sale = 9
# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
Originator FE
Issue Qtr FE
Issuer FE
State FE
Other Controls

Alt-A

Subprime

Affiliation

No Affiliation

Affiliation

No Affiliation

Affiliation

No Affiliation

-0.0039
(2.12)
-0.0071
(3.34)
-0.0153
(5.77)
-0.0197
(6.56)
-0.0271
(6.58)
-0.024
(5.12)
-0.0326
(5.03)
-0.0316
(4.49)
-0.0152
(1.81)

-0.0313
(8.66)
-0.0396
(11.78)
-0.0468
(12.26)
-0.0482
(11.14)
-0.0523
(11.04)
-0.054
(9.74)
-0.0555
(9.52)
-0.0507
(8.68)
-0.052
(8.11)

-0.007
(3.40)
-0.0114
(4.91)
-0.0206
(4.34)
-0.0243
(6.76)
-0.02
(4.24)
-0.0221
(4.11)
-0.0263
(3.97)
-0.0491
(6.31)
-0.0428
(4.24)

-0.0442
(13.42)
-0.0513
(14.97)
-0.0615
(15.34)
-0.0712
(13.69)
-0.075
(14.32)
-0.0817
(11.91)
-0.0923
(12.01)
-0.0971
(10.61)
-0.1128
(12.40)

-0.0014
(1.11)
-0.0027
(1.46)
-0.0082
(3.64)
-0.0112
(4.22)
-0.018
(5.37)
-0.0147
(3.37)
-0.0274
(4.20)
-0.0212
(2.83)
-0.0035
(0.32)

0.0021
(0.68)
-0.0065
(2.16)
-0.0136
(4.15)
-0.0142
(3.77)
-0.0185
(4.51)
-0.0192
(3.83)
-0.0178
(3.31)
-0.009
(1.49)
-0.0021
(0.31)

3,176,715
0.20

3,473,338
0.21

603,234
0.24

735,374
0.26

2,573,481
0.19

2,737,861
0.20

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

This table displays results from the estimation of Equation 5 on PLS loans in the CoreLogic data set originated in
the 2002–2007 period. The dependent variable is an indicator variable for loans that default over a 36-month horizon.
Default is defined as a loan that is 60+ days delinquent. Months to sale is defined as the number of months that elapse
between origination and sale to a PLS issuer. All regressions include origination year-quarter fixed effects, state fixed
effects, year-quarter of sale fixed effects, originator fixed effects, and the detailed list of covariates described in the
text and in Section A.1 of the Online Appendix. “Affiliated” PLS deals are those in which the originator of all of
mortgages in the deal is affiliated with the issuer (either the same company or part of the same vertical corporation).

42

The first row for each variable shows the regression coefficient and the second row shows the t-statistic. The standard
errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by state-quarter (of origination.

Table 11: Documentation Results for the Sample of CoreLogic PLS Loans
Panel A: Linear Results
Default Definition:

60+ DQ over 36 Months
All PLS

Months to Sale
# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
Originator FE
Issue Qtr FE
Issuer FE
State FE
Other Controls

Alt-A

Subprime

Full Doc

Low Doc

Full Doc

Low Doc

Full Doc

Low Doc

-0.0033
(7.78)

-0.0051
(7.35)

-0.0061
(9.56)

-0.0051
(8.71)

-0.0025
(5.94)

-0.0034
(4.81)

4,275,516
0.18

3,408,451
0.25

493,756
0.16

1,344,859
0.28

3,781,606
0.17

2,063,379
0.24

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Panel B: Non-Parametric Results
Default Definition:

60+ DQ over 36 Months
All PLS

Months to Sale = 1
Months to Sale = 2
Months to Sale = 3
Months to Sale = 4
Months to Sale = 5
Months to Sale = 6
Months to Sale = 7
Months to Sale = 8
Months to Sale = 9
# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
Originator FE
Issue Qtr FE
Issuer FE
State FE
Other Controls

Alt-A

Subprime

Full Doc

Low Doc

Full Doc

Low Doc

Full Doc

Low Doc

-0.0032
(2.55)
-0.0068
(4.96)
-0.0145
(8.23)
-0.0173
(8.40)
-0.0199
(8.18
-0.0194
(6.42)
-0.0208
(5.29)
-0.0118
(2.82)
-0.0033
(0.64)

-0.0112
(5.35)
-0.0173
(7.74)
-0.0244
(8.72)
-0.0273
(7.78)
-0.0347
(9.15)
-0.0358
(7.18)
-0.0339
(5.61)
-0.0275
(4.08)
-0.032
(5.08)

-0.0125
(6.80)
-0.0194
(8.46)
-0.0291
(9.76)
-0.0343
(9.81)
-0.0359
(8.43)
-0.0332
(7.01)
-0.0428
(7.04)
-0.0464
(7.63)
-0.0535
(7.24)

-0.0181
(10.59)
-0.0227
(11.39)
-0.0272
(11.19)
-0.0319
(10.42)
-0.0313
(9.74)
-0.0365
(8.05)
-0.0381
(6.53)
-0.0455
(6.49)
-0.0526
(9.48)

-0.0008
(0.64)
-0.0025
(1.78)
-0.009
(5.14)
-0.0119
(5.80)
-0.0148
(6.14)
-0.0141
(4.73)
-0.0151
(3.79)
-0.0049
(1.08)
0.0097
(1.70)

0.0025
(1.35)
-0.0005
(0.24)
-0.0083
(3.10)
-0.0093
(2.75)
-0.0196
(4.94)
-0.0188
(3.51)
-0.0194
(3.11)
-0.0033
(0.51)
-0.0004
(0.06)

4,275,516
0.18

3,408,451
0.25

493,756
0.16

1,344,859
0.28

3,781,606
0.17

2,063,379
0.24

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

This table displays the results from the estimation of Equation 5 on PLS loans in the CoreLogic data set originated
in the 2002–2007 period. The dependent variable is an indicator variable for loans that default over a 36-month
horizon. Default is defined as a loan that is 60+ days delinquent. Months to sale is defined as the number of
months that elapse between origination and sale to a PLS issuer. All regressions include origination year-quarter
fixed effects, state fixed effects, year-quarter of sale fixed effects, originator fixed effects, and the detailed list of
covariates described in the text and in Section A.1 of the Online Appendix. “Full Doc” loans correspond to those
in which the borrower’s income and assets were not fully documented at the time of origination, while “Low Doc”

43

loans are those in which either the borrower’s income or assets (or both) were not fully documented. The first row
for each variable shows the regression coefficient and the second row shows the t-statistic. The standard errors are
heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by state-quarter (of origination).

Table 12: Pricing Analysis Results
Panel A: Linear Specification, Triple A securities
Dependent Variable: Pool-level Average Yield Spread (Triple-A Securities Only)

Seasoning
Pool Covariates
Issue Qtr FE
Issuer FE
Observations
Adjusted R2

(1)

All Securities
(2)

(3)

(4)

Alt-A Securities
(5)
(6)

Subprime Securities
(7)
(8)
(9)

-0.015***
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.001)

-0.011***
(0.004)

-0.023*
(0.014)

-0.024
(0.017)

-0.025**
(0.012)

0.003*
(0.002)

0.002
(0.002)

0.002
(0.002)

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

3,532
0.17

3,532
0.30

3,513
0.44

909
0.08

909
0.15

909
0.34

2,623
0.67

2,615
0.68

2,615
0.71

Panel B: Panel A: Non-linear Specification, Triple A securities
Dependent Variable: Pool-level Average Yield Spread (Triple-A Securities Only)

(1)

All Securities
(2)

(3)

(4)

Seasoning

-0.103***
(0.022)

-0.056***
(0.021)

-0.037***
(0.014)

-0.199***
(0.055)

-0.051
(0.037)

-0.185***
(0.061)

-0.003
(0.006)

-0.006
(0.007)

-0.010
(0.008)

Seasoning2

0.011***
(0.003)

0.007**
(0.003)

0.003**
(0.002)

0.023***
(0.008)

0.003
(0.005)

0.021**
(0.009)

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

3,532
0.19

3,532
0.31

3,513
0.44

909
0.12

909
0.34

909
0.17

2,623
0.67

2,615
0.69

2,615
0.71

Pool Covariates
Issue Qtr FE
Issuer FE
Observations
Adjusted R2

Alt-A Securities
(5)
(6)

Subprime Securities
(7)
(8)
(9)

Panel C: Linear specification, All securities
Dependent Variable: Pool-level Average Yield Spread

Seasoning
Pool Covariates
Issue Qtr FE
Issuer FE
Observations
Adjusted R2

(1)

All Securities
(2)

(3)

(4)

Alt-A Securities
(5)
(6)

Subprime Securities
(7)
(8)
(9)

-0.001
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.002
(0.005)

-0.041***
(0.014)

-0.034**
(0.015)

-0.034**
(0.015)

0.006**
(0.003)

0.004
(0.004)

0.004
(0.004)

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

2,254
0.35

2,254
0.44

2,247
0.56

453
0.10

453
0.18

453
0.18

1,799
0.53

1,795
0.67

1,795
0.67

This table displays results from the estimation of Equation 7. The sample includes triple-A, floating rate subprime,
and Alt-A securities issued between January 2002 and December 2007. The dependent variable is the weighted
average spread over the 1-month LIBOR of all triple-A securities with claims on cash flows for a given mortgage
pool. Seasoning is the average age (# months) of all mortgages in a pool at the time of issuance. All regressions
include month-of-issue fixed effects. The set of pool-level covariates corresponds to the variables included in Table
A.8, which are all pool-level averages. The first row for each variable shows the regression coefficient and the second
row shows the t-statistic. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered at the deal-level. ***
p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p<0.1.

44

Table 13: Quantitative magnitudes of signaling costs.
Panel A: Parameter Values
Preset Parameters
Parameter
B0
rm
θ

Calibrated Parameters

Value

Source

$291, 003
6.26%
90%

Table 4
Table 4
An and Cordell (2017)
and Adelino et al. (2013)
Average time to sale
for GSE Loans Table 1
Annualized expected default
rates for sample of loans in Table (8)

η

9.73

λ̄

0.0621

Parameter

Value

λ`
λh
α1
α2
r
γ

0.0487
0.0642
1.75
.275
5.58%
7.92%

Panel B: Simulated vs Empirical Data
Simulated
Coefficient of Default
on Time to Sale
Mortgage Value to Originator
Coefficient of Yield Spread
on Time to Sale

Actual

-0.0072

-0.0072

$291, 002

$291, 003

-0.0070

-0.034

Panel C: Loss in Surplus
Average Proceeds
with Signaling

Average Proceeds
without Signaling

Percentage Loss

$291, 002
$293, 462

$291, 538
$294, 049

18.4 bps
20.0 bps

Main Parameters
50 bps Originator Profit

Panel D: Sensitivity of Model Moments to Parameters
Baseline Moments
Coefficient of Default on Time to Sale
Mortgage Value to Originator
Percent Sold Before Month 1
Percent Sold Before Month 3
Percent Sold Before Month 5

-0.0072
$291, 002
0.33
0.74
0.91

γ

r

λh − λ̄

α1

α2

0.50
-0.01
0.97
0.83
0.65

-0.21
-0.46
0.97
0.63
0.32

0.27
0.00
-0.25
-0.21
-0.16

0.04
0.00
0.08
0.03
-0.01

-0.14
0.00
-0.32
-0.03
0.05

This table presents the results of our quantitative analysis of the magnitude of signaling cots. Panel A presents our
parameter estimates. Panel B shows moments in the simulated and actual data. Panel C presents the loss in total
surplus due to signaling for our baseline parameters and assuming the originator earns a 50 bps profit. Panel D
presents the sensitivity of model moments to parameters. For each parameter we calculated the model moment for a
20 percent upward and downward shift of the parameter, and divide the change in the moment by the change in the
parameter. We then multiply this quantity by the ratio of the baseline parameter to the baseline moment to obtain
an elasticity.

45

Figure 1: Ex-Ante vs. Ex-Post McDash Results
Panel B: GSE Ex-Post
0.06

0.04

0.04

Ex-Post Default Rate

Ex-Post Default Rate

Panel A: PLS Ex-Post
0.06

0.02
0.00
−0.02
−0.04
−0.06
−0.08

0.02
0.00
−0.02
−0.04
−0.06
−0.08

0–1

3

5

7

0–1

9

Months to Sale

0.04
0.02
0.00
−0.02
−0.04
−0.06
−0.08
5

7

9

Panel D: GSE Ex-Ante
Ex-Ante Default Probability

Ex-Ante Default Probability

Panel C: PLS Ex-Ante

3

5
Months to Sale

0.06

0–1

3

7

9

0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
−0.02
−0.04
−0.06
−0.08
0–1

Months to Sale

3

5

7

9

Months to Sale

This figure displays results from the estimation of the non-parametric version of Equation 5 for both the PLS and
GSE loans in the McDash data set originated in the 2002–2007 period. Panels A and B correspond to the ex-post
default rates, while panels C and D correspond to ex-ante predicted default rates. Default is defined as a loan that
becomes 60 days delinquent over a 36-month horizon measured from origination. Months to sale is defined as the
number of months that elapse between origination and sale to a PLS issuer. The dotted lines correspond to 95%
confidence intervals.

46

Figure 2: CoreLogic PLS Results
Panel B: Subprime PLS

Panel A: Alt-A PLS
0.04
Ex-Post Default Rate

Ex-Post Default Rate

0.04
0.02
0.00
−0.02
−0.04
−0.06
−0.08

0.02
0.00
−0.02
−0.04
−0.06
−0.08

0

2

4

6

8

0

2

Months to Sale

4

6

8

Months to Sale

This figure displays results from the estimation of the non-parametric version of Equation 5 for PLS loans in CoreLogic. Panel A corresponds to Alt-A PLS loans and panel B corresponds to subprime loans. Default is defined
as a loan that becomes 60 days delinquent over a 36-month horizon measured from origination. Months to sale is
defined as the number of months that elapse between origination and sale to a PLS issuer. The dotted lines show
95% confidence intervals.

Figure 3: CoreLogic Affiliation Results
Panel B: Subprime PLS

0.02

0.02

0.00

0.00

Ex-Post Default Rate

Ex-Post Default Rate

Panel A: Alt-A PLS

−0.02
−0.04
−0.06
−0.08
−0.10

Affiliated Loans
Unaffiliated Loans

−0.12
−0.14

−0.02
−0.04
−0.06
−0.08
−0.10

Affiliated Loans
Unaffiliated Loans

−0.12
−0.14

2

4

6

2

8

Months to Sale

4

6

8

Months to Sale

This figure displays results from the estimation of the non-parametric version of Equation 5 for PLS loans in the
CoreLogic data set. Panel A corresponds to Alt-A PLS loans and panel B corresponds to subprime loans. Default is
defined as a loan that becomes 60 days delinquent over a 36-month horizon measured from origination. Months to
sale is defined as the number of months that elapse between origination and sale to a PLS issuer. The dotted lines
show 90% confidence intervals.

47

.6
.4

Empirical CDF

10

0

0

.2

5

Percent of Sample

.8

15

1

Figure 4: Distribution of Pool-Level Seasoning

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15

Average Seasoning (Pool-Level)

Notes: This figure displays the density and cumulative distribution of the average months of seasoning in the sample
of floating-rate, triple-A, Subprime and Alt-A securities issued between January 2002 and December 2007 used in
the pricing analysis in section 5.6.

.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.2

.3

.4

Predicted Yield Spread

1

1.1 1.2

Figure 5: Predicted Yield Spread as a Function of Seasoning

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Average Seasoning (Pool-Level)

Notes: This figure displays the predicted security spreads (over the 1-month LIBOR) as a function of the average
pool-level seasoning calculated using the estimation results from the specification reported in column (6) in panel B
of Table 12. The shaded area corresponds to 95% confidence intervals calculated using the delta method.

48

Figure 6: Simulated vs Actual Distribution of Months to Sale

Cumulative %
of Loans Sold

100%
80
60
40
Simulated
Actual

20

0

2

4

6

8

Months to Sale

Notes: This figure displays the distribution of time to sale in the simulated data vs the same distribution in the
actual data for the CoreLogic sample taken from Table 2.

49

.tocmtappendix mtchapternone mtappendixsubsection

Online Appendix (Not for Publication)
This appendix supplements the empirical analysis and provides an additional proof for the model
used in the calibration exercise in “Are Lemons Sold First? Dynamic Signaling in the Mortgage
Market” by Adelino, Gerardi, and Hartman-Glaser. Below is a list of the sections contained in this
appendix.

Contents
1 Introduction

2

2 A model of signaling through delayed trade

6

2.1

Random delay, default, and prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

3 Background on the U.S. mortgage market

11

4 Testing for dynamic signaling using mortgage data

12

4.1

Time to sale and mortgage default . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

4.1.1

Observable characteristics and default measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

4.2

Time to sale and mortgage spreads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

4.3

McDash data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

4.3.1

Lender processing services data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

4.3.2

CoreLogic data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

Summary statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

4.4

5 Results

18

5.1

Default and time to sale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

5.2

Accounting for “mechanical” effects of random delays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

5.3

Default and time to sale: agency loans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

5.4

Predicted default and time to sale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

5.5

Default and time to sale in the CoreLogic data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

5.5.1

Alt-A PLS vs. subprime PLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

5.5.2

Affiliation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

5.5.3

Documentation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

Security spreads and time to sale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

5.6

1

6 Quantifying the cost of signaling

26

6.1

Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

26

6.2

Model output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

28

7 Conclusion

30

A.1Variable Definitions

3

A.2Further Detail on Data Sets

4

A.2.1Lender Processing Services (McDash) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

A.2.2Corelogic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

A.2.2.1 Lender Identity in Corelogic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

A.2.3Bloomberg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

A.3Robustness of the Month to Sale Threshold Value

5

A.4Robustness to the Inclusion of Debt-to-Income Ratios in the Covariate Set

12

A.5Pricing Analysis – Detail on Including Lower Rated Securities

15

A.6Early Prepayment Analysis

18

A.7Additional Summary Statistics and Tests

21

A.8Solving the model with additional random delay in trade

26

2

A.1. Variable Definitions
ARM: An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the mortgage has an adjustable rate and
0 if it has a fixed rate.
Balance: The natural logarithm of the principal balance of the loan at origination.
Balloon: An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the mortgage is characterized by a
balloon payment at the end of its term and 0 if it is a fully amortizing mortgage.
Condo: An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the property is a condominium or a
townhouse and 0 otherwise.
FICO: The credit score of the borrower at origination. All models include both the continuous
FICO variable and a set of indicator variables corresponding to 5 FICO intervals: FICO < 580,
580≤FICO < 620, 620≤FICO < 660, 660≤FICO < 700, and FICO ≥ 700.
House Prices: County-level house price indices from CoreLogic. We include both price level in
the county in the month of origination and the cumulative growth in prices from the month of
mortgage origination calculated over the default horizon.
Interest-Only: An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the loan requires interest-only
payments for a specified period of time and 0 otherwise.
Jumbo: An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the loan amount at origination exceeds
the conforming loan limit set by statute that limits the size of mortgages eligible to be insured by
the GSEs (during the vast majority of our sample period, the limit was $417,000 for mortgages on
single-family properties) and 0 otherwise.
Loan-to-Value (cumulative): The loan-to-value ratio at origination computed using information
on the first and second liens. All models include both the continuous LTV variable and a set of
indicator variables corresponding to 5 LTV intervals: LTV < 70, 70 ≤ LTV < 80, 80 < LTV < 90,
90 ≤LTV< 100, and LTV ≥ 100. An indicator variable for the LTV ratios exactly equal to 80 is
also included as a proxy for unreported second liens.
Low Documentation: An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the borrower’s income
and assets are not fully documented in the underwriting process and 0 if they are fully documented.
Month to Sale: The number of months after the date of origination in which a loan is sold
to a PLS issuer or acquired by one of the GSEs. In the McDash data set, the variable is based
on a field that is updated monthly and shows the current holder of the loan. In the CoreLogic
LoanPerformance database, the variable is based on the length of time between the month of
origination and the month in which the corresponding PLS security is issued.
Multi-family: An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the property is a 2–4-family house
and 0 otherwise.
Negative Amortization: An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the loan requires
payments of less than interest and principal for a specified period of time and 0 otherwise.

3

Prepayment Penalty: An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the mortgage contains a
prepayment penalty and 0 otherwise.
Primary Residence: An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the property is the primary
residence of the borrower and a value of 0 if the property is either an investment or a second home.
Purchase Loan: An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the loan is used to purchase
property and 0 otherwise.
Refinance (traditional): An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the loan is used to
refinance previous mortgage debt without converting any equity into cash and 0 otherwise.
Refinance (cashout): An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the loan is used to refinance
previous mortgage debt with a portion of the equity converted to cash and 0 otherwise.
Single Family: An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the property is a detached
single-family home and 0 otherwise.
Term: The maturity length of the mortgage in months.
Unemployment: County-level unemployment rates from the Bureau of Labor Services (BLS). We
include both the rates in the county in the month of origination and the cumulative growth in the
unemployment rate from the month of mortgage origination calculated over the default horizon.
A.2. Further Detail on Data Sets
A.2.1. Lender Processing Services (McDash)
Our primary data set is sourced from Lender Processing Services (McDash). We adopt standard
sample restrictions in our analysis of the McDash data. We consider only first lien mortgages
originated in the 2002–2007 period that were sold to PLS issuers or to the GSEs, so we eliminate
loans kept in the portfolios of mortgage originators and never sold. In addition, a small number
of loans in the data set were sold to the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs), which we also
eliminate from the sample. We only retain loans originated in the 50 United States and restrict
the sample to loans that enter the data set in either the same month of origination or in the month
following origination. We also address outliers in the data by winsorizing the distributions of credit
scores, original loan balances, LTV ratios at origination, and interest rates at origination at the
1st and 99th percentiles of each distribution. We also explored trimming these variables instead of
winsorizing and found that this change had little effect on the results.
A.2.2. Corelogic
The second mortgage data set used is sourced from Corelogic. In addition to the differences
noted in the main text, the timing for when a loan enters each data set is also different across
the McDash and CL data sets. In McDash, we observe most loans from the month of origination,
and we can directly observe the month in which they are sold out of banks’ portfolios to PLS
issuers or the GSEs. In CL, however, we compute time to sale as the difference between the date
4

of issuance of the mortgage-backed security in which the loan is included and the reported month
of origination of the mortgage. Loans enter the CL data set on the issue date, so we do not observe
the performance history of loans before they are securitized.
A.2.2.1. Lender Identity in Corelogic
There is some uncertainty about whether the originator field in the CoreLogic database actually
corresponds to the lender of record (i.e., the institution that underwrote and originated the loan) or
to what is sometimes referred to as the “aggregator” or “seller,” which is the institution responsible
for purchasing loans from various lenders to fill the PLS mortgage pools and then selling those loans
to the issuer (Stanton et al. (2014)). This is a potentially important distinction because it could
be more likely that private information is obtained by the lender of record because it has more
interaction with the mortgage borrower.
To verify that the originator field in CoreLogic corresponds to the lender of record, we match
our CoreLogic mortgage data to a database of public mortgage filings that contains the identity
of the lender of record. This database covers the universe of all residential mortgages in the state
of Massachusetts during our sample period and comes from county deed registries that record
information on property transactions. We compare the lender of record with the originator listed
in the CoreLogic database for the sample of matched Massachusetts mortgages. We find that for
83% of the matched sample, the lender of record matched the CoreLogic originator field. The
remaining 17% are either cases in which CoreLogic is reporting an entity other than the lender
of record (most likely the aggregator) or cases that are bad matches (there is the potential for
significant matching errors because we are not able to perform a precise match using loan account
numbers or social security numbers). Thus, we view the 17% figure as an upper bound on the
severity of the potential for misidentifying the true originator in the CoreLogic data.
A.2.3. Bloomberg
Pricing data is sourced from Bloomberg. The data fields consist of security identifiers (including
CUSIP and ticker), issuer name, issuance date, the identification of the loan pool that the security
has claims on, the spread over one-month LIBOR at origination, and the weighted average life as
advertised in the prospectus.
A.3. Robustness of the Month to Sale Threshold Value
In this section we conduct a sensitivity analysis of our choice of nine months for the maximum
threshold between origination and sale. Imposing a threshold is important for our analysis for three
reasons. First, we want to ensure that the loans in our estimation sample were originated with the
intention of being sold. The distributions of months to sale in Tables 1 and 2 clearly show that
the vast majority of loans are sold relatively quickly. More than 94% of all loans (including loans
sold to PLS issuers and the GSEs) are sold within 6 months of origination. We are concerned that
5

loans sold more than a year (or several years) after origination may be different in ways that are
unobservable to us. Second, there was a fairly robust market for loans that were in delinquency
early in their lives, but that were then rehabilitated at some point and sold. These loans were
sold on a separate secondary market, which the industry referred to as “scratch and dent.” We
are unable to explicitly identify “scratch and dent” (S&D) loans in our McDash and CoreLogic
data sets, but believe that many of the loans in the right-tail of the months to sale distribution
may have been sold on the S&D market. MBS issuers and investors would have known that these
were previously problematic loans, and including these loans in our sample would contaminate our
empirical tests. A final reason for imposing a sale threshold is that it is necessary for implementing
our sample selection correction discussed in Section 2.1.
While a months to sale threshold is necessary in our context, the choice of nine months is somewhat
arbitrary. Thus, we display results below for our baseline specifications using longer thresholds.
We consider 12-month and 24-month thresholds in both the CoreLogic and McDash data sets, and
a 36-month threshold in our McDash data set. In CoreLogic, we do not observe loans seasoned
more than 26 months, so the 24-month threshold includes essentially all loans. In contrast, we
do see loans in our McDash data set that are sold more than two years after origination and that
we suspect are S&D loans. Thus, when we consider longer horizons in the McDash data set we
attempt to identify and eliminate them in a manner described in further detail below. CoreLogic,
in contrast, contains loans sold exclusively in the subprime and Alt-A segments, and since S&D
loans were typically pooled together for explicit S&D securities (not included in CoreLogic), we do
not believe that S&D is an important issue for our analysis using this data set.1
Tables A.1 and A.2 below show the baseline results for the linear specification of months to sale in
the CoreLogic data set using a months to sale threshold of 12 months and 24 months, respectively.
The tables are exact counterparts to Table 9 in the main text. The top panels show the effect of
including lender and lender-by-year-quarter fixed effects while the bottom panels show the effect
of including issuer and issuer-by-year-quarter fixed effects for the sample of all PLS loans and the
sample of Alt-A and subprime loans. The results are very similar to those displayed in Table 9,
which assume a 9-month threshold. Figure A.2 shows results for the non-parametric months to
sale specification for the Alt-A and subprime PLS samples assuming a 24-month threshold. This
is the exact counterpart to Figure 2 in the main text. We group all loans sold between 12 and
24 months after origination into the same category due to the small number of loans sold after 12
months. The patterns for both the Alt-A and subprime samples are very similar to those in Figure 2.
Table A.3 displays results for the linear specification of months to sale in the McDash sample
1

The fact that we do not see as many highly seasoned loans in CoreLogic supports this position.

6

of private-label loans for the longer thresholds. These results are directly comparable to those
reported in Panel A of Table 5 in the main text. The top panel of Table A.3 displays results for a
12-month threshold for both the 36-month and 60-month default horizons and for our 60+ DQ and
90+ DQ default definitions. The results are consistent with those in Table 5. The bottom panel
of the table shows results for 24-month and 36-month thresholds, where we focus on the 60+ DQ
default definition and the 60 month default horizon. We focus on the 60-month horizon to ensure
that we have a reasonable length of time to measure default for loans that are sold between 24 and
36 months after origination. As we discussed briefly above, we are especially concerned about the
presence of S&D loans in the McDash sample. Since many of these loans default before being sold,
it is probably the case that they would be more likely to default after being sold compared to a
loan that did not default before sale. Inclusion of S&D loans would thus contaminate our test and
likely bias us against finding better ex-post performance for loans sold later. Since we track loans
in McDash from origination we can identify loans that default before they are sold. Thus, in an
attempt to purge the sample of S&D loans, we eliminate any mortgage that defaults before sale
for the analysis using longer sale thresholds (24 and 36 months).2 In the bottom panel of Table
A.3 we show results for the longer thresholds with and without this S&D correction. It is clear
that the correction does have a significant effect on the results and confirms our intuition that the
presence of S&D loans among the sample of loans sold long after origination produces an upward
bias in our estimate of the relationship between time-to-sale and default.

2
The vast majority of loans sold within a year of origination in our McDash data set do not default before they
are sold. However, the fraction of loans that default before sale increases fairly dramatically for loans sold after a
year. For example, about one-quarter of loans sold between 24 and 36 months defaulted before sale in our McDash
sample.

7

8

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

7,906,364
0.22

-0.0013
(1.09)

(3)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

1,916,628
0.25

-0.0070
(6.62)

(4)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

1,915,876
0.26

-0.0061
(4.73)

Alt-A
(5)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

7,770,236
0.22

-0.0025
(2.97)

All PLS
(2)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

1,914,573
0.27

7,767,706
0.22

-0.0014
(1.35)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

1,870,072
0.26

-0.0063
(5.30)

(4)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

1,870,071
0.27

-0.0046
(4.59)

Alt-A
(5)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

1,868,782
0.27

-0.0054
(4.44)

(6)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

5,899,872
0.19

-0.0022
(2.53)

(7)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

5,994,537
0.19

-0.0014
(1.60)

(7)

Default Definition: 60+ DQ over 36 Months
(3)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(6)
-0.0060
(5.18)

Panel B: Including Issuer Fixed Effects

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

7,908,898
0.21

-0.0024
(2.76)

All PLS
(2)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

5,899,872
0.19

-0.0004
(0.52)

Subprime
(8)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

5,992,733
0.19

-0.0010
(1.19)

Subprime
(8)
(9)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

5,898,121
0.20

0.0012
(1.37)

(9)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

5,990,980
0.20

0.0010
(1.13)

origination).

The first row for each variable shows the regression coefficient and the second row shows the t-statistic. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by state-quarter (of

and sale to a PLS issuer. All regressions include origination year-quarter fixed effects, state fixed effects, year-quarter of sale fixed effects, and the detailed list of covariates described in the text.

variable for loans that default over a 36-month horizon. Default is defined as a loan that is 60+ days delinquent. Months to sale is defined as the number of months that elapse between origination

This table displays results from the estimation of Equation 5 (in the main text) on PLS loans in the CoreLogic data set originated in the 2002–2007 period. The dependent variable is an indicator

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

7,770,236
0.21

# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig YQ FE
State FE
Issue YQ FE
Lender FE
Lender x Orig-YQ FE
Issuer FE
Issuer x Issue -YQ FE
Other Controls

-0.0033
(3.34)

Months to Sale

(1)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

7,911,165
0.21

# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig YQ FE
State FE
Issue YQ FE
Lender FE
Lender x Orig-YQ FE
Other Controls

-0.0031
(3.40)

Months to Sale

(1)

Default Definition: 60+ DQ over 36 Months

Panel A: Including Originator Fixed Effects

Table A.1: Baseline Parametric Results for the Sample of CoreLogic PLS Loans: 12-month Sale Threshold

9

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

7,984,021
0.23

-0.0007
-0.59

(3)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

1,938,373
0.28

-0.0064
-5.55

(4)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

1,937,617
0.29

-0.0052
-3.71

Alt-A
(5)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

7,834,853
0.23

-0.0009
-0.98

All PLS
(2)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

1,936,208
0.29

7,832,072
0.23

0.0001
0.09

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

1,889,307
0.29

-0.0047
-3.51

(4)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

1,889,306
0.29

-0.0039
-2.94

Alt-A
(5)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

1,887,908
0.29

-0.0045
-3.88

(6)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

5,945,246
0.21

-0.0008
-0.64

(7)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

6,050,732
0.20

-0.0014
-1.25

(7)

Default Definition: 60+ DQ over 36 Months
(3)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(6)
-0.0053
-3.81

Panel B: Including Issuer Fixed Effects

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

7,986,805
0.22

-0.0016
-1.65

All PLS
(2)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

5,945,246
0.21

0.0013
1.46

Subprime
(8)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

6,048,891
0.21

-0.0004
-0.34

Subprime
(8)
(9)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

5,943,302
0.21

0.0028
2.96

(9)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

6,046,946
0.21

0.0014
1.13

origination).

The first row for each variable shows the regression coefficient and the second row shows the t-statistic. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by state-quarter (of

and sale to a PLS issuer. All regressions include origination year-quarter fixed effects, state fixed effects, year-quarter of sale fixed effects, and the detailed list of covariates described in the text.

variable for loans that default over a 36-month horizon. Default is defined as a loan that is 60+ days delinquent. Months to sale is defined as the number of months that elapse between origination

This table displays results from the estimation of Equation 5 (in the main text) on PLS loans in the CoreLogic data set originated in the 2002–2007 period. The dependent variable is an indicator

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

7,834,853
0.22

# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig YQ FE
State FE
Issue YQ FE
Lender FE
Lender x Orig-YQ FE
Issuer FE
Issuer x Issue -YQ FE
Other Controls

-0.0018
-1.66

Months to Sale

(1)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

7,989,106
0.22

# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig YQ FE
State FE
Issue YQ FE
Lender FE
Lender x Orig-YQ FE
Other Controls

-0.0027
-2.77

Months to Sale

(1)

Default Definition: 60+ DQ over 36 Months

Panel A: Including Originator Fixed Effects

Table A.2: Baseline Parametric Results for the Sample of CoreLogic PLS Loans: 24-month Sale Threshold

10
5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

(12‐24]

Months to Sale

‐0.12
4

‐0.12
3

‐0.10

‐0.10

2

‐0.08

‐0.08

1

‐0.06

‐0.04

‐0.02

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

‐0.06

‐0.04

‐0.02

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

Panel B: Alt-A PLS

1

2

3

4

5

7

8

Months to Sale

6

9

Panel C: Subprime PLS

10

11

12

to sale is defined as the number of months that elapse between origination and sale to a PLS issuer. The dotted lines show 90% confidence intervals.

and panel B corresponds to subprime loans. Default is defined as a loan that becomes 60 days delinquent over a 36-month horizon measured from origination. Months

Notes: This figure displays results from the estimation of the non-parametric version of Equation 5 for PLS loans in CoreLogic. Panel A corresponds to Alt-A PLS loans

Ex‐Post Default Rate

Figure A.1: CoreLogic PLS Results: 24-Month Sale Threshold

Ex‐Post Default Rate

(12‐24]

Table A.3: McDash Private-Label Results: Higher Sale Thresholds

Panel A: 12-Month Sale Threshold
Default Horizon:

36 Months

60 Months

Default Definition:

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

Months to Sale

-0.0067
(8.40)

-0.0072
(9.43)

-0.0068
(9.46)

-0.0078
(11.23)

5,811,639
0.24

5,811,639
0.22

5,811,639
0.26

5,811,639
0.25

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
State FE
Sale Qtr FE
Other Controls

Panel B: Higher Sale Thresholds
Default Horizon:

60 Months

Default Definition:
Sale Threshold:
Scratch & Dent Correction
Months to Sale
# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
State FE
Sale Qtr FE
Other Controls

60+ DQ
24 Months

36 Months

No

Yes

No

Yes

-0.0028
(4.31)

-0.0076
(12.39)

-0.0021
(4.09)

-0.0059
(11.05)

5,879,757
0.26

5,860,471
0.26

5,910,105
0.26

5,885,068
0.26

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

11

A.4. Robustness to the Inclusion of Debt-to-Income Ratios in the Covariate Set
In this section we conduct a sensitivity analysis to the inclusion of the debt-to-income (DTI)
ratio as a control variable in our empirical analysis. We chose to leave the DTI ratio out of the
covariate set in the baseline specifications reported in the main text for two reasons. First, the
variable has poor coverage as it is missing for approximately 50 percent of the loans in our McDash sample and approximately 35 percent in our CoreLogic sample of Alt-A mortgages.3 Thus,
including it in our set of control variables results in a loss of a significant fraction of our sample of
loans. Second, the variable includes information on the “front-end” DTI ratio (only mortgage debt
divided by income at origination) for some loans, but for other loans it includes information on
the “back-end” DTI ratio (all outstanding debt, including mortgage, credit card, auto, education
debts, divided by income at origination). Unfortunately, McDash does not provide us with the
necessary information to distinguish between the two different types of DTI ratios, which results
in significant measurement error.4
In Table A.4 below we display estimation results of our primary McDash specifications in which
we include the DTI ratio in the covariate set. Despite losing approximately half of the sample, the
results are broadly similar to those reported in Tables 5 and 6 in the main text.
In Table A.5 below we display estimation results of our primary CoreLogic specifications in which
we include the DTI ratio in the covariate set. The results are broadly similar to those reported in
Table 9 in the main text.

3
4

It is better populated in our sample of CoreLogic subprime loans (about 90 percent).
We are slightly more confident that the variable reflects the “front-end” DTI ratio in the CoreLogic data set.

12

Table A.4: The Effect of Including Debt-to-Income Ratios: PLS Loans in McDash

Panel A: Parametric Results
Default Horizon:

36 Months

60 Months

Default Definition:

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

Months to Sale

-0.0076
(6.82)

-0.0078
(7.21)

-0.0117
(7.35)

-0.0122
(7.84)

2,968,692
0.24

2,968,692
0.23

2,968,692
0.25

2,968,692
0.25

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
State FE
Sale Qtr FE
Other Controls

Panel B: Non-Parametric Results
Default Horizon:

36 Months

60 Months

Default Definition:

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

60+ DQ

90+ DQ

Months to Sale = 2

-0.0079
(3.26)
-0.0222
(6.56)
-0.0404
(10.51)
-0.0383
(7.27)
-0.0379
(5.77)
-0.0207
(2.92)
-0.0255
(2.31)
-0.041
(2.32)

-0.0068
(2.88)
-0.0215
(6.73)
-0.0406
(11.87)
-0.0377
(7.49)
-0.0385
(6.28)
-0.0236
(3.38)
-0.0295
(2.89)
-0.0461
(2.72)

-0.0148
(4.24)
-0.0339
(6.15)
-0.0595
(9.32)
-0.0578
(8.22)
-0.0629
(7.50)
-0.0461
(4.62)
-0.0411
(3.38)
-0.0429
(2.99)

-0.0133
(3.87)
-0.0326
(6.23)
-0.0611
(10.36)
-0.0589
(8.52)
-0.0675
(8.27)
-0.0509
(5.13)
-0.0469
(4.00)
-0.0521
(3.69)

2,968,692
0.24

2,968,692
0.23

2,968,692
0.25

2,968,692
0.25

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Months to Sale = 3
Months to Sale = 4
Months to Sale = 5
Months to Sale = 6
Months to Sale = 7
Months to Sale = 8
Months to Sale = 9
# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
State FE
Sale Qtr FE
Other Controls

This table displays results from the estimation of Equation 5 on PLS loans in the McDash data set originated in the
2002–2007 period. The specifications are identical to those in Table 5 with the addition of the debt-to-income ratio

13 the regression coefficient and the second row shows the
in the covariate set. The first row for each variable shows
t-statistic. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by state-quarter (of origination).

14
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

-0.0044
(8.29)
6,354,517
0.21

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

6,467,766
0.21

-0.0012
(1.22)

(3)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

1,196,111
0.25

-0.0066
(5.12)

(4)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

1,195,640
0.25

-0.007
(4.85)

Alt-A
(5)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

-0.0020
(4.15)
6,354,517
0.21

All PLS
(2)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

1,194,611
0.26

-0.0015
(3.79)
6,352,805
0.21
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

-0.0072
(4.03)
1,158,779
0.25

(4)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

-0.0052
(4.22)
1,158,779
0.26

Alt-A
(5)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.0047
(3.83)
1,157,760
0.26

(6)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

-0.0028
(2.91)
5,195,576
0.19

(7)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

5,274,454
0.19

-0.0023
(2.52)

(7)

Default Definition: 60+ DQ over 36 Months
(3)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(6)
-0.0053
(5.00)

Panel B: Including Issuer Fixed Effects

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

6,469,485
0.21

-0.0027
(3.04)

All PLS
(2)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

-0.0003
(0.22)
5,195,575
0.20

Subprime
(8)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

5,273,683
0.19

-0.0013
(1.55)

Subprime
(8)
(9)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

0.0006
(0.55)
5,194,476
0.20

(9)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

5,272,583
0.2

0.0005
(0.51)

heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by state-quarter (of origination).

the addition of the debt-to-income ratio in the covariate set. The first row for each variable shows the regression coefficient and the second row shows the t-statistic. The standard errors are

This table displays results from the estimation of Equation 5 on PLS loans in the CoreLogic data set originated in the 2002–2007 period. The specifications are identical to those in Table 9 with

Orig YQ FE
State FE
Issue YQ FE
Originator FE
Originator x Orig-YQ FE
Issuer FE
Issuer x Issue -YQ FE
Other Controls

# Loans
Adjusted R2

Months to Sale

(1)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

6,470,565
0.2

# Loans
Adjusted R2

Orig YQ FE
State FE
Issue YQ FE
Originator FE
Originator x Orig-YQ FE
Other Controls

-0.0034
(3.33)

Months to Sale

(1)

Default Definition: 60+ DQ over 36 Months

Panel A: Including Originator Fixed Effects

Table A.5: The Effect of Including Debt-to-Income Ratios: PLS Loans in CoreLogic

A.5. Pricing Analysis – Detail on Including Lower Rated Securities
Table A.6 shows the effect of including lower-rated securities in our pricing analysis. The table is
structured identically to Table 13 in the main text, with the top panel containing estimation results
when we include only a linear term for average seasoning and the bottom panel containing results
from a quadratic specification. The results are broadly consistent with those in Table 13. The
negative relationship between pool-level seasoning and yield spreads is stronger for the sample of
Alt-A pools (columns (4)–(6)), but is weaker for the full sample of PLS pools. Figures A.2 and A.3
display the predicted security spreads as a function of the average pool-level seasoning calculated
using the estimation results in column (6) in Panels A and B of Table A.6, respectively. Figure
A.3 is extremely similar to Figure 5 in the main text. Average yield spreads associated with pools
with average seasoning of 4–5 months are about 40 basis points lower than those associated with
pools with very little seasoning.

15

Table A.6: Pricing Analysis Results
Panel A: Linear Specification
Dependent Variable: Pool-level Average Yield Spread

(1)
Seasoning
Pool Covariates
Issue Qtr FE
Issuer FE
Observations
Adjusted R2

All Securities
(2)

(3)

(4)

Alt-A Securities
(5)

(6)

Subprime Securities
(7)
(8)
(9)

-0.001
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.002
(0.005)

-0.041***
(0.014)

-0.034**
(0.015)

-0.034**
(0.015)

0.006**
(0.003)

0.004
(0.004)

0.004
(0.004)

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

2,254
0.35

2,254
0.44

2,247
0.56

453
0.10

453
0.18

453
0.18

1,799
0.53

1,795
0.67

1,795
0.67

Panel B: Non-Linear Specification
Dependent Variable: Pool-level Average Yield Spread

(1)
Seasoning
Seasoning2
Pool Covariates
Issue Qtr FE
Issuer FE
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

All Securities
(2)

(3)

(4)

Alt-A Securities
(5)

(6)

Subprime Securities
(7)
(8)
(9)

-0.037**
(0.016)
0.005**
(0.002)

-0.031**
(0.015)
0.004*
(0.002)

-0.014
(0.017)
0.002
(0.002)

-0.185***
(0.043)
0.019***
(0.005)

-0.177***
(0.053)
0.019***
(0.007)

-0.177***
(0.053)
0.019***
(0.007)

0.003
(0.011)
0.001
(0.001)

-0.012
(0.011)
0.002
(0.001)

-0.005
(0.014)
0.001
(0.002)

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

2,254
0.35

2,254
0.44

2,247
0.56

453
0.13

453
0.20

453
0.20

1,799
0.53

1,799
0.61

1,795
0.67

This table displays results from the estimation of Equation (7) in the main text. The sample includes triple-A and
lower-rated, floating rate subprime, and Alt-A securities issued between January 2002 and December 2007. The
dependent variable is the weighted average spread over the 1-month LIBOR of all securities with claims on cash
flows for a given mortgage pool. Seasoning is the average age (# months) of all mortgages in a pool at the time
of issuance. All regressions include month-of-issue fixed effects. The set of pool-level covariates corresponds to
the variables included in Table A.5, which are all pool-level averages. The first row for each variable shows the
regression coefficient and the second row shows the t-statistic. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and
are clustered at the deal-level. *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p<0.1.

16

.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.2

.3

Predicted Yield Spread

1

1.1 1.2

Figure A.2: Predicted Yield Spread as Function of Seasoning

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Average Seasoning (Pool-Level)

Notes: This figure displays the predicted security spreads (over the 1-month LIBOR) as a function of the average
pool-level seasoning calculated using estimation results from the specification reported in column (6) in panel B of
Table A.6. The shaded area corresponds to 95% confidence intervals calculated using the delta method.

.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.2

.3

.4

Predicted Yield Spread

1

1.1 1.2

Figure A.3: Predicted Yield Spread as Function of Seasoning

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Average Seasoning (Pool-Level)

Notes: This figure displays the predicted security spreads (over the 1-month LIBOR) as a function of the average
pool-level seasoning calculated using estimation results from the specification reported in column (6) in panel B of
Table A.6. The shaded area corresponds to 95% confidence intervals calculated using the delta method.

17

A.6. Early Prepayment Analysis
While default is clearly undesirable from the perspective of an MBS investor, the risk of early
prepayment is another potentially negative outcome for mortgage investors. Residential mortgages
contain a prepayment option that allows the borrower to fully repay the outstanding principal
balance of the loan before it reaches full maturity. Early prepayment risk was an important
consideration for investors in the period before the housing bust and financial crisis, especially
given the low levels of default rates that prevailed during that period.
It is well established in the mortgage literature that interest rate movements largely drive
the prepayment behavior of borrowers with fixed-rate mortgages. In contrast, the prepayment
of adjustable-rate mortgages is typically driven by life events that are unrelated to interest rate
movements, such as new housing purchases driven by employment changes or changes in household
size due to the birth of a child or death of a family member. In the PLS market, however, in
addition to responses to life events, prepayments of adjustable-rate mortgages were often driven
by specific contractual features. In particular, the prepayment behavior of 2/28 and 3/27 hybrid
ARMS, the most common types of PLS ARMs (accounting for about 75% of the market), was
highly correlated with the duration of the period in which the interest rate was frozen: two years
for the 2/28s and 3 years for the 3/27s. After the initial period, the interest rate would reset to a
new level and track a market interest rate (such as the 6-month LIBOR or the 10-year Treasury
rate). Because the interest rate typically reset to a higher level, many borrowers prepaid either
right at or shortly after the reset period. In addition, many ARMs in the PLS market contained
prepayment penalties that expired at the same time of the interest rate reset, providing further
incentive for borrowers to wait until the reset date to exercise their prepayment options.5
We focus on the sample of 2/28 and 3/27 ARMs that did not default and define a negative
outcome to be an ARM that was prepaid several months before the interest rate reset month.6 We
consider two cutoffs, six and nine months before the reset date, in defining our early prepayment
indicator variables, as the most common type of prepayment penalty associated with these mortgages was six months of interest on 80% of the principal amount prepaid. An ARM that carried
this prepayment penalty and prepaid more than six months before the reset date would generate
lower cash flows for investors than a loan that prepaid at the reset date, and prepayment can thus
be considered as a negative outcome for a PLS investor.
Table A.7 contains the results of the early prepayment analysis. Panel A displays results
for parametric (quadratic) specifications, while Panel B displays results for the non-parametric
specifications. We show results pertaining to various corrections for the potential “mechanical”
5

For an excellent reference on the PLS market in general and for empirical analyses on the prepayment and
default behavior of various types of PLS loans in particular, see Kramer and Sinha (2006). See Sengupta (2010) for
a detailed discussion of the composition of loans in the Alt-A and subprime PLS markets.
6
We eliminate defaults from our analysis to isolate voluntary prepayment risk.

18

selection issue discussed in Section 5.2 above. Specifically, we exclude from the sample loans that
prepay within three, six, and nine months from origination. Just as in the case of default, however,
this may be an “over-correction” to the extent that investors may be especially concerned with
prepayments within the first year or so after origination, and such a restriction could eliminate the
true signaling effect rather than simply correct the sample selection bias.
Table A.7 clearly shows a negative relation between time to sale and early prepayment risk.
As months to sale increase, the likelihood of early prepayment decreases in a relatively monotonic
manner. Focusing on the first two columns in the table (no correction), PLS loans sold six months
after origination are approximately 6–7% less likely to prepay early compared to loans sold immediately, while loans sold nine months after origination are about 10–11% less likely to prepay early.
The negative relation remains significant when we exclude prepayments that occur in the first few
months after origination, but the non-parametric specification shows that the relation flattens for
five months in columns (5) through (8).
In general, results on the correlation between time to sale and early prepayment are consistent
with the default analysis and support the mechanism of using sales delays to signal quality. While
PLS investors were likely concerned about significant credit risk in the case of a large downturn
(which, of course, occurred), prepayment risk is present in both good and bad economic conditions,
and it was thus an important consideration for mortgage investors. In addition, while our results
suggest that asymmetric information on default risk did not play an important role in the subprime
PLS market, asymmetric information on prepayment risk may have been important as the vast
majority of 2/28 and 3/27 hybrid-ARMs were placed in subprime securities.7 These findings
are consistent with Agarwal et al. (2014), who find evidence of adverse selection with respect to
prepayment risk but not default risk in the PLS market.

7

In our CL sample, approximately 96% of 2/28s and 79% of 3/27s were in subprime securities.

19

Table A.7: Early Prepayment Results
Panel A: Parametric Specification

Reset Month - Prepay Month

Months to Sale
Months to Sale

≤ 3 months

None

Correction:

2

# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
State FE
Sale Qtr FE
Originator FE
Other Controls

≤ 6 months

≤ 9 months

≥ 6 Months

≥ 9 Months

≥ 6 Months

≥ 9 Months

≥ 6 Months

≥ 9 Months

≥ 6 Months

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

≥ 9 Months
(8)

-0.0129
(6.20)
0.0007
(2.56)

-0.0152
(6.28)
0.0009
(2.83)

-0.0089
(4.11)
0.0004
(1.36)

-0.0105
(4.15)
0.0005
(1.58)

-0.0111
(4.76)
0.0012
(3.75)

-0.0131
(4.75)
0.0015
(4.03)

-0.0144
(5.66)
0.0019
(5.07)

-0.0169
(5.57)
0.0023
(5.36)

4,024,361
0.13

4,024,361
0.13

3,968,227
0.13

3,968,227
0.13

3,701,607
0.12

3,701,607
0.11

3,302,260
0.10

3,302,260
0.08

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Panel B: Non-parametric Specification
Correction:
Reset Month - Prepay Month

Months to Sale = 1
Months to Sale = 2
Months to Sale = 3
Months to Sale = 4
Months to Sale = 5
Months to Sale = 6
Months to Sale = 7
Months to Sale = 8
Months to Sale = 9
# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig Qtr FE
State FE
Sale Qtr FE
Originator FE
Other Controls

≤ 3 months

None

≤ 6 months

≤ 9 months

≥ 6 Months

≥ 9 Months

≥ 6 Months

≥ 9 Months

≥ 6 Months

≥ 9 Months

≥ 6 Months

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

≥ 9 Months
(8)

-0.024
(4.90)
-0.033
(6.90)
-0.039
(7.09)
-0.043
(7.24)
-0.049
(9.32)
-0.059
(8.59)
-0.064
(7.97)
-0.082
(10.65)
-0.096
(9.67)

-0.027
(4.87)
-0.038
(6.88)
-0.045
(7.07)
-0.049
(7.48)
-0.056
(9.35)
-0.066
(8.93)
-0.072
(7.83)
-0.090
(11.38)
-0.108
(9.07)

-0.023
(4.41)
-0.028
(5.70)
-0.030
(5.19)
-0.034
(5.36)
-0.040
(7.06)
-0.049
(6.93)
-0.054
(6.65)
-0.073
(8.99)
-0.085
(8.58)

-0.025
(4.34)
-0.032
(5.63)
-0.035
(5.13)
-0.038
(5.47)
-0.045
(7.02)
-0.055
(7.15)
-0.060
(6.54)
-0.078
(9.56)
-0.097
(8.00)

-0.024
(4.51)
-0.030
(5.81)
-0.032
(5.36)
-0.029
(4.51)
-0.026
(4.43)
-0.024
(3.03)
-0.027
(3.22)
-0.046
(5.57)
-0.059
(5.84)

-0.027
(4.39)
-0.034
(5.69)
-0.037
(5.25)
-0.033
(4.53)
-0.028
(4.21)
-0.024
(2.88)
-0.028
(3.01)
-0.047
(5.63)
-0.065
(5.44)

-0.025
(4.07)
-0.031
(5.17)
-0.034
(5.13)
-0.030
(4.50)
-0.028
(4.69)
-0.027
(3.24)
-0.014
(1.50)
-0.017
(1.91)
-0.011
(1.01)

-0.028
(3.87)
-0.035
(4.98)
-0.039
(4.89)
-0.033
(4.38)
-0.030
(4.26)
-0.027
(3.02)
-0.012
(1.14)
-0.011
(1.22)
-0.008
(0.58)

4,024,361
0.13

4,024,361
0.13

3,968,227
0.13

3,968,227
0.13

3,701,607
0.12

3,701,607
0.11

3,302,260
0.10

3,302,260
0.08

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

This table displays results from the estimation of Equation 5 on adjustable-rate PLS loans in the CoreLogic data
set originated in the 2002–2007 period. The dependent variable is an indicator variable for loans that prepay more
than three months or six months before the month in which the interest rate resets from a fixed rate to an adjustable
rate. All loans that are prepaid within three months of origination are eliminated from the sample. Months to sale
is defined as the number of months that elapse between origination and sale to a PLS issuer. All regressions include
origination year-quarter fixed effects, state fixed effects, year-quarter of sale fixed effects, originator fixed effects, and
the detailed list of covariates described in the text. The first row for each variable shows the regression coefficient
and the second row shows the t-statistic. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by
year-quarter of origination.

20

A.7. Additional Summary Statistics and Tests
Table A.8 below displays summary statistics for the sample of triple-A securities included in
the pricing analysis discussed in Section 5.6 in the main text.
Table A.9 displays the full set of estimation results (for all covariates) corresponding to the specification reported in Column (1), Panel A of Table 5 in the main text.
Finally, Table A.10 displays results from the estimation of Equation 5 on Alt-A and Subprime
PLS loans in the CoreLogic data set that do not default within 10 months of origination. The
specifications are identical to those in Table 9 in the main text.

21

Table A.8: Pricing Analysis Summary Statistics

Yield Spread
Months to Sale
# Loans
Log Loan Balance
FICO
FICO < 580
580 ≤ FICO < 620
620 ≤ FICO < 660
660 ≤ FICO < 700
FICO ≥ 700
CLTV
CLTV < 70
70 ≤ CLTV < 80
80 ≤ CLTV < 90
90 ≤ CLTV < 100
CLTV ≥ 100
LTV = 80
Term
Purchase Loan
Cashout Refinance
Primary Residence
Single-Family Property
Condominium
ARM
Interest-Only
Negative Amortization
Low Documentation
Balloon
Jumbo
Prepayment Penalty
Fraction in CA
Unemployment Rate
Predicted WAL
Subordination

Mean

Standard Dev.

Minimum

25th Perc.

Median

75th Perc.

Maximum

0.28
3.3
2,355
12.2
640
0.20
0.19
0.23
0.18
0.20
84
0.13
0.15
0.28
0.24
0.20
0.16
359
0.42
0.48
0.87
0.73
0.08
0.83
0.21
0.10
0.47
0.08
0.19
0.69
0.26
5.14
2.59
0.86

0.23
1.4
1,833
0.4
43
0.15
0.12
0.08
0.09
0.21
6
0.08
0.07
0.13
0.10
0.20
0.12
15
0.20
0.19
0.13
0.11
0.04
0.18
0.28
0.30
0.23
0.15
0.24
0.21
0.17
0.61
0.61
0.14

0.04
0.3
55
11.0
413
0.00
0
0
0.01
0
39
0
0
0
0
0
0
120
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.73
0
0

0.16
2.2
1,108
11.9
609
0.01
0.05
0.19
0.11
0.06
80
0.08
0.10
0.20
0.18
0.02
0.08
356
0.27
0.33
0.85
0.68
0.05
0.76
0
0
0.31
0
0
0.65
0.13
4.66
2.23
0.81

0.23
3.1
1,911
12.1
624
0.22
0.22
0.24
0.15
0.10
84
0.12
0.14
0.27
0.23
0.16
0.12
359
0.40
0.50
0.91
0.75
0.07
0.85
0.10
0
0.41
0
0.10
0.74
0.23
5.06
2.52
0.85

0.32
4.2
3,078
12.4
682
0.31
0.27
0.28
0.25
0.35
88
0.17
0.19
0.36
0.29
0.32
0.20
360
0.57
0.62
0.95
0.80
0.09
1
0.26
0
0.61
0.05
0.27
0.81
0.34
5.63
2.90
0.91

2.09
9.0
18,190
14.9
764
0.87
0.67
0.68
0.72
0.92
102
0.87
0.49
0.92
0.97
0.96
0.91
480
1
1
1
0.99
0.36
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
6.83
6.61
2.65

# Securities

3,532

Notes: This table displays summary statistics for the variables included in the pricing analysis presented in section 5.6.
All mortgage characteristics correspond to averages that are calculated at the pool-level in the sample of CoreLogic
loans, which includes mortgages backing subprime and Alt-A triple-A floating rate securities issued between January
2002 and December 2007. Yield Spread is the weighted average spread over the 1-month LIBOR of all triple-A
securities with claims on cash flows for a given mortgage pool. Seasoning is the average age (# months) of all
mortgages in a pool at the time of issuance. Predicted WAL is a model-based calculation of the expected weighted
average life. Subordination is calculated as the ratio of the total face value of all triple-A securities associated with
the deal to the sum of the remaining principal balances of all of the loans in the deal in the month of issuance.

22

Table A.9: Coefficient Estimates for Control Variables

Dependent Variable: Indicator for 60+ DQ within 36 months of origination
Coefficient
t-statistic
Months to Sale
-0.0094
(10.75)
Primary Residence (d)
-0.0012
(0.49)
Prepayment Penalty (d)
0.0687
(7.70)
ARM (d)
0.0281
(2.24)
Balloon Payment (d)
0.0890
(4.74)
Low Documentation (d)
0.0515
(9.74)
Missing Documentation (d)
0.0119
(1.80)
B or C Grade Mortgage (d)
0.1091
(9.38)
Single Family Property (d)
-0.0010
(0.69)
Missing Property Type (d)
0.0302
(7.12)
Interest-Only (d)
0.0130
(1.44)
Purchase Loan (d)
0.0015
(0.22)
Refinance (cash-out) (d)
0.0141
(3.04)
Missing Loan Type (d)
0.0141
(3.04)
Term
0.0001
(2.81)
LTV
0.0010
(3.96)
Missing LTV (d)
0.1632
(4.23)
70 ≤ LTV < 80 (d)
0.0352
(4.19)
LTV = 80 (d)
0.0257
(7.33)
80 < LTV < 90 (d)
0.0443
(4.75)
900 ≤ LTV < 100 (d)
0.0608
(5.72)
LTV ≥ 100 (d)
0.0459
(4.04)
FICO
-0.0011
(8.59)
Missing FICO (d)
-0.8955
(8.54)
FICO < 580 (d)
-0.0614
(3.22)
580 ≤ FICO < 620 (d)
-0.0482
(4.53)
620 ≤ FICO < 660 (d)
-0.0149
(5.86)
660 ≤ FICO < 700 (d)
-0.0128
(2.72)
Interest Rate (at origination)
0.0110
(6.53)
Jumbo (d)
0.0217
(2.55)
Unemployment Rate (at origination)
0.0041
(7.63)
Cumulative Change in Unemployment Rate (36 months)
0.0244
(5.75)
House Price Level (at origination)
0.0016
(12.36)
Cumulative Change in House Prices (36 months)
-0.1583
(7.65)
# Loans
5,747,722
Adjusted R2
0.24
Orig Qtr FE
Y
State FE
Y
Sale Qtr FE
Y
Originator FE
N

This table displays the coefficients for all variables included as controls in the regression shown in the first column of
Panel A, Table 5 in the paper (Baseline parametric results for the sample of PLS Loans in McDash). The dependent
variable is an indicator variable for loans that default over a 36-month horizon. Default is defined as a loan that is
60+ days delinquent. Months to sale is defined as the number of months that elapse between origination and sale
to a PLS issuer. All regressions include origination year-quarter fixed effects, state fixed effects, and year-quarter of
sale fixed effects. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by year-quarter of origination.

23

Table A.10: Correcting for Potential Selection Bias: Alt-A and Subprime PLS Loans
Panel A: Effect of Lender Fixed Effects
Default Definition: 60+ DQ over 36 Months
Subprime

Alt-A
Months to Sale
# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig YQ FE
State FE
Issue YQ FE
Lender FE
Lender x Orig-YQ FE
Other Controls

-0.0054
(7.62)

-0.0042
(6.86)

-0.0035
(6.92)

0.0020
(4.83)

0.0026
(5.72)

0.0039
(8.60)

1,848,602
0.24

1,847,871
0.25

1,846,633
0.26

5,426,811
0.17

5,425,136
0.18

5,423,582
0.18

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Panel B: Effect of Issuer Fixed Effects
Default Definition: 60+ DQ over 36 Months
Subprime

Alt-A
Months to Sale
# Loans
Adjusted R2
Orig YQ FE
State FE
Issue YQ FE
Lender FE
Lender x Orig-YQ FE
Issuer FE
Issuer x Issue -YQ FE
Other Controls

-0.0040
(7.37)

-0.0023
(4.41)

-0.0026
(5.09)

0.0020
(4.00)

0.0040
(7.82)

0.0043
(8.03)

1,803,941
0.25

1,803,940
0.26

1,802,714
0.26

5,344,226
0.18

5,344,226
0.18

5,342,673
0.18

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

This table displays the results from the estimation of Equation 5 on Alt-A and Subprime PLS loans in the CoreLogic
data set that do not default within 10 months of origination. The specifications are identical to those in Table 9 in
the text. The dependent variable is an indicator variable for loans that default over a 36-month horizon. Default
is defined as a loan that is 60+ days delinquent. Months to sale is defined as the number of months that elapse
between origination and sale to a PLS issuer. All regressions include origination year-quarter fixed effects, state
fixed effects, year-quarter of sale fixed effects, and the detailed list of covariates described in the text. The first row
for each variable shows the regression coefficient and the second row shows the t-statistic. The standard errors are
heteroskedasticity-robust and are clustered by year-quarter of origination.

24

25

Figure A.4: Example of Prospectus: Summary Mortgage Data Table

A.8. Solving the model with additional random delay in trade
In this appendix, we show that the equilibrium strategies and prices are unaffected by random
delay in trade as specified in Section 5. In that section, we assume the selling protocol for a
mortgage is as follows. The originator chooses to list a mortgage for sale at some publically
observable date t. Once the originator lists the mortgage for sale, there is a random interval of
time ν between the listing date and the date of sale distributed as an exponential random variable
with parameter η. At the date of sale, buyers Bertrand compete for the asset all with common
knowledge of the listing date t. We also assume that if the mortgage defaults, a lump sum recovery
of αB0 is paid to the holder of the mortgage. Given an originator of type λ, a listing date t, and
a price p, the originators value is
(rm + αλ)B0
U (λ, t, p) =
γ+λ

ηe−(γ+λ)t
1−
γ+λ+η

!
+

ηe−(γ+λ)t p
.
γ+λ+η

Note that prices here will depend on the listing date and not the actual sale date. Thus, the
first-order condition for listing date is now
(rm + αλ)B0 − (γ + λ)P ∗ (t) +

d ∗
P (t) = 0
dt

but for any separating equilibrium
(rm + αλ)B0
,
r+λ

P ∗ (T (λ)) =

which in turns gives the following ODE for the price of a mortgage listed for sale at time t
d ∗
P (t) = (γ − r)P ∗ (t).
dt
We restrict attention to equilibria in which the worst type does not delay, which in turn implies
the following initial condition
(rm + αλH )B0
.
r + λH

P ∗ (0) = ph =
This ODE has the following solution

P ∗ (t) = ph e(γ−r)t .
Note this solution is the same as the equilibrium given in Proposition 1 up to the difference in ph
that results from including some recovery. As such, the equilibrium strategy for the originator is
unaffected by publicly observable random delay.
26

