NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MATCH QUALITY, SEARCH, AND THE INTERNET MARKET FOR USED BOOKS
Glenn Ellison
Sara Fisher Ellison
Working Paper 24197
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24197

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018

We would like to thank Vivek Bhattacharya, Masao Fukui, Chen Lian, David Liu, and especially
Hongkai Zhang for outstanding research assistance. We thank Panle Jia Barwick, Gabriel Carroll,
and many seminar audiences for comments on an earlier drafts that led us to make substantial
improvements to the paper. We thank the NBER Sloan Program on Digitization and the Toulouse
Network for Information Technology for financial support, and the Paris School of Economics
for their hospitality. The first author has received material financial support from the Toulouse
Network for Information Technology. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Glenn Ellison and Sara Fisher Ellison. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Match Quality, Search, and the Internet Market for Used Books
Glenn Ellison and Sara Fisher Ellison
NBER Working Paper No. 24197
January 2018
JEL No. D22,L13,L81
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the effect of the Internet on markets in which match-quality is important,
including an analysis of the market for used books. A model in which sellers of unusual objects
wait for high-value buyers to arrive brings out match quality and competition effects through
which improved search technologies may increase both price dispersion and social welfare. A
reduced-form empirical analysis finds support for a number of more nuanced predictions of the
model in the context of the used book market, exploiting both cross-sectional differences across
books and time-series differences in the wake of Amazon's acquisition and incorporation of a
large used book marketplace. The paper develops a framework for structural estimation of a
model based on the theory. The estimates suggest that the shift to Internet sales substantially
increased both seller profits and consumer surplus.

Glenn Ellison
Department of Economics, E52-424
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
gellison@mit.edu
Sara Fisher Ellison
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-428
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
sellison@mit.edu

1

Introduction

The empirical literature on Internet pricing has found that improved search technologies
did not have the dramatic price-lowering and law-of-one-price-reinforcing effects that some
had forecast.1 Ellison and Ellison (2009) argued that one explanation was that the Internet
provides sellers with the means and motivation to keep markets inefficient by engaging in
“obfuscation.” The literature now includes a variety of models of obfuscation and empirical
studies.2 This paper can be seen as a Chicago-school critique of this literature.3 We point
out that in other markets, ones where match quality is very important, high and dispersed
prices can also be a sign that search is becoming more efficient and producing welfare gains.
We take advantage of features of the used book market to test a number of more nuanced
predictions of our match-quality theory and find that they are borne out. We then discuss
how models like ours can be structurally estimated, and estimate a model which suggests
that Internet sales substantially increased both seller profits and consumer welfare.
This paper focuses on the market for used books, which is an extreme example of the
Internet’s failure to lead to low, uniform prices. Online prices are typically higher than
offline prices had been, and are also extremely dispersed.4 One particularly salient feature
of the used book market is the importance of match quality: most people would derive zero
utility from owning most used books but positive utility from owning a few specific titles.
Our basic argument is that when search costs are reduced, the few people who would value
owning any particular used book are more likely to come across it. This phenomenon is
akin to an increase in demand. And with supply fixed (or at least highly inelastic), prices
increase. We see dispersion as a separate phenomenon arising at the same time due to the
Internet being an inherently asymmetric environment. Firms with many repeat customers
or who are ranked highly by Google will exploit this advantage by setting a high price and
1

Brynjolfsson and Smith (2000) found that online book and CD prices were just 9-16% lower than offline
prices and price dispersion was actually greater online. Baye, Morgan and Sholten (2004) found an average
range of over $100 for consumer electronics products and noted that the more refined law-of-one-price
prediction that at least the two lowest prices in a market should be identical also fails dramatically. Search
technologies might also be expected to reduce price dispersion at physical stores, but Kaplan and Menzio’s
(2015) study of a broad sample of products sold (mostly) through traditional retail stores in 2004-2009 finds
substantial dispersion even after one takes out store quality effects and within-store cross-time variation.
2
See among others Ellison (2005), Spiegler (2006), Wilson (2010), Ellison and Wolitzky (2012), Piccione
and Spiegler (2012), Chioveanu and Zhou (2013), Grubb (2015), Armstrong and Zhou (2016), and Celerier
and Vallee (2017).
3
Moraga Gonzalez, Sandor, and Wildenbeest (2017) offer another critique in noting that in models
with heterogeneous search costs, reductions in search costs can sometimes lead to higher equilibrium price
distributions.
4
The first online vs. offline comparison paper we know of, Bailey (1998), reported that online prices for
CDs were higher than offline prices, but we have not seen such a finding in any later papers.

1

waiting for a (relatively uninformed) high value consumer to arrive; whereas, less-visible
sellers will need to enter the aggressive competition to serve highly informed consumers.
From a theory perspective, our story is a simple one, but one that has yet to be spelled
out in detail, as far as we can tell. Accordingly, our paper is divided into three main parts.
We first formalize the model of used book shopping and price-setting that we have described
verbally. Then we try to establish that it is the right story for used books, through a series
of reduced-form tests of more nuanced implications of our model using data we collected
over several years in both online and brick and mortar used book stores. Finally, we develop
a structural model along the lines of our theoretical model that is amenable to estimation,
even with our limited data set, and present estimates of the parameters. In doing so, we
draw out our model’s implications for welfare effects.
A personal anecdote may be illustrative. Several years ago, one of us wanted a thirty
year old academic book on the pharmaceutical market which the MIT library did not have.
The book had long been out of print, and looking for a used copy in brick and mortar
stores would be like looking for a needle in a haystack. A quick search on Alibris, however,
produced four or five copies for sale. A copy was ordered, for around $20, and it arrived
shortly, with $0.75 written in pencil on the inside front cover and subsequently erased!5 The
book had evidently been languishing on the shelf of some used book store for years, and
not a single customer who noticed it was willing to pay even $0.75. A researcher needing
the book happily paid $20 and would have paid significantly more.
While this story and the empirical estimates we present are about used books, we think
that similar insights should apply to the Internet’s impact on a range of retail and labor
markets. A wide variety of collectibles and used goods exist in limited supply and would
be highly valued only by a tiny fraction of the population. For instance, eBay’s founder
has said that an important early experience was when he encountered a collector of broken
laser pointers (Cohen, 2002). The two Boeing 747’s recently sold in an online auction also
fit this basic description, as might the labor of many individual craftsmen, home repair
contractors, or Upwork freelancers, or the couches rented on Airbnb.
Section 2 uses simple models to bring out observations about match-quality markets.
We start with a model in which sellers of unique items post prices and wait for sufficiently
high-valuation buyers to arrive. The model highlights a “match-quality effect.” If improved
search technologies increase customer flows, then sellers will increase their prices. But this
is not a bad thing: increased equilibrium match quality between buyers and items leads to
5

The exact details of this story are lost to history, but the basic facts are correct.

2

increases in social welfare. We also note that price dispersion will naturally be present if
some sellers are more visible than others, and we present a sufficient statistic result relevant
to the estimation of welfare gains. We then use an oligopoly model in which sellers are in
competition for some more sophisticated consumers to highlight a “competition effect,”
which tends to pull down prices at the low-end of the price distribution and can be a
second channel through which improvements in search technologies lead to increased price
dispersion.
Section 3 discusses the market for used books. Match quality is obviously very important
in this market – most people have zero interest in owning most of the millions of books
in this world – and the market has been dramatically affected by the Internet. We think
that the market is of interest in its own right in part because Amazon plays a major role.
An additional strong motivation for studying the market is that several features make it
a natural setting for a general empirical study of match-quality markets: the fact that
books have ISBN numbers makes it easy identify each offered item as one of a well-defined
set of “products”; it is feasible to collect the prices at which thousands of merchants offer
(or do not offer) any particular product; and there is natural variation both across titles
and within-titles over time that one can examine to gain insights on models and their
applicability. In particular, we highlight four sets of more nuanced predictions of the theory
that one can examine in the used books context.
Section 4 discusses our dataset. We began by visiting several physical used book stores
to construct a pseudo-random sample of books intended to be representative of what those
stores were offering in 2009, with one group oversampled, as we will describe later. Shortly
thereafter, we collected data on the prices at which a large number of online bookstores were
offering the same titles by scraping data from a website, AbeBooks.com, which aggregated
listing from thousands of Internet bookstores. At that time, Amazon had recently acquired
AbeBooks, but the site was still operating independently. Amazon subsequently launched
a program to have AbeBooks’ listings appear under the “buy used” link on Amazon’s
site, which presumably increased the number of well-informed consumers in the market.
Motivated by this change we collected listing prices for the same set of titles in November
of 2012. And we collected listings again two months later so that we could get a proxy for
sales by looking for listings that sellers removed over the Christmas season. Combining data
from our various collection efforts, we can make several types of comparisons: within-title
online versus offline prices in 2009; within-title 2009 versus 2012 online price distributions;
within-time comparisons of price distributions for different types of books; and analyses of

3

demand.
Section 5 presents our most basic observations about online used book prices which we
mentioned at the very start. By 2009 online prices were substantially higher on average
than contemporaneous offline prices for the same titles. And price dispersion was also much
greater online than offline. (By necessity we only have a single offline price for each title
in our dataset, but can still place bounds on how much offline dispersion there could have
been by exploiting a variance decomposition.) The majority of the section is then devoted
to examining the four sets of more nuanced cross-sectional and cross-time implications of
the theory discussed at the end of section 3. In several cases we find very strong support
for the predictions, bolstering the case that the model is providing a good description of
the basic economics of the market.
Section 6 then develops and estimates a structural model. This model is closely based on
the theoretical model of secton 2: well-informed and less well-informed potential consumers
arrive at Poisson rates, firms are heterogeneous in the arrival processes they face, and
products are sufficiently differentiated so that pure strategy dispersed price equilibria exist.
In the model there is a one-to-one correspondence between prices and arrival rates. This
fact makes it possible to back out firm-specific arrival rates from observed prices, which
makes the model relatively easy to estimate via simulated maximum likelihood and lets us
avoid some difficulties associated with endogeneity while using our demand data. Given the
limited size of our dataset we must estimate a fairly parsimonious model, but are able to give
the model some flexibility to estimate most quantities of interest. Our structural estimates
indicate that arrival rates for a particular title are substantially higher at online stores than
offline stores (although arrival rates are still very low for some titles), that online demand
includes a very price-sensitive “shopper” segment, and that firms also receive small inflows
of much less price sensitive “nonshoppers.” When we use these primitives to estimate profit
and welfare effects we find strong support for the view that the Internet’s tranformation
of the used book market has been welfare enhancing. We estimate that the shift to online
sales increased sellers’ discounted per-title revenues by about 80% and that welfare gains are
roughly evenly shared between firms and consumers. Per-listing profit levels appear to have
declined somewhat between 2009 and 2012, perhaps due to an Amazon-driven increased
use of price comparison tools, but there is also at the same time an increase in the number
of listed titles.
Our paper is related to a number of other literatures, both theoretical and empirical.
One related empirical literature explores facts similar to those that motivate our analysis

4

– comparing online and offline prices for various products and documenting substantial
online price dispersion.6 Another (much smaller) related literature provides reduced-form
evidence that price distributions appear consistent with models of heterogeneous search.
Two noteworthy papers here are Baye, Morgan, and Scholten (2004), which discusses the
implications of several theoretical models and notes that dispersion is empirically smaller
when the number of firms is larger, and Tang, Smith, and Montgomery (2010), which
documents that prices and dispersion are lower for more frequently searched books. A
number of other papers explore other issues in the book market including Chevalier and
Goolsbee (2003), Brynjolfsson, Hu, and Smith (2003), Ghose, Smith, and Telang (2006),
and Chevalier and Goolsbee (2009). The focus of Brynjolfsson, Hu, and Smith (2003)
is most similar in that it also estimates welfare gains from Internet book sales. In their
case, the consumer surplus improvement results from Amazon making books available to
consumers that they would have been unable to purchase at traditional brick and mortar
stores.
Our theoretical section is intended primarily to bring out some basic intuitions as simply
as possible, but we have not found an exact antecedent in the literature for our simple
initial analysis of monopoly pricing with Poisson arrivals.7 We also have not seen another
derivation of our sufficient statistic result about welfare estimation, although Stiglitz (1976)
does have the related fact that monopoly pricing is socially optimal in our model with
constant elasticity demand. Our subsequent consideration of oligopoly pricing follows the
literature on pricing and price dispersion with consumer search, including Salop and Stiglitz
(1977), Reinganum (1979), Varian (1980), Burdett and Judd (1983), Stahl (1989), and Baye
and Morgan (2001).8 Relative to many of these papers, we simplify our model by focusing
exclusively on the firm pricing problem without rationalizing the consumer search. Our
approach of focusing on pure-strategy equilibria with heterogeneous firms harkens back to
Reinganum (1979), although the structure of the population is more similar to that of Baye
and Morgan (2001).
Another active recent literature demonstrates how one can back out estimates of search
costs from data on price distributions under rational search models. An early paper was
6

See, for example, Bailey (1998) Brynjolfsson and Smith (2000), Clay, Krishnan, and Wolff (2001), Baye,
Morgan, and Scholten (2004), and Ellison and Ellison (2009).
7
The model could be thought of as a simplified special case of the dynamic inventory model of Arrow,
Harris, and Marschak (1951). Also, similar stopping time problems with price offers made by buyers rather
than sellers are in a number of papers, including Karlin (1962) and McCall (1970). In addition, there are
substantial literatures covering more complex dynamic monopoly problems with inventory costs, finite time
horizons, learning about demand, etc. See Talluri and Van Ryzen (2004).
8
See Baye, Morgan, and Scholten (2006) for a survey that brings together many of these models.

5

Sorensen (2001), which performed such an estimation in the context of prescription drug
prices. Hortacsu and Syverson (2004) examine index mutual funds. Hong and Shum (2006)
discuss both a nonparametric methodology and an application involving used book prices.
Subsequent papers extending the methodology and examining other applications include
Moraga Gonzalez and Wildenbeest (2008), Kim, Albuquerque, and Bronnenberg (2010),
Brynjolfsson, Dick, and Smith (2010), De los Santos, Hortacsu, and Wildenbeest (2012)
(which also studies consumers shopping for books), Moraga Gonzalez, Sandor, and Wildenbeest (2013), and Koulayev (2014). Relative to this literature, we will not try to estimate
search costs to rationalize demand and we will not posit identical firms – instead we focus on estimating a consumer arrival process from price distributions (and some quantity
data) in a model that allows for substantial firm-level heterogeneity. Our motivation is
also quite different: these papers focus on estimating the distribution of search costs which
rationalizes price distributions, whereas we are most interested in what we can learn about
consumer demand and welfare from those price distributions.

2

A Model

In this section we discuss monopoly and duopoly models of markets with fixed supply in
which match quality is important. The models are quite simple, but illustrate several ways
in which search technology improvements may affect price levels and price dispersion, and
also bring out some important observations related to the estimation of welfare effects.

2.1

A monopoly model

We begin with a simple dynamic monopoly model. One can think of it as a model of a
brick-and-mortar store or of an Internet store serving customers unaware of any other sites
that offer the same product. It will also serve as a starting point for our subsequent analysis
of an oligopoly model in which some consumers do also search across stores.
Suppose that a monopolist has a single unit of a good to sell. It may store the good
in inventory at zero cost, but earnings from sales at any future date t will be discounted
by a factor of e−rt . Consumers randomly arrive at the monopolist’s store according to a
Poisson process with rate γ. The valuation v of each arriving consumer is an independent
draw from a distribution with CDF F (v). Consumers buy if and only if their value exceeds
the firm’s price so the probability that a consumer who arrives will buy is D(p) = 1 − F (p).
Assume that limp→∞ pD(p) = 0, which implies that optimal prices are finite.

6

One can think about the dynamic optimal monopoly price in two different ways. One
is simply to compute the discounted expected profit π(p) obtained from any fixed price p.
Intuitively, expected profit is simply E(pe−rt̃ ) where t̃ is the random variable giving the
time at which the good is sold and r is a discount rate. Consumers willing to pay at least p
arrive at Poisson rate γD(p). The density of the time of sale is then f (t|p) = γD(p)e−γD(p)t
and the expected profit is
Z ∞
pe−rt f (t|p)dt
π(p) =
Z0 ∞
=
pe−rt γD(p)e−γD(p)t dt
0

=

γpD(p)
r + γD(p)

Hence, one way to think of the dynamic optimal monopoly price pm is as the maximizer of
this expression:
pm = argmax π(p) = argmax
p

p

γpD(p)
.
r + γD(p)

Note that expected profits are zero in both the p → 0 and p → ∞ limits, so an interior optimum exists if D(p) is continuous. The monopoly price will satisfy the first-order condition
obtained from differentiating the above expression if D(p) is differentiable. Note also that
π(p) only depends on γ and r through the ratio γ/r. This is natural because the scaling of
time is only meaningful relative to these two parameters, arrival rate and discount rate.
The second way to think about the dynamic profit maximization problem is as a dynamic
programming problem. Let π ∗ (which depends on γ, r, and D()) be the maximized value
of π(p). This is the opportunity cost that a monopolist incurs if it sells the good to a
consumer who has arrived at its shop. Hence, the dynamic optimal monopoly price is also
the solution to
pm = argmax(p − π ∗ )D(p).
p

Looking at the problem from these two perspectives gives two expressions relating the
dynamic monopoly price to the elasticity of demand:
Proposition 1 Suppose D(p) is differentiable. The dynamic monopoly price pm and the
elasticity of demand  at this price are related by
pm − π ∗
1
=− ,
m
p

and


γ
 = − 1 + D(pm ) .
r
7

We leave the proof of this and other propositions to the appendix to streamline the presentation.
Remarks:
1. In contrast to the static monopoly pricing problem with zero costs where a monopolist
chooses p so that  = −1, the monopolist in this problem prices on the elastic portion
of the demand curve to reflect the opportunity cost of selling the good.
2. The expressions in Proposition 1 are first-order conditions that one can solve to obtain
expressions for the monopoly price given a particular D(p). For example,
√ if values
1+(γ/r)
m
are uniform on [0, 1] so D(p) = 1 − p, they can be solved to find p = √
.
1+

1+(γ/r)

Another tractable example is a truncated constant elasticity demand curve: D(p) =
min{1, hp−η }. Here, the monopoly price is
 
1/η 

γ 1/η
h
if γr > η − 1
m
η−1
r
p =
 h1/η
otherwise

If more consumers visit online stores than offline stores, then the comparative statics
with respect to the arrival rate are relevant to online-offline price differences.
Proposition 2 The monopoly price pm is weakly increasing in

γ
r.

Remarks:
1. The γ/r → ∞ limit of the monopoly price depends on the support of the consumer
value distribution. When the value distribution has an upper bound, the monopoly
price will approach the upper bound. When there is no upper bound on consumer
valuations, the monopoly price will go to infinity as γ/r → ∞.9
2. The rate at which pm increases in γ/r depends on the thickness of the upper tail
of the distribution of consumer valuations. In the uniform example, the monopoly
price increases rapidly when γ/r is small, but the effect also diminishes rapidly. In the
truncated constant elasticity example, the monopoly price is proportional to (γ/r)1/η .
In the extremely thick-tailed version of this distribution with η slightly larger than
p+
To see this, note that for any fixed p and , π(p + , γ/r) = 1+r/(γD(p+))
→ p +  as γ/r → ∞. Hence,
the monopoly price must be larger than p for γ/r sufficiently large.
9

8

1, the monopoly price is almost proportional to the arrival rate. When the tail is
thinner, i.e., when η larger, it increases more slowly.
Online and offline used book dealers may also differ in the distribution of consumer
values. For example, the probability that a consumer searches for a particular book online
may be increasing in the consumer’s valuation, whereas consumers who are browsing in
a physical bookstore will come across titles for which they have low and high valuations.
One way to capture such an effect would be to assume that offline searchers’ valuations are
random draws from f (v), while consumers with value v only search online with probability
q(v), so the density of valuations in the online searcher population will be g(v) = af (v)q(v)
for some constant a. If q(v) in increasing, then g is higher than f both in the sense of
first-order stochastic dominance and in having a thicker upper tail:

1−G(x)
1−F (x)

is increasing

in x. The following proposition shows that shifts in the distribution satisfying the latter
condition increase the monopoly price holding the arrival rate constant.
Proposition 3 Let pm (γ/r, F ) be the monopoly price when the distribution of valuations
is F (x). Let G(x) be a distribution with

1−G(x)
1−F (x)

increasing in x. Then pm (γ/r, G) ≥

pm (γ/r, F ).
The monopoly model with constant elasticity demand has some important welfare properties relevant to our and other empirical implementations. The first is an alignment result
related to Stiglitz’s (1976) observation about monopolistic exploitation of exhausible resources. The second is a sufficient statistic result about computing social welfare.
Proposition 4 Suppose that the distribution of consumer valuations is such that demand
has the truncated constant elasticity form and that the monopolist’s price is not at the kink
in the demand curve. Then,
(i) The monopoly price maximizes social welfare.
(ii) Expected social welfare is E(W ) = pm .
Result (i) is part of the motivation for our earlier description of this paper as a Chicagoschool critique. It suggests that market power need not lead to inefficiency.
On the positive side, result (ii) can be seen as a powerful observation for estimating
social welfare. Any given price can be rationalized by a variety of (γ, h, η) combinations,
but the proposition implies we do not need to estimate these underlying parameters to
estimate social welfare. We also, however, view the result as an important cautionary note.
Assuming that firms are pricing optimally and that demand has the constant elasticity form
9

are strong assumptions. Welfare would not be parameter-independent if we depart from
these assumptions. But estimated welfare in a rational-seller model will be approximately
equal to the price of the good unless one estimates a demand equation that is sufficiently
flexible so that E(v − pm |v > pm ) need not be approximately equal to what it would be
with a constant elasticity demand curve that matched the estimated demand elasticity at
the observed price. Estimating demand flexibly for prices outside the range of most of the
data will typically be extremely difficult.

2.2

An oligopoly model

We now discuss related oligopoly models. We begin with a simple symmetric full-information
model which serves as a building block. And we then discuss an asymmetric oligopoly model
in which firms serve both comparison shoppers and a local market.
Suppose that there are N firms in the market. Suppose there is a flow arrival rate
γ0 of shoppers who visit all N firms. Assume that shoppers buy from firm i with probability D(pi , p−i ) and that this demand function is symmetric, twice-differentiable, weakly
decreasing in pi , and weakly increasing in p−i . Assume also that the set of feasible prices
is a compact interval so argmaxp pD(p, p−i ) always exists. As in the monopoly model, we
are interested in modeling a firm endowed with a single unit of the good to sell that faces a
dynamic waiting-time problem. In the oligopoly case it is natural that the dynamic problem would have a time-varying component: a firm should anticipate that competition will
become more and less intense as additional sellers enter and current sellers sell their goods.
Optimal pricing in such a setting could be an interesting topic to explore, but in this paper
we consider a simpler stationary model: we assume that whenever one of a firm’s rivals
makes a sale, the rival is instantaneously replaced by an identical entrant.10 Profits in the
dynamic model then relate to those of the static model as in the monopoly case:
π(pi , p−i ) =

γ0 pi D(pi , p−i )
.
r + γ0 D(pi , p−i )

In the static version of this model with a nonzero marginal cost c, it is common to
assume that demand is such that π s (p) = (pi − c)D(pi , p−i ) has increasing differences in pi
and p−i . The game is then one with strategic complements: best response correspondences
BRi (p−i ) are increasing, and results on supermodular games imply that a symmetric pure
10

Our model can also be thought of as a model of boundedly rational sellers who are able to estimate the
expected rate of arrival of consumers willing to buy from them at p given the observed set of rival prices
(which is probably already unrealistically demanding), but who are not sophisticated enough to be able to
assign probabilities to future paths of rival prices and integrate expected demand over all such paths.

10

strategy Nash equilibrium always exists (Milgrom and Roberts, 1990). These results would
carry over to our dynamic model.
Proposition 5 Suppose π s (p) = (pi − c)D(pi , p−i ) has increasing differences in pi and p−i
when pi > c. Then, best response correspondences in the the dynamic oligopoly model are
weakly increasing, and a symmetric pure strategy Nash equilibrium exists.
Remarks:
1. As in the monopoly model, equilibrium prices in the full information oligopoly model
are increasing in the arrival rate γ0 . Each individual best response is increasing in γ0
by the same argument as in the monopoly case. And then the comparison of equilibria
follows as in Milgrom and Roberts (1990). The static oligopoly model corresponds
to γ0 = 0, so this implies that prices in the dynamic oligopoly model are higher than
those in the static model.
2. A more precise statement of the previous remark is that the set of Nash equilibrium
prices increases in γ0 in the strong set order. The dynamic oligopoly model may have
multiple equilibria even when the static model has an unique Nash equilibrium. For
example, in a duopoly model with Di (p1 , p2 ) = 19 (1 − pi + 32 p−i ), the static (γ0 = 0)
model has p∗ = 2 as its unique symmetric PSNE, whereas the dynamic model with
γ0 /r = 1 has both p∗ = 4 and p∗ = 10 as symmetric PSNE. Intuitively, the dynamic
effect creates an additional complementarity between the firms’ prices: when firm 2’s
price increases, firm 1’s opportunity cost of selling the good increases, which provides
an additional motivation for increasing p1 .
3. Although it is common to assume that demand is such that (p − c)D(pi , p−i ) has
increasing differences, it is implausible that the assumption would hold at all price
levels. For example, the assumption is globally satisfied in the linear demand case
Di (pi , p−i ) = 1 − pi + ap−i , but assuming that this formula holds everywhere involves assuming that demand is negative for some prices.11 In such static models
it is common to modify the demand function in some cases, for example assuming
demand is zero whenever the formula gives a negative answer. The modifications
only affect cases that are unimportant so the equilibrium set is unchanged and best
11

Prices for which demand is greater than one are also inconvenient for our interpretation of demand
as a probability of purchase, but this can often be dealt with by scaling demand down by a constant and
increasing all arrival rates by the same constant.

11

responses remain upward sloping. Similar modifications should also typically produce
a more plausible dynamic oligopoly model without affecting the equilibrium or the
best response functions. But the modified models will not globally have the increasing
differences property.
In practice, there is a great deal of price dispersion in markets for used books (and other
items). The most common approach to explain such dispersion in the IO theory literature
is to assume that some consumers are not fully informed about prices.12 A simple way
to incorporate a similar mechanism in the above framework is to consider a hybrid of the
monopoly and full-information oligopoly models above and the gatekeeper model of Baye
and Morgan (2001). In particular, let us assume that there are N + 1 populations of
consumers. There is a flow with arrival rate γ0 of shoppers who visit all N online firms.
And for each i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }, assume there is a flow with arrival rate γi of nonshoppers
who visit only firm i. Assume that nonshoppers again buy from firm i with probability
Dm (pi ) ≡ 1 − F (pi ) as in the monopoly model. Assume that shoppers buy from firm i with
probability D(pi , p−i ) as in the full information oligopoly model. So, in other words, online
stores have a flow of consumers for whom they are effectively monopolists, the nonshoppers,
and a flow of consumers for whom they are effectively oligopolists competing with other
stores carrying the same title, the shoppers. We treat offline stores as only having a flow
of nonshoppers.
Again, we assume each firm that makes a sale is immediately replaced by an identical
entrant. Expected firm profits can then be calculated just as in the monopoly model:
πi (pi , p−i ) =

pi (γi Dm (pi ) + γ0 D(pi , p−i ))
r + γi Dm (pi ) + γ0 D(pi , p−i )

For the reason noted in the final remark after Proposition 5, this objective function would
not be expected to satisfy increasing differences at all prices. And here the departures are
consequential: the model will not have a pure strategy Nash equilibrium for some parameter
values. Intuitively, if the oligopoly demand function is very price sensitive and two firms
have nearly identical γi , then there cannot be an equilibrium where both firms set nearly
identical high prices because each would then like to undercut the other. There also cannot
be an equilibrium with nearly identical low prices because the firms would then gain from
jumping up to the monopoly price to exploit their nonshoppers. For other parameters,
however, there will be a pure strategy equilibrium in which firms with more nonshoppers
12

Among the classic papers in this literature are Salop and Stiglitz (1977), Reinganum (1979), Varian
(1980), Burdett and Judd (1983), Stahl (1989).

12

set a higher price. This will occur when the oligopoly demand is less price sensitive, the
shopper population is relatively small, and/or when arrival rates γi of nonshoppers are
farther apart.
When a pure strategy Nash equilibrium exists, the equilibrium prices p∗i will satisfy the
first-order conditions which can be written as:
0 = rp∗i γi Dm 0 (p∗i ) + rγi Dm (p∗i ) + γi2 Dm (p∗i )2
∂D ∗ ∗
(p , p ) + rγ0 D(p∗i , p∗−i ) + γ02 D(p∗i , p∗−i )2
+ rp∗i γ0
∂pi i −i
+ 2γ0 γi Dm (p∗i )D(p∗i , p∗−i ).
Note that the first line of this expression is γi , the nonshopper arrival rate, times the
expression from the monopoly first-order condition. If the monopoly demand function is
single peaked, it is positive for p < pm and negative for p > pm . The second line of
the FOC is γ0 , the shopper arrival rate, times the first-order condition from the oligopoly
model in which all consumers are shoppers. When the shoppers-only oligopoly game has
single-peaked profit functions and increasing best responses, this term will be positive for
the player i setting the lowest price pi if pi is less than the lowest equilibrium price of the
full-information oligopoly game. The third term is everywhere positive. Hence, when the
monopoly price pm is above the equilibrium price in the shoppers-only oligopoly model, all
solutions to this N + 1 population model will have firms setting prices above the shoppersonly oligopoly level.
Roughly, one can think of the solution as being that firms with γi large relative to γ0
(with many nonshoppers relative to shoppers), will set prices close to pm (γi ).13 Meanwhile,
firms with γi small will set prices somewhat above shoppers-only oligopoly level both because of the third term in the FOC and because some of their rivals are mostly ignoring
the shopper population and pricing close to pm (γ−i ).
Note that the mechanism behind the price dispersion is somewhat different from that of
Baye and Morgan’s (2001) gatekeeper model. In Baye and Morgan’s model price dispersion
is a mixed strategy outcome made possible by the fact that there is a positive probability
that no other firms will be listed with the clearinghouse. We have modified the model in two
ways to get dispersion as a pure strategy phenomenon: we add product differentiation in
the shopper segment to eliminate the discontinuity in demand; and we add exogenous firm
heterogeneity (in the consumer arrival rates) to make asymmetric pricing natural. Given
13

Prices may be lower than pm (γi ) because of the oligopoly demand, but may also be higher because the
shoppers also constitute an increase in the arrival rate.

13

that arrival rates can be thought of as creating different opportunity costs of selling the
good, the model can be thought of as more akin to that of Reinganum (1979) which first
generated dispersed price equilibria via heterogeneous costs.

2.3

A numerical example

Figure 1 illustrates how one might think of the difference between offline and online prices in
light of this model. We think of prices as differing because of two effects. First, differences
in the flow of nonshoppers may make online monopoly prices higher than offline monopoly
prices.14 Second, online prices will be pulled down by the competition effect as firms
(especially those with low arrival rates of nonshoppers) compete to attract the shopper
population.
Shift in Monopoly Price Distribution

Addition of Shopper Population
3

2

2
Density

Density

3

1

1

0

0
1

1.5

2

2.5

3

1

1.5

Price
Monopoly (v=1)

2

2.5

3

Price
Monopoly (v=1.25)

Monopoly (v=1.25)

Monopoly + Shoopers (v=1.25)

Figure 1: Numerical example: Effects of increasing valuations and adding shoppers
The left panel of Figure 1 illustrates the first effect. The thinner dashed line graphs the
distribution of offline monopoly prices for one specification of the demand/arrival process.
Each consumer j arriving at firm i is assumed to get utility 1 − pi + ij if he purchases
from firm i and 0j if he does not purchase, where the ij are independent type 1 extreme
value random variables. The heterogeneous arrival rates γi , which lead firms to set different
prices, are assumed to be exponentially distributed with mean 1. The thicker solid line is
the distribution of monopoly prices that results if we shift the distribution of consumer
valuations upward: we assume the utility of purchasing is now 1.25 − pi + ij . We think
14

We can decompose this effect into two components. Selection into searching may result in the distribution of searchers’ values being higher, and the reduced cost of searching may make the customer arrival
rate higher.

14

of this as the online monopoly price distribution. The gap between the two distribution
illustrates how the higher valuations in the online population would lead to higher prices if
retailers retained their monopoly power.
The right panel illustrates the competition effect. The thick solid line is the online
monopoly distribution from the left panel. The thick dashed line is the distribution of
equilibrium prices in a nine-firm oligopoly model.15 Each firm in this model faces a nonshopper arrival process identical to the online monopoly process. But in addition there is
also a population of shoppers who arrive at Poisson rate γ0 = 2, see the prices of all firms,
and buy from the firm that provides the highest utility if it is greater than the utility of
the outside good (with random utilities as in the online monopoly model). Note that the
competition effect (the difference between the thick solid blue and thick dashed red lines)
is different at different parts of the distribution. There is essentially no competition effect
on the upper part of the distribution: firms with high nonshopper arrival rates essentially
ignore the shopper population.16 But at the lower end of the distribution it is powerful and
oligopoly prices are substantially below monopoly levels: firms with low nonshopper arrival
rates compete aggressively for shoppers.
The comparison between the the light gray line and the dark dashed red line illustrates
how the two effects in combination increase price dispersion. The match quality effect
pushes up the high end of the price distribution. Meanwhile the competition effect pulls
down (or at least offsets some increases in) the lower tail.

3

The Market for Used Books

In this section we provide some background on the used book market and discuss more
nuanced predictions of our theoretical model in this context that we will examine in section
5 to assess its applicability.

3.1

Background

Our analysis of the used book market will focus on the run-of-the-mill titles that for many
years lined the shelves of physical used bookstores. It includes biographies, literary fiction,
detective novels, histories, former best sellers, and a wide variety of others, most of which
15

To generate this figure, we repeatedly took nine independent draws from the assumed distribution of
nonshopper arrival rates and solved for the pure strategy equilibrium prices. The graphed distribution is a
kernel smoothing of the prices obtained from many such draws.
16
Online oligopoly prices are actually slightly higher than the online monopoly prices due to the extra
shopper demand.

15

were out of print. Many used book dealers began also selling online in the early to mid
1990’s. In that pre-Google era, however, it was probably unlikely that a consumer looking
for an uncommon title could find a copy just by typing the name into a search engine. In
the second half of a 1990’s a number of sites including AbeBooks, Alibris, Biblio, Bibliofind,
and Bookfinder pursued the business model of aggregating listings and making referrals.
AbeBooks, which initially just aggregated listings of physical stores in Victoria B.C., grew
to be the largest aggregator (in part by acquiring Bookfinder) with 20 million listings by
2000 and 100 million by 2007. Alibris is of comparable size. Amazon acquired AbeBooks
om 2008. Initially, this had little impact as Amazon left AbeBooks to operate as it had. But
in 2010 Amazon launched a program to have AbeBooks listings also appear underAmazon’s
“buy used” button. This may have substantially increased the number of consumers who
viewed aggregated listings.
People find used books online in multiple ways, which we think fit well with the model’s
assumption that there are both “shoppers” and “nonshoppers”. Shoppers would include
both regular purchasers of used books familiar with Abebooks and Alibris and those who
search on Amazon and click on a buy used link. Such customers will usually find a list of
merchants offering the book ordered on the shipping-inclusive price. Others look for books
via a variety of other methods. Customers who go directly to their favorite online used
bookstore would be most similar to the nonshoppers in our model.17 The behavior of the
many consumers who type a book’s title into Google is probably also fairly well described
by our nonshopper model. For example, figure 2 shows the top part of the page returned
when we searched for one of the books in our sample using both the first part of the book’s
title and the phrase “used book”. Some consumers might be led by the first two links to
become searchers and look on AbeBooks or Amazon. But some others would just buy copy
prominently displayed in the Thrift Books ad, figuring that $5.69 is a fair price and they
have better things to do than engage in a search odyssey to try to save a dollar or two. And
others who are comfortable with eBay would presumably click on the bottom organic link
to buy the copy that AwesomeBooks is selling through eBay. Note that the nonshopper
channels will naturally lead to different stores having different arrival rates: some stores
will have many more repeat customers than others; and some are much more likely than
others to appear near the top of a Google search for a particular title.
Several features of the used book market make it attractive as a setting in which to
17
According to Alexa.com’s traffic estimator Thriftbooks.com is among the 4000 sites most visited by US
consumers and Powells.com and Betterworldbooks.com are both among the top 20,000.

16

Figure 2: A sample Google search for a used book
study the effect of the Internet on match-quality markets. First, books are well-defined
products and AbeBooks scale makes it feasible to find the prices at which thousands of
different sellers are (or are not) offering each product. Second, demand will naturally differ
for different types of books, allowing us to examine cross-sectional predictions of our model.
Third, Amazon’s incorporation of the AbeBooks listings presumably increased the number
of searchers in the market, which provides us with an opportunity to also examine crosstime predictions of the model. Finally, we think the market is of interest both because its
experience may be shared by many other markets for collectibles and similar items, and
in its own right because it was one of the earliest markets to thrive on the Internet and
because Amazon’s entry raises questions of potential regulatory concern.
One set of books that we will include in our cross-sectional analysis is books that are of
“local interest”. Some examples in our sample are the short story collection, Christmas in
Georgia, a history book by a Boston College professor emeritus, Boston Catholics: A History
of the Church and Its People, and Indiana native Booth Tarkington’s novel The Turmoil.
We think these books could be interesting to analyze because physical used bookstores may
have already been very well positioned to match such books with high willingness-to-pay
owners, and, therefore, there may be little added benefit from listing many such books on
the Internet. One instructive example is The Mount Vernon Street Warrens: A Boston
Story, 1860-1910. Beacon Hill’s narrow cobbled streets flanked by 19th century row houses
17

attract tourists as well as well-heeled and history conscious homeowners. It seems plausbile
that someone who sees this book on a used bookstore shelf shortly after having walked
down Mount Vernon Street might decide that reading the book would be an enjoyable way
to learn more about the area’s history and have a high willingness to pay. Given that the
book achieved limited commercial success–it has just a single review on Amazon–it seems
likely that there are few consumers searching directly for it on the Internet. Moreover, even
if the consumer in our example did find the book via an Internet search, the Publishers
Weekly review,
The fortune of the Warren family . . . enabled five siblings to grow up in the
elite society of Boston’s Beacon Hill in the early 1900s. In telling the stories of
those children who became notable for eccentricity and philanthropy, Green . . .
focuses on Ned Warren, a homosexual and mover in the international movement
of aestheticism, who was determined to lead a “grand but blighted life.” . . .
This somewhat jumbled tale of a family’s sundering through greed and suicide
is enlivened with anecdotes . . ..
might well have convinced him or her that some other book might make for lighter reading.
Another cross-sectional difference is that some books are much more popular than others. A critical feature of our opening anecdote about searching for a book on the pharmaceutical industry is the book’s obscurity. If instead the book was Michael Dibdin’s 1994
detective novel, Dead Lagoon, or Ron Chernow’s 2004 best-selling inspiration for the Hamilton musical, Alexander Hamilton, the story would have ended differently. It would not be
so unlikely to find the book at any random used bookstore and, futhermore, many, many
copies would be available online, resulting in a completely different degree of competition
for that title. Also, willingness to pay would be different – if the cheapest available used
copy was still $20, the story might have ended instead with a recognition that the paperback
was still in print and cheaply available on Amazon, or perhaps with a decision to instead
choose among the many other used detective novels available for a dollar or two.

3.2

Testable implications of our model

Our model provides a very simple potential explanation for the facts we began with. That
online prices are higher than offline prices can be explained as a consequence of the Internet
having boosted customer flows. And online price dispersion can a consequence of the
different stores’ facing different consumer arrival rates (due to asymmetric prominence,

18

etc.), with the lower tail also pulled down by the presence of a shopper population. But, of
course, these facts could also be explained in other ways. In this section we discuss several
more nuanced implications of the model that can be examined to help assess its relevance
to the used book market.
To begin consider the comparison between offline and online price distributions. In
the model we would think of this as comparing the light gray and the thick dashed red
lines in the right panel of Figure 1. The offline world where prices differ only because
different stores have different arrival rates would correspond to the light gray line. The
online world where arrival rates are higher, but firms also are in competition for shoppers
would correspond to the red line. Two differences between the curves reflect effects that
should be found robustly across parameter values. First, we would expect to see more
high prices online than offline because a more favorable nonshopper arrival process pushes
prices up and the competition effect is negligible at the high end of the price distribution.
Second, the online price distribution would be expected to be more dispersed than the
offline price distribution because the competition effect pulls down prices at the low end of
the distribution while having little effect on the upper tail. These effects are summarized
in the following prediction:
Prediction 1: The online price distribution should be more dispersed and have more
mass in the upper tail than the offline price distribution.
We noted above that we think there may be two important differences between standard
used books and those that are of “local interest.” Local interest books may already have
high arrival rates of high-value consumers at physical bookstores. And listing such a book
online may do little to boost the arrival rate of high willingness-to-pay consumers. This
leads to our second prediction:
Prediction 2: Offline prices should be relatively high for local interest books. Offline
prices for these books may have some similarities to online prices for standard titles. The
offline-online price gap should be smaller for local interest titles than for standard titles.
We would put our comments about popular books in the context of our model in two
ways. First, it may be that popular titles tend to be more substitutable across titles
(think detective novels or romance novels). Even if this is not the case, the availability of
other outside options (including in-print paperbacks), would result in the distribution of

19

valuations for used copies of many popular books to have thinner upper tails than do the
distributions for more unusual books. Recall, that the effect of an increase in the consumer
arrival rate on prices is smaller when the distribution has a thinner upper tail. Second,
popularity will imply that the books are available from a larger number of online sellers,
which will make the competition effect more powerful. The combination leads to our third
prediction:
Prediction 3: The online-offline price gap should be smaller for popular books. The
upper tail of the online price distribution should be thinner.
Finally, recall that Amazon incorporated AbeBooks’s listings under its “buy used”
button between 2009 and 2012. In terms of our model, this could be captured by assuming
that the size of the searcher population increased between the two dates. The right panel of
Figure 1 illustrated the potential effect of a similar change, involving introducing a shopper
population where there had not been one. Increasing the size of the shopper population
should have a similar effect, pulling down the lower end of the price distribution (because
firms with few nonshoppers focus on competing for the shoppers) but leaving the upper
part of the distribution largely unchanged (because firms with many nonshoppers prefer
selling to them at high prices to setting prices low enough to be competitive in the shopper
submarket). This leads to our fourth prediction:
Prediction 4: The 2012 online price distribution should include more listings at very
low prices than the 2009 online price distribution. The upper tails of the 2009 and 2012
distributions, however, should be similar.

4

Data

Our dataset construction began with a sample of books found at physical used book stores
in the spring and summer of 2009. One of the authors and a research assistant visited
three physical used book stores in the Boston area, one store in Atlanta, and one store in
Lebanon, Indiana, and recorded information on a quasi-randomly selected set of titles. The
information recorded was title, author, condition, type of binding, and the presence of any
special attribute, such as author’s signature.
We then collected online prices, shipping charges, and conditions for the same set of
titles from www.AbeBooks.com at three points in time: first in the fall of 2009, then in

20

November of 2012, and again in January of 2013.18 In most of our analyses we will use a
price variable defined as listed price plus shipping charges minus two dollars to reflect the
money received by the seller from the sale (with $2 being a rough estimate of the actual cost
to the seller of shipping the book). The online collection was restricted to books with the
same type of binding as the offline copy. For most of the titles the online data include the
complete set of listings on www.AbeBooks.com.19 But for some titles with a large number
of listings we only collected a subset of the listings.20
Most of our analyses will be run on the set of 335 titles that satisfy three conditions:
the copy found in a physical bookstore was not a signed copy, at least one online listing
was found in 2009, and at least one online listing was found in November of 2012. We will
often divide the sample into three subsamples which we refer to as “popular”, “nonpopular
local interest,” and “standard” titles. We classify titles as popular if the number of copies
found in our 2009 online search is at least fifty. Examples include Chernow’s Alexander
Hamilton, the detective novel Dead Lagoon, and Jeff Smith’s cookbook The Frugal Gourmet.
Paperback versions of the first two were still available new on Amazon in 2012 whereas the
latter was out of print. We intentionally oversampled books of “local interest,” which we
define to include histories of a local area, novels set in the local area, and books by authors
with local reputations. Most local interest books were drawn from shelves labeled as being
of local interest in the bookstores, but some were swept up in our general collection and may
be “displaced” local interest books that are of interest to some very distant location. For all
local interest books we constructed a measure of distance between the locus of interest and
the particular bookstore. For example, if a history of the state of Maine were being sold in a
Cambridge, Massachusetts bookstore, the distance measure would take on the value of the
number of miles between Cambridge and Maine’s most populous city, Portland. Finally,
we refer to books which are neither poplar nor of local interest as standard titles. Many of
these books never achieved much commercial success and have been out of print for some
time.
18
The latter two data collections were primarily conducted on November 3, 2012 and January 5, 2013,
respectively.
19
By 2012, new copies of some formerly out-of-print books had again become available via print-on-demand
technologies. We remove any listings for new print-on-demand copies from our 2012 and 2013 data.
20
In the 2009 data collection, we collected every nth listing if a title had more than 100 listings, with n
chosen so that the number of listings collected would be at least 50. In the 2012 and 2013 collections we
collected all listings if a title had at most 300 listings, but otherwise just collected the 50 listings with the
lowest shipping-inclusive prices plus every 5th or 10th listing thereafter.

21

4.1

Summary statistics on title-level data

Table 1 reports summary statistics describing offline and online prices.21 The average
offline price (in 2009) of the books in our sample is $11.29. In 2009 the average across the
same titles of the lowest online price for each title is a little lower at $9.27. Statistics on the
median and maximum online price give some sense for the magnitude of the price dispersion
in the data. The average across titles of the within-title median price, $17.77, is almost
twice as high as the average of the minimum prices, and the most expensive online copy
is often very expensive. Statistics on the 2012 online price distributions are similar,with
perhaps a little more dispersion. To give a sense of where each offline price would rank in
the online price distribution for each title, we constructed the variable PlaceInDistribution
giving the fraction of 2009 online listings for each title which are at prices below the price
of the copy found in a physical store. The mean for this variable, 0.26, indicates that on
average, 2009 offline copies were around the 26th percentile of the contemporaneous online
price distribution.
The table gives a few additional statistics for two subsamples. 100 of the 355 titles are
“standard” titles. Like the pharmaceutal book in our opening story, many are somewhat
obscure. In the current online world, saavy consumers interested in any of them will usually
have a number of options. On average we found 17.4 online listings in 2009 and 22.7 online
listings in 2012. But given the number of bookstores in the US, these numbers suggest that
it would be quite unlikely that one would come across any one of them in any particular
online or offline bookstore. Our sample contains 158 nonpopular local interest titles. They
are, if anything, slightly more obscure on average with averages of 14.5 online listings in 2009
and 17.5 online listings in 2012. Note that 20% of these books were found at a bookstore
that is more than 100 miles from their location of interest. One statistic on the 77 popular
titles is that the mean number of online listings in 2012 was 204.22 The markets for these
titles are quite different.
21
To avoid having our statistical analyses influenced by a small number of listings at extremely high (and
probably mostly unrealistic) prices, we drop all listings with prices above $500 in our comparisons of means,
variance decompositions, regression analyses, and these summary statistics. In 2009 this drops 19 listings
with prices ranging up to $8252. In 2012 it drops 34 listings with prices ranging up to $17,498. We do
include these listings in the rightmost bar showing the number of listings priced above $200 when we present
price histograms.
22
Due to our data collection protocol we cannot provde a comparable statistic for 2009.

22

Variable

Mean St Dev Min
Title-Level Variables
Full Sample: 335 Titles
OfflinePrice09
11.29
21.11 1.00
MinOnlinePrice09
9.27
22.34 1.89
MedOnlinePrice09
17.77
23.86 2.95
MaxOnlinePrice09
67.16
83.04 5.00
PlaceinDist09
0.26
0.28
0
MinOnlinePrice12
8.63
21.34 1.01
MedOnlinePrice12
17.64
25.46 1.95
MaxOnlinePrice12
78.77
94.07 2.05
Standard Subsample: 100 Titles
NumberListed09
17.41
11.99
1
NumberListed12
21.15
29.52
1
Nonpopular Local Interest: 158 Titles
NumberListed09
14.53
11.36
1
NumberListed12
17.49
34.33
1
Over100Miles
0.20
0.40
0
Popular Subsample: 77 Titles
NumberListed12
204.35 269.35
41
2012 Online Listing-Level Dataset
5284 Listings for 318 Titles
Price12
13.90
36.06 1.01
Disappear
0.15
0.36
0
Condition
3.97
1.12
1
StoreTitles
23.06
26.42
1
Table 1: Summary statistics

23

Max

250.00
351.50
351.50
495.50
1
302.00
302.00
498
49
270
49
380
1
1608

1256
1
7
108

4.2

“Quantity” data

We have no sales data, but we did obtain a proxy for sales based on our gathering of
data on multiple dates close together in 2012 and 2013: whether a listing in our November
2012 sample has disappeared by January of 2013.23 Of course this measure is only a
proxy and probably overstates true sales because listings can be removed for reasons other
than a book being sold. For instance, the seller could have exited the AbeBooks platform
or just stopped listing this particular copy. In the interest of interpreting this measure
conservatively, we treat our Disappear variable as missing in several circumstances where
we think it is particularly likely to have reliability problems.24 The resulting dataset has a
total of 5284 listings across 318 titles.
The bottom panel of table 1 provides summary statistics on this subset of our listinglevel data. The average price of the listings in this sample is $13.90. The mean disappearance rate is 15.2%. This should be thought of as the sum of true sales over a two
month period (which includes the Christmas season) for listings which are among the 50
lowest-priced listings for their title plus the rate at which such titles are removed without
being sold. Listings can be described as being in one of seven conditions, but in practice
this has limited variation: 85% of the listings are within one step of “very good”.25 About
half of the roughly 2000 online retailers in our data have listings for just one or two of our
318 titles. They account for 18% of the listings in our dataset. At the other extreme, some
sellers apparently have many, many listings: one has listings for 108 of the 318 titles in our
dataset and fifteen others have listings for at least 50. Given that we selected titles pseudorandomly, oversampled local interest titles, and have dropped the 20 titles with the largest
number of 2012 listings, these sellers must have enormous numbers of titles available.
To investigate whether the disappearance data may provide a reasonable proxy for demand, we used the data to estimate standard logit demand models. The first column of
23
Listings do not have a permanent identifier, so what we observe more precisely is whether the seller no
longer lists a copy of the same title in the same condition.
24
We treat the variable as missing in four circumstances. (1) If the listing was not unique by title-seller
in the 2012 data. (2) If the title was one of the 20 for which we collected only a subset of the listings in
2012/2013. (3) If the seller listed copies of three or more of the titles in our dataset in 2012 and all of
the seller’s listings were removed before the 2013 collection. (Of 203 sellers listing exactly three titles only
two removed two of their three listings but 14 removed all three so we presume most of the 14 are due to
sellers’ exiting the platform.) (4) Listings which were not among the 50 lowest priced listings for a title in
the 2012 data collection. (We worried that some high price listings might be due to something other than
sellers having a copy they wish to sell at the high price and thought other motives might overwhelm true
sales at such noncompetitive prices.) The fact that we drop data for 7% of the sellers with exactly three
listings could be thought of as an estimate of the background disappearance rate due to exit that might be
expected among sellers with one or two listings. Sales can also be underestimated if a seller has multiple
copies of a title in the same condition and only lists the second after selling the first.
25
We code poor as 1, fair as 2, and so on. The modal “very good” is 4.

24

Table 2 presents estimates of a logit model in which the probability that a listing will disappear is a function of the listing’s rank, price, condition, and some additional variables.26
The coefficients on a listing’s price and on its rank in a price-sorted list are both highly
significant. Together they indicate that disappearance displays the strong price-sensitivity
that one would expect of demand in this environment. For example, a seller that raised
its price from $4 to $5 and fell from first to third on the list would see its probability
of disappearance drop by over one third. The log(Rank) variable appears more important quantitatively than that price variable, which fits with a world where low-priced firms
usually sell to price-sensitive shoppers while more the sales of higher-priced firms are to
less price sensitve nonshoppers. The right panel reports similar estimates from a model
with title-fixed effects, dropping titles for which no or all listings sell. The estimates are
fairly similar with the price coefficient becoming somewhat larger and the rank coefficient
somewhat smaller.
Holding price fixed, listings that are in better condition are significantly more likely to
disappear. This also fits with expectations about demand. The maginitude of the condition
effect is not very large compared to the rank effects. It indicates that a “good” condition
copy ranked third would have about the same expected probability of disappearance as
a “very good” copy ranked fourth. The median price difference between the third- and
fourth-ranked listings is less than 50 cents. The two title-level controls, the lowest price at
which any copy of the tile is offered and the number of listings for the title (which we have
been taking as a proxy for popularity) both also have effects of the expected sign.
The final listing-level covariate, log(StoreTitles), which reflects the number of our 318
titles for which the seller is listing at least one copy, does not have the effect one would
expect in our fully rational model. By itself it might be expected to be a positive predictor of
demand – sellers with more listings could be websites with greater nonshopper traffic which
will sell more copies in equilibrium. But in our model price is supposed to be a sufficient
statistic for a store’s unobserved traffic level, in which case the variable would have no effect
in a regression that includes price. Two potential reasons for a departure in this direction
are that some small sellers might fail to live up to the standard of fully informed profitmaximizing behavior assumed by our model and not realize that they should be pricing
relatively aggressively given their low arrival rates; or that some large sellers may set lower
26

The regressions also included two unreported variables: a constant and an indicator for the condition
variable being missing. We construct the rank variable by sorting listings for each title on shipping inclusive
rank, but it need not correspond with how consumers would have seen the listings presented both because
we do not know how AbeBooks broke ties and because consumers can choose to sort on something other
than the default setting.

25

prices than the model implies because they have other (nonlisted) copies in inventory and
hence have a lower opportunity cost of making a sale than the model assumes.
Overall, we take this look at disappearance patterns to support our hope that disappearance can provide a useful proxy for demand.
Variable
log(Rank)
log(Price/MinPrice)
Condition
log(StoreTitles)
log(MinPrice)
log(TitleListings)
Title fixed effects
Number of obs.
Pseudo R2

Dependent Variable: Disappear
Est. St.Err Est.
St.Err
-0.43 (0.06) -0.28
(0.09)
-0.54 (0.10) -0.97
(0.14)
0.13 (0.04) 0.17
(0.04)
0.31 (0.04) 0.25
(0.04)
-0.51 (0.19)
0.24 (0.07)
No
Yes
5284
4332
0.141
0.157

The table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from logit regressions with an
indicator for whether a listing was removed between November 3, 2012 and January 5, 2013
as the dependent variable. The sample includes the (up to 50) lowest priced listings for 318
titles.
Table 2: Logit estimates of the listing disappearance process

5

Used Books: Facts and Tests of Model Predictions

The purpose of this section is two-fold: to present general descriptive evidence on prices
of used books and to perform reduced form tests of some more subtle predictions of our
models. The first subsection establishes the basic facts concerning price levels and price
dispersion offline versus online. The next four subsections roughly correspond to the four
sets of empirical predictions we enumerated earlier. The final subsection, a regression
analysis of offline-online price differences, can be thought of as providing significance tests
for some of the observations we make informally in the earlier subsections.

5.1

Basic facts

The introduction mentions a number of papers with somewhat counterintuitive findings
about what happens to prices when markets move online. First, previous research has
found that online markets continue to display substantial price dispersion. Second, previous
research has found some evidence that price levels are lower online than offline, but perhaps
not as much lower as some had expected. In this section we establish a similar dispersion

26

fact for the online market for used books. And we establish a more concrete and extreme
version of a stylized fact about price levels: online used book prices are higher on average
than offline used book prices, sometimes much higher. These facts will resonate throughout
the section, but we establish them first here in their most aggregated form.
The first row of Table 3 compares the mean of the offline prices with the average across
titles of the mean online price for each title.27 The fact that online prices are higher again
comes through clearly: the average online price is about twice as high.
2009 Offline Prices
Average price
10.60
Variance of prices (LHS)

281.14

2009 Online Prices
Average across titles of average price
Average within-title coefficient of variation
Average of within-title variance (RHS Term 1)
Variance of mean prices across titles (RHS Term 2)

Note: The table presents statistics on 2009 online and offline prices. All listings priced at
$500 or more are omitted and the set of titles is limited to those that had more than one
online copy in 2009.
Table 3: Comparison of Price Dispersion Offline and Online
The second row quantifies the observation that there is a great deal of price dispersion
online. The coefficient of variation of the set of prices at which a title is listed online
averages 0.72, i.e. the standard deviation is on average 72% of the title’s mean price.
We cannot directly compare offline and online price dispersion because our sample
contains just a single offline price for each title.28 Nonetheless, a simple calculation indicates
that there must have been substantially less within-title price dispersion offline. Suppose
that our offline prices, p1 , p2 , . . . , pN , are independent random draws from distributions
H1 , H2 , . . . , HN and that the distribution, Hi , of offline prices for title i has expectation
P
µi and variance σi2 . If we set p = N1 N
i=1 pi , then we would have a standard variance
decomposition:
E

N
1 X
(pi − p)2
N
i=1

where µ =

1
N

PN

i=1 µi .

!
=

N
1 X 2
1 X
σi +
(µi − µ)2 ,
N
N
i=1

i

The left column of the bottom row of the table indicates that the

LHS of this expression is 281 in our 2009 offline sample. Hence, the first term on the RHS,
27

For this calculation we omit nine titles for which we found only a single online price in 2009 and hence
cannot compute a within-title standard deviation.
28
Our data set has this structure out of necessity – many of our books are very obscure relative to the
size of a typical physical used bookstore. Even if we visited hundreds of brick-and-mortar book stores and
spent hours scanning the shelves of each of them, we probably would have failed to find another copy of
many of our titles.

27

20.30
0.72
621.84
670.81

1
N

2
i σi ,

P

must be smaller than 281 for offline listings and is probably substantially smaller

than this given that the online data suggest that the titles are quite different from each
other. The right column of the third row indicates that the average within-title variance in
the offline data is over 600. Hence, there was substantially less price dispersion offline than
online in 2009.

5.2

Offline and online prices in 2009: standard titles

In this section we examine offline and online prices for “standard” titles, which we define
to be titles that have no particular local interest and are not offered by sufficiently many
merchants to meet our threshold for being deemed “popular.” We find patterns that are
strikingly consistent with Prediction 1: the online price distribution has many more highpriced listings and online prices are much more dispersed.
We have 100 standard titles in our sample. Most are out of print. The mean number
of 2009 online listings for these books was 17.4. Our basic fact about online prices being
higher than offline prices is true to an extreme in the standard title subsample. The average
offline price for the standard titles in our sample is $4.27. The average across titles of the
average online price is 315% higher at $17.74.
Figure 3 provides a more detailed look at online vs. offline prices. The left panel contains
the distribution of prices at which we found these titles at offline bookstores. Twenty of the
books sell for less than $2.50. Another 74 are between $2.50 and $7.50. There is essentially
no upper tail: only 6 of the 100 books are priced at $7.50 or more with the highest being
just $20. The right panel presents a comparable histogram of online prices.29 The upper
tail of the online distribution is dramatically thicker: on average 27% of the listings are
priced at $20 or higher including 6% at $50 or more.30
The contrast between the upper tails is consistent with Prediction 1: the upper tail of
online price distribution should be thicker if online consumers arrive at a higher rate and/or
have valuations drawn from a higher distribution. The other part of prediction 1 – that
online prices should be more dispersed – is also very clear in the comparison. A comparison
of the left tails of the price distribution suggests that the competition effect is not strong
enough to make the online distribution have a thicker lower tail.
To provide a clearer picture of the lower-tail comparison, the left panel of figure 4
29
To keep the sample composition the same, the figure presents an unweighted average across titles of
histograms of the prices at which each title is offered.
30
To show the full extent of the distribution we have added three extra categories – $50-$100, $100-$200,
and over $200 – at the right side of the histogram. The apparent bump in the distribution is a consequence
of the different scaling.

28

Distribution of Offline Prices

Distribution of Online Prices
Standard Titles
45

40

40

35

35

20

20
0

50

45

40

35

0

20
0

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

0
15

5

0
10

10

5

5

10

30

15

25

15

25

20

20

15

25

30

10

30

5

Percent of listings

45

0

Percent of titles

Standard Titles

Price

Price

Figure 3: Offline and online prices for standard titles in 2009
presents a histogram of the P laceInDist variable. (Recall that this variable is defined as
the fraction of online prices that are below the offline price for each title.) The most striking
feature is a very large mass point at 0: for 54% of the titles, the price at which the book was
found in a physical bookstore was lower than every single online price! (This occurs despite
the fact that we had found on average 15.3 online prices for these 54 titles.) Beyond this,
the pattern looks roughly like another quarter of offline books are offered at a price around
the 20th percentile of the online price distribution and the remaining 20% spread fairly
evenly over the the upper 70 percentiles of the online distribution. Overall, the patterns
suggest that the match quality effect is much more important than the competition effect
for these titles.
Offline Prices Relative to Online Prices:
Local Interest Nonpopular Titles

50

20

10

Location of Offline Price in Online Price
Distribution

Location of Offline Price in Online Price
Distribution

Figure 4: Offline prices relative to online prices for the same title

29

0.
9

0.
7

0.
5

0.
9

0.
7

0.
5

0.
3

0

0.
1

al
l

0.
9

0.
7

0.
5

0.
3

0.
1

Location of Offline Price in Online Price
Distribution

20

10

0

0

30

0.
3

10

al
l

30

al
l

20

Percent of titles

30

40

Be
lo
w

Percent of titles

40

50

40

Be
lo
w

Percent of titles

50

Be
lo
w

Offline Prices Relative to Online Prices:
Popular Titles

0.
1

Offline Prices Relative to Online Prices:
Standard Titles

5.3

Offline and online prices for local interest titles in 2009

In this section we examine price distributions for local interest books. We note that the
offline prices for these titles look very different from those of other types of books and are
very much in line with our Prediction 2.
Recall that Prediction 2 was that offline prices for local interest books should be relatively high and that differences between the offline and online price distributions should
not be as pronounced. We argued that the highest-value match for a title like The Mount
Vernon Street Warrens: A Boston Story, 1860-1910 might well be a tourist who has just
walked into a Boston used bookstore looking for something to read that evening. Consistent with this presumption, we will show here that offline prices for local interest titles
look more like the online prices we saw in the previous section. Accordingly, offline stores
may already have been achieving levels of match quality comparable to what the Internet
makes possible for standard books, and the incremental gains from also listing books on
the Internet may not be so large.
Our sample contains 158 titles which we classified as being of “local interest” and which
did not meet our threshold for being labeled as “popular.” The mean offline price for these
titles is $18.86. Average online prices are again higher, but the proportional increase in
prices is much smaller: the mean across titles of the mean online price is $27.82. A nearly
50% increase is substantial, but much less than a 315% increase. Figure 5 provides striking
visual evidence of the predicted patterns. The distribution of offline prices in the left panel
looks very different from the the corresponding figure for standard titles (in the left panel
of Figure 3). Instead, the distribution shares several features with the distribution of online
prices for standard titles: the largest number of prices fall in the $7.50-$9.99 bin; and there
is a substantial upper tail of prices including 26 books with prices from $20 to $49.99,
and nine books with prices above $50. Comparing the left and right panels we see that
the distribution of online prices does again have a thicker upper tail, but, consistent with
Prediction 2, the online-offline difference is not nearly as large. The online distribution
also has a slightly higher percentage of listings at prices below $5, but there is nothing to
suggest that the competition effect is very strong.
The middle panel of figure 4 includes a histogram showing where in the online price
distribution for each title the offline copy falls. Here we see that about 30% of the offline
copies are cheaper than any online copy. For the other 70% of titles, the offline prices look
a lot like random draws from the online distribution, although the highest prices are a bit
underrepresented.
30

Distribution of Offline Prices

Distribution of Online Prices
Local Interest Nonpopular Titles
25

20

20

50

20
0

45

40

35

30

25

0

20
0

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

0
15

0
5

5

10

5

20

10

15

10

15

5

15

10

Percent of listings

25

0

Percent of titles

Local Interest Nonpopular Titles

Price

Price

Figure 5: Offline and online prices for nonpopular local interest titles in 2009

5.4

Offline and online prices for popular titles in 2009

We now turn to the final subsample, popular books. Again, we will show that onlineoffline differences and comparisons to the earlier data on standard titles generally appear
consistent with a match-quality model, Prediction 3, in particular.
Recall that we labeled 77 books as “popular” on the basis of there being at least 50
copies offered through AbeBooks. Our prior was that two differences between these books
and standard titles would be most salient. First, the greater number of shoppers (and
sellers) might make the competition effect more important. Second, the distribution of
consumer valuations might have less of an upper tail because consumers sometimes have
the option of simply buying a new copy of the book in paperback (and may, to the extent
that these titles are more substitutable across title, be quite willing to switch from one
detective novel to another). Prediction 3 was that as a result the growth of the upper tail
in an offline-online comparison, which was so dramatic for standard titles, should be less
pronounced here.
The left panel of Figure 6 shows that popular book prices are fairly similar to standard
book prices at offline bookstores: the mean price is $4.89 (whereas the mean price for
standard titles was $4.27). Fourteen percent of these books are selling for below $2.50 with
the vast majority (70%) being between $2.50-$7.49. None is priced above $18. Comparing
the offline prices with the online prices shown in the right panel of Figure 6 we once again
note that our most basic prediction about how offline and online prices should compare
(Prediction 1) is again validated: online prices for popular books are more dispersed and

31

have a thicker upper tail than offline prices.
Distribution of Offline Prices

Distribution of Online Prices
Popular Titles

40

40

35

35

30

30

15

Price

50

20
0

45

40

35

0

50

20
0

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

0
5

0
10

5

0

5

30

10

25

10

20

15

20

15

20

25

5

25

10

Percent of listings

Percent of titles

Popular Titles

Price

Figure 6: Offline and online prices for standard titles in 2009
Comparing this figure to the corresponding figure for standard titles (Figure 3) provides
support for Prediction 3. The upper tail of the online distribution is less thick than that
for standard titles: on average 18% of listings are priced above $20 whereas the comparable
figure for standard titles was 27%. And the online-offline difference is less dramatic.
One other difference between popular and standard titles is that the online distribution
for popular books has a larger concentration of low prices: about one-third of the listings
are priced below $5. The more pronounced lower tail is consistent with the hypothesis that
the competition effect may be more powerful for these titles.
The right panel of figure 4 shows that for about 20% of titles, the offline price we found
was below all online prices. This number is smaller for popular books then for the other two
types, but it is still a strikingly large number, given that each title had at least 50 online
listings. Meanwhile the remaining prices look like they are mostly drawn from the bottom
two-thirds of the online price distribution for the corresponding title. A comparison of the
left and right panels provides another illustration of the data’s consistency with prediction
3: the online-offline price gap is narrower here than it was for standard titles.

5.5

Online prices: 2009 and 2012

In this section we compare online prices from 2009 and 2012 and note changes in the price
distributions in line with Prediction 4.
Recall that prediction 4 was that the 2012 online price distributions may have more
low-priced listings than 2009 distributions, but a similar upper tail. The reason for the pre32

diction is that AbeBooks’ integration into Amazon, which may have substantially increased
the number of shoppers who viewed AbeBooks’ listings, occurred between 2009 and 2012.
In our theory section, specifically the right panel of Figure 1, we had noted that introducing
shoppers pulls down prices at the lower end of the distribution and may lead several firms
to price below the former lower bound of the price distribution. But in the upper part of
the distribution it should have almost no impact (as firms setting high prices mostly ignore
the shopper segment).
The upper left panel of figure 7 illustrates how prices of standard titles changed between
2009 and 2012. The gray histogram is the histogram of 2009 prices we saw previously in
Figure 3. The outlined bars superimposed on top of this distribution are a corresponding
histogram of prices from November 2012. At the low end of the distribution we see a
striking change in the distribution of the predicted type: there is a dramatic increase in the
proportion of listings below $2.50. Meanwhile (and perhaps even more striking), the upper
tail of the distribution appears to have changed hardly at all. We find this consistency
somewhat amazing given that there is a three-year gap between the collection of these
two data sets. The other two histograms in the figure illustrate the changes in the price
distributions for local interest and popular books. In each case we again see an increase
in the proportion of listings priced below $2.50. The absolute increase is a bit smaller in
the local interest case, although it is large in percentage terms given that almost no local
interest books were listed at such a low price in 2009. In both cases we also again see little
change in the upper part of the distribution. This observation is particularly true for the
popular histogram in which almost all of the growth in prices below $2.50 seems to come
out of the $2.50-to-$5 bin. We conclude that the pattern of the lower tail having been
pulled down while the upper part of the distribution changes less is consistent across the
different sets of titles. This is very much in line with what we would expect if Amazon’s
integration of used book listings increased the size of the shopper population.

5.6

Regression analysis of offline-online price differences

In the preceding sections we used a set of figures to illustrate the online-offline price gap
for standard, popular, and local interest books and noted apparent differences across the
different groups of books. In this section we verify the significance of some of these patterns
by regressing the P laceInDist variable on book characteristics.
The first column of Table 4 presents coefficient estimates from an OLS regression. The
second column presents estimates from a Tobit regression which treats values of zero and

33

Online Prices 2009 vs. 2012

Online Prices 2009 vs. 2012

Local Interest Nonpopular Titles
25

20

20

2009

Price

2009

2012

Price

2012

Online Prices 2009 vs. 2012
Popular Titles
25

Percent of listings

20

15

10

5

2009

Price

20
0

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

0

2012

Figure 7: Comparison of 2009 and 2012 online prices

34

50

20
0

45

40

35

30

25

0

50

20
0

45

40

35

30

25

20

0
15

0
5

5

10

5

20

10

15

10

15

5

15

10

Percent of listings

25

0

Percent of listings

Standard Titles

one as censored observations. With regard to our prediction that the Internet may not
have as large of an effect on the upper tail of the price distribution for popular books,
the coefficient estimate of 0.11 in the first column indicates that offline prices are indeed
higher in the online price distribution for popular titles. The estimate of the coefficient on
P opular from the Tobit model is larger at 0.21, i.e. offline prices are 21 percentiles higher
in the online distribution for popular books on average, and even more highly significant.

Variable
P opular
LocalInt × Close
LocalInt × F ar
Constant
Num. Obs.
R2 (or pseudo R2 )

Dependent variable: P laceInDist
OLS
Tobit
Coef.
SE Coef.
SE
0.11 (0.04)
0.21
(0.06)
0.17 (0.04)
0.27
(0.06)
0.08 (0.05)
0.17
(0.08)
0.16 (0.03) -0.01
(0.04)
335
335
0.07
0.06

Table 4: Variation in offline-online prices with book characteristics
Local interest books located in physical bookstores close to their area of interest may
have both a relatively high arrival rate of interested consumers and a relatively high
distribution of consumer valuations. Again, this should lead to relatively small onlineoffline price gap, i.e. to relatively high offline prices. The 0.17 coefficient estimate on the
LocalInterest × Close variable indicates that this is true for local interest books in used
bookstores within 100 miles of the location of interest. The Tobit estimate, 0.27, is again
larger and more highly significant.
One would not expect misplaced local interest books to benefit in the same way. Here,
the regression results are less in line with the model. In the OLS estimation the coefficient
on LocalInterest × F ar is about half of the coefficient on LocalInterest × Close, and the
standard error is such that we can neither reject that the effect is zero, nor that it is as
large as that for local interest books sold close to their area of interest. In the Tobit model,
however, the estimate is a bit more than 60% of the size of the estimated coefficient on
LocalInterest × Close and is significant at the 5% level. This suggests that a portion of
the differences between local interest and other books noted earlier may be due to other
unobserved book characteristics.

35

6

Welfare Estimates from a Structural Model

In our model the welfare effects of online sales depend on the various primitives and the
induced equilibrium effects: the change in consumer arrival rates; the change in valuation
distributions; the equilibrium delay before sales occur; etc. In this section we note that
features of our theoretical model make it amenable to structural estimation and develop a
version that can be estimated with our limited dataset. Our estimates suggest that Internet
sales led to substantial increases in both profits and consumer surplus.

6.1

A structural framework

In this section we discuss an empirical model closely related to the theoretical model of
section 2 and note that aspects of the model facilitate estimation.
Consider a model similar to that of section 2 in which Ik + 1 populations of consumers
shop for title k at stores i = 1, 2, . . . , Ik . One of these is a population of shoppers who
arrive at Poisson rate γ0k . Shoppers observe all prices and purchase from store i at the
instant at which they arrive with probability Dko (pik , p−ik ; Xik , Λ, ξik ), where Xik is a vector
of store-title characteristics, Λ is a vector of parameters to be estimated, and ξik is a vector
of unobserved characteristics that may vary at the title or title-store level. Assume that
the arrival rate γ0k and the unobserved ξik are draws from distributions that may depend
on the parameter vector Λ.
The other Ik populations are nonshoppers who do not compare prices across sellers:
nonshoppers from population i arrive at store i at Poisson rate γik . Suppose that they
m (p ; X , Λ, ξ ). The γ and ξ are unobserved
purchase upon arrival with probability Dik
ik
ik
ik
ik
ik

random variables with a distribution that may depend on Λ.
Assume that stores choose the prices that would maximize expected profits in a stationary dynamic model like that of section 2, i.e. assume that pik is chosen to maximize
πi (pik , p−ik ) ≡

pik (γik Dkm (pi ) + γ0k Dko (pik , p−ik ))
,
r + γik Dkm (pik ) + γ0k Dko (pik , p−ik )

where we have omitted the characteristics and parameters from the arguments for readability.
Suppose that we are given data on a set of titles k = 1, 2, ..., . . . , K. These data will take
two distinct forms. For some titles we observe just the vector of prices (p1k , p2k , . . . , pIk k ).
For other titles we observe both prices and an indicator for whether the title sells in store
i in a given time period: (p1k , . . . , pIk k , q1k , . . . , qIk k ). We wish to estimate the parameter
vector Λ.
36

One feature of this model that facilitates estimation is that the first order condition for
store i’s title k price to be optimal,
2
0 = rpik γik Dm 0 (pik ) + rγik Dm (pik ) + γik
Dm (pik )2
∂Do
2
+rpik γ0k
(pik , p−ik ) + rγ0k Do (pik , p−ik ) + γ0k
Do (pik , p−ik )2
∂pi
+2γ0k γik Dm (pik )Do (pik , p−ik ),

is a quadratic function of γik once one fixes γ0k , the parameters affecting Dm (pik ) and
Do (pik , p−ik ), and values for the random coefficients. Specifically, this FOC is of the form
2 + bγ + c = 0 for
aγik
ik

a(pk , Xik ; Λ, ξik ) = Dm (pik )2
b(pk , Xik ; Λ, ξik ) = rpik Dm 0 (pik ) + rDm (pik ) + 2γ0k Dm (pik )Do (pik , p−ik )
∂Do
2
c(pk , Xik ; Λ, ξik ) = rpik γ0k
Do (pik , p−ik )2
(pik , p−ik ) + rγ0k Do (pik , p−ik ) + γ0k
∂pi
Under some conditions (b > 0, c < 0), only the larger root of this quadratic will be positive.
When this occurs, we can calculate the conditional likelihood of each price observation pik
(conditional on the parameters, Xik , and random coefficients) by backing out the unique
γik which makes pik optimal and then computing the likelihood via
L(pik |γ0k , Xik , Λ, ξik ) = L(γik |γ0k , Xik , Λ, ξik ) ∂g

1

∂γ (γik )

,

where g is the best-response pricing function with g(γik ) = pik . By implicitly differentiating
the FOC we find that
∂g
2γik a(pik ) + b(pik )
.
(γik ) = − ∂a 2
∂b
∂c
∂γik
∂p γik + ∂p γik + ∂p
ik

ik

ik

Another aspect of our model that facilitates estimation is that the one-to-one correspondence between the observed pik and unobserved γik also makes it easy to account for
endogeneity when using the demand data.31 Given the observed pik and an inferred γik ,
the arrival rate of consumers who would buy book k from store i is
dik ≡ γ0k Do (pik , p−ik ) + γik Dm (pik )
Hence the probability that the book will be sold in a ∆t time interval is
E(qik |pik , p−ik , γ0k , Λ, ξik ) = 1 − edik ∆t .
31
Normally, one would need an instrument for pik in a logit demand model because of its correlation with
the unobserved product attributes. Here, we know the relationship between pik and the single unobservable
γik .

37

The joint likelihood of observed pairs (pik , qik ) is simply the product of this expression and
our earlier expression for the likelihood of pik .
Together these two observations suggest a simple procedure for simulated maximum
likelihood estimation. Given any potential parameter vector Λ, we take random draws for
the unobservables γ0k and ξik . Conditional on each random draw, we compute the joint
likelihood of each observed price vector (p1k , . . . , pIk k ) and of each observed price/quantity
vector (p1k , . . . , pIk k , q1k , . . . , qIk k ) using the above formulae. Summing across the draws
of the random coefficients gives the unconditional likelihood. Parameter estimates are
obtained by maximizing this likelihood over the parameter space.

6.2

Empirical specification

Given the limitations of our dataset, we implement a parsimonious version of the model
with a limited number of parameters and random unobservables. The model can match
the main features of the dataset and includes coefficients that give it some flexibility in
estimating most (but not all) of the underlying effects that matter most for welfare.
The rate γikt at which nonshoppers interested in title k arrive at store i in year t is
allowed to vary systematically with the title’s popularity, the year, whether store i is online
or offline, and whether the title is of local interest (for offline stores only). We assume that
it also varies idiosyncratically across store-titles – a store’s price is an increasing function
of the rate at which it is visited by nonshoppers, and it is through the random variation
in γik that the model can account for each observed price as a best response. Formally, we
assume that the arrival rate is
γikt =

γ ns
P opktP op
ns
γ g(ikt) P
ns z̃ikt ,
γP
op
P
op
`
`t

where the first term in this expression is a set of estimated fixed effects giving the mean
arrival rates for a group g(ikt) of store titles, the second term allows for the possibility that
the arrival rate at each online store may vary with the popularity of the title, and z̃ikt are
exponential random variables with mean 1 assumed to be drawn i.i.d. across store-titles
to create the heterogeneity in store-specific arrival rates. The fixed effects allow the mean
rate to vary depending on whether ikt belongs to one of four groups: 2009 offline standard,
2009 offline local interest, 2009 online, and 2012 online. The popularity term is intended
to reflect that there may be more people searching online for more popular titles, but that
the number of nonshoppers who end up at any one online store may also be reduced when
there are more stores offering the title that any given consumer might find via a Google
38

search or other means. We include it only for online stores, and take P opkt equal to the
number of online listings for title k in year t in our sample.
We assume that each nonshopper’s demand curves has the constant elasticity form.
Specifically, we assume that
m
Dkt
(pikt ) = δk p−η
ikt ,

where η is the price elasticity of demand which will be estimated and δk is an unobserved
demand shifter which will allow the model to account for heterogeneity across titles in
average price levels and in the fraction of listings which are sold. We assume the δk are
independent draws from a lognormal distribution with mean 1 and a variance σδ which is
to be estimated. In utility terms, our demand specification is equivalent to assuming that
a nonshopper j considering buying book k from store i gets utility

vjk − pik if he buys
,
uikj =
0
if he does not
where the vjk are heterogeneous across consumers and for title k are independent draws
1/η

from the density fk (v) = δk ηv −η−1 on [δk , ∞].

32

We similarly assume that the rate γ0kt with which shoppers interested in title k arrive
in year t and see all available online prices is the product of a year-specific fixed effect, a
popularity effect, and a title-level unobservable w̃kt :
γs

γ0kt

P opktP op
= γ st P
w̃kt .
s
γP
op
P
op
`
`t

Here, we estimate just two fixed effects, one for 2009 and one for 2012, and the coefficient
related to the effect of a title’s popularity on the searcher rate, γPs op , is unambiguously
expected to be positive because γ0kt is the total arrival rate of shoppers, not a per-listing
arrival rate. We assume that the w̃kt are gamma-distributed random variables with mean
s
1 and shape parameter γshape
.

We assume that shoppers have pure logit demands that do not vary over time:
c

o
Dkt
(pikt ; p−ikt )

e−αδk pikt
= −αδc p
.
P
e k 0kt + ` e−αδk p`kt

Here, α is a parameter to be estimated that will reflect consumer price senstivity when
choosing among listings for a title, c is a coefficient to be estimated which allows the
32
Note that we must have η > 1 for the monopoly price not to be infinite, and that the density justification
for the demand curve is only technically valid if the δk > 0 is such that that all observed prices are in the
support of the value distribution.

39

cross-listing price sensitivity to be higher or lower for titles that have higher nonshopper
demand. We parsimoniously introduce an outside option that is equally relevant across
titles by assuming that its “price,” p0kt , is ∆pout higher than the lowest price at which title
k is available online in year t and estimating a single parameter ∆pout . Note that in this
part of the specification we are not flexibly estimating an effect that is important to welfare:
the degree to which shoppers are willing to substitute between inside and outside goods.
We would like to have estimated a nested logit or some other such model, but found that
we did not have the power to estimate the relevant parameter with any precision. Given
this, we have chosen to just estimate the simple logit model, and then to make an ad hoc
adjustment when we compute welfare.33 Another limitation, driven by the fact that we
only have demand data for 2012 and not for 2009, is that we are assuming that the shopper
price sensitivity is the same in both years.34
The model as described above is (as are many structural models) somewhat heroic in
its reliance on firm optimization. In our case this would result in the model having trouble
fitting two types of behavior: it is hard to rationalize why any firm would list a price that is
much below the second-lowest price at which the same title is offered; and extremely high
prices can only be rationalized by the firms’ having unreasonably high customer arrival
rate. As noted earlier, our reduced form sales regressions also suggest that either small
or large sellers are not always pricing in a manner that is fully consistent with our model
assumptions. Accordingly, we allow for some degree of firm irrationality by assuming that
each firm chooses the optimal price with probability 1 − Rp and with the complementary
probability Rp instead chooses its price as an i.i.d. random draw from a Gamma distribution
with mean µR and shape parameter sR . Rp , µR , and sR are additional parameters to be
estimated.
We also remarked earlier that some books that disappear in between our 2012 and
2013 data collections disappear because they were sold, but others will disappear for other
reasons, e.g. they were listed by small firms that withdrew from the AbeBooks platform or
had their listing taken down for other reasons. To account for this, we assume that there is
a constant background disappearance rate Rq so that the total probability that a listing will
disappear in between the two periods is Rq + (1 − Rq )qikt , where qikt is the disappearance
probability calculated from the arrival/demand model. The background disappearance rate
33

As described below we assume that shopper valuations for inside versus outside goods have the same
distribution as that we have estimated for nonshoppers.
34
We also do not include book condition effects in the demand specification. Our reduced-form regressions
suggest that they are not large in magnitude, and in preliminary investigations we found that we could not
estimate these with any precision within our structural model.

40

Rq is another parameter to be estimated.
This specification yields a model with eighteen parameters to be estimated:
ns
ns
ns
ns
s
s
s
s
out , Rp , µR , sR , Rq ).
(γ ns
09,of,std , γ 09,of,local , γ 09,on , γ 12,on , γP op , η, σδ , γ 09 , γ 12 , γP op , γshape , α, c, ∆p

6.3

Estimates of arrival rates and demand

We estimate the model described above on a dataset containing 236 books which include
almost all titles in our “standard” and “nonpopular local interest” subsamples.35 We do
not include the “popular” titles because we worry that our quantity data is not sufficiently
reliable for many of them and that our model assumptions are not as appropriate.36 The
estimation roughly follows the simulated maximum likelihood procedure described above
with the integration over the unobservables dealt with via importance sampling as in Ackerberg (2009). Standard errors were obtained via a bootstrap approach. Appendix B provides
more details.
While the structural model is stylized, some of the estimated coefficients will provide
insights on the nature of demand in the market. Table 5 presents the complete set of
coefficient estimates, with coefficients related to the nonshopper arrival processes in the
top panel, followed by coefficients related to the shopper arrival process, followed by those
related to the departures we have allowed from full rationality.
Our most basic observation about the arrival rates at offline bookstores is that they are
quite low. The estimated arrival rate for a standard title at an offline bookstore is 0.65
customers per year. Given the estimated demand function D(p) = p−1.87 , each potential
customer who “arrives” would only be willing to buy the book even at a price of $5 with
probability 5−1.87 ≈ 0.05, so the arrival rate of customers willing to pay $5 or more is just
0.65 × 0.05 ≈ 0.03. This calculation suggests that copies of standard titles will typically sit
on shelves of offline bookstores for quite a number of years before being purchased. The
estimated parameters imply that the probability of selling a standard title within a year
at $10 is less than 1 percent. This is consistent with the model needing to rationalize that
almost all standard titles at offline bookstores are priced below $10. Arrival rates for local
interest titles are estimated to be about 90% higher than those for standard titles. We also
35

Within these subsamples we include all titles that had at least two listings priced at less than $50
successfully scraped from AbeBooks.com in the 2009 and 2012 online collections.
36
One difficulty is that some sellers will own multiple copies of highly popular books. We will miss sales
if such a seller makes a sale and subsequently relists another copy of the same title. It would also make
sellers’ opportunity costs different from what is assumed in the model. Also, in 2012/2013 we only collected
a subset of listings when the number of listings was very large. For such titles we will not know if a seller
who is seen in the 2012 collection but not in the 2013 collection removed a listing or simply was not included
in the second sample.

41

think these estimates are in line with our casual empiricism: books, especially unusual or
niche titles, do sometimes languish on the shelves of used book stores for years.
Estimated nonshopper arrival rates at online bookstores are substantially higher. In
2009 the estimated arrival rate at online stores is estimated to be over twenty times the
contemporaneous arrival rate at offline stores for standard titles. Nonshopper arrival rates
are then estimated to have declined by about one half between 2009 and 2012. Increased
use of online comparison tools following Amazon’s incorporation of AbeBooks could be
one factor that has reduced nonshopper arrival rates. Another factor that might lead to a
decline in nonshopper arrival rates on a per-seller basis is that the nonshoppers who are in
the market are being divided among a larger number of sellers: the number of listings in
the 2012 dataset is 13% larger.
Shopper arrival rates are substantial and appear to have increased substantially between
2009 and 2012. The estimates are estimates are that the shopper arrival rate was 5.6 per
year in 2009 and 14.9 per year in 2012. The estimated shopper demand function is such that
most shoppers who “arrive” will purchase a book from some seller. Hence, the parameter
estimates can be thought of as saying that the shopper population contributes substantially
to aggregate sales totals. The estimated price coefficient for the shoppers suggests that
consumer choice at this price comparison website is very price sensitive.
Note that one way in which the model is rationalizing the upper tail of prices in the online
data is by assuming that firms are choosing prices randomly with probability about onequarter, and that randomly-chosen prices chosen are drawn from a fairly diffuse distribution
√
with a mean of 15.3 and a standard deviation of 11.6 (≈ 15.25/ 1.73). As a result, the
model is much more conservative in its estimates of online welfare than it would have been
if we forced it to maintain the assumption that all sellers were pricing rationally as in
the theoretical model, which would have implied that high-priced firms must have very
high arrival rates. Intuitively, a feature of the data that helps drive the nonrational pricing
estimates is the contrast between estimated disappearance rates for high-priced listings and
the disappearance rates that would be expected under the arrival rates that are needed to
rationalize the prices.

6.4

Estimating welfare

In this section we discuss how we estimate welfare given the structural model estimates.
Given an estimated parameter vector Λ̂, the average per-listing welfare generated by the
listings for title k in year t can be calculated by integrating over the posterior distribution

42

Parameter
Nonshopper arrival and demand
Mean arrival 2009 offline standard title (γ ns
09,of,std )
Mean arrival 2009 offline local interest (γ ns
09,of,local )
Mean arrival 2009 online (γ ns
)
09,on
Mean arrival 2012 online (γ ns
12,on )
Popularity effect on arrival (γPnsop )
Nonshopper price elasticity (η)
StDev of title-level unobservable (σδ )
Shopper arrival and demand
Mean arrival 2009 online (γ s09 )
Mean arrival 2012 online (γ s12 )
Popularity effect on arrival (γPs op )
s
)
Arrival distribution shape parameter (γshape
Shopper price coefficient (α)
Outside option relative price (∆pout )
Effect of unobservable on price coefficient (c)
Departures from fully rational model
Probability of randomly chosen price (Rp )
Mean of randomly chosen price (µR )
Random price shape parameter (sR )
Background disappearance rate (Rq )

Est.

SE

0.65
1.25
14.90
7.95
-1.36
1.87
1.16

(0.17)
(0.37)
(3.61)
(2.00)
(0.19)
(0.08)
(0.05)

5.65
14.86
0.80
0.32
15.77
0.16
-0.91

(1.41)
(3.10)
(0.09)
(0.03)
(1.28)
(0.02)
(0.07)

0.26
15.25
1.73
0.07

(0.02)
(0.80)
(0.09)
(0.01)

Table 5: Estimates of structural model parameters

43

of the unobservables ξikt :
1
E(Wkt |Λ̂) =
Ikt

!

Z
E(CSkt |Λ̂, ξ) +
ξ

X

E(πit (pikt , p−ikt )|Λ̂, ξ) f (ξ|p1kt , . . . , qIkt kt }dξ,

i

where Ikt is the number of listings for title k, CSkt , is the total discounted consumer surplus
generated by the eventual sales of all the listings and πit is the discounted expected profit
that the firm listing copy i will earn.
The profit term can be computed using the same approach we use in estimating the
model. Given the estimated parameters, the price pikt , and values for the unobservables
γ0kt and δkt , firm i’s profits are
E(π(pikt , p−ikt )|Λ̂, ξ) =

pikt (γikt Dm (pikt ) + γ0kt Do (pikt , p−ikt ))
r + γikt Dm (pikt ) + γ0kt Do (pikt , p−ikt )

We numerically integrate this function over the unobserved δkt and γ0kt , treating the unobserved γikt in two ways. With some posterior probability the model estimates that firm
i chose its price rationally, in which case we plug in the backed out value of γ̂ikt that rationalizes the observed prices. And with the complementary probability (corresponding to
pikt having been randomly chosen) we simply plug in the estimated mean.
Consumer surplus from sales to nonshoppers can be calculated almost identically. Writing ti for the random variable giving the time when listing i will be sold it is
ns
) =
E(CSkt

X

=

X

=

X

E(e−rti )Prob{i sells to a nonshopper}E(v − pikt |v > pikt )

i

i

i

γikt Dm (pikt ) + γ0kt Do (pikt , p−ikt )
γikt Dm (pikt )
pikt
,
m
o
m
o
r + γikt D (pikt ) + γ0kt D (pikt , p−ikt ) γikt D (pikt ) + γ0kt D (pikt , p−ikt ) η − 1
γikt Dm (pikt )
pikt
,
m
o
r + γikt D (pikt ) + γ0kt D (pikt , p−ikt ) η − 1

We used a logit demand function because we could not practically estimate something
more flexible and felt that this functional form was a reasonable one for estimating how
many highly price-sensitive consumers are in the market and how price senstive they are.
It would not, however, be reasonable to estimate consumer surplus using the formula that
comes from the standard discrete-choice justification for logit demands: the justification assumes that consumers are equally willing to substitute between purchasing and not puchasing as between purchasing from any two retailers, which is clearly unreasonable in this
context. Accordingly, we instead estimate shoppers’ welfare gains by assuming that the
distribution of consumer surplus among shoppers who buy a book at a price of p matches

44

the estimated distribution of consumer surplus among nonshoppers who buy at that same
price. With this assumption,
s
E(CSkt
) =

X

=

X

=

X

E(e−rti )Prob{i sells to a shopper}E(v − pikt |v > pikt )

i

i

i

γ0kt Do (pikt , p−ikt )
pikt
γikt Dm (pikt ) + γ0kt Do (pikt , p−ikt )
,
m
o
m
o
r + γikt D (pikt ) + γ0kt D (pikt , p−ikt ) γikt D (pikt ) + γ0kt D (pikt , p−ikt ) η − 1
pikt
γ0kt Do (pikt , p−ikt )
,
m
o
r + γikt D (pikt ) + γ0kt D (pikt , p−ikt ) η − 1

Note that this assumption ignores the additional source of surplus in a standard discrete
choice model that comes from being able to purchase from a retailer for which a consumer
has a high idiosyncratic preference. We do not feel that this utility gain is at all important
in our application, and given the estimated parameters it would only be on the order of a
few cents if we did incorporate it.
Note that the equations above imply that our estimates will have the property that total
surplus is split between merchants and consumers in the ratio of 1 to

1
η−1 .

Hence, the esti-

mate of the producer-consumer split is coming from the single estimated parameter η. Note
also that our model for 2009 offline sales differs from the the simple isoelastic demand model
in which we showed that expected social welfare is equal to the average price only in its allowance that some prices may be set randomly rather than in a profit-maximizing way. The
models that we use for 2009 and 2012 online sales are more complicated multi-population
models in which estimates of social welfare are affected by various other estimated parameters as well.

6.5

Welfare gains from Internet sales

In this section we present profit and welfare estimates calculated using the above methodology. Among our main findings are that profits and consumer surplus resulting from online
sales are quite large and represent a substantial gain to market participants relative to the
offline market for used books. Welfare appears to have remained roughly constant between
2009 and 2012.
The first row of Table 6 presents estimates of the expected gross profit per listing. More
precisely, it is the average across titles of the average across listings of the estimated gross
profit given the listing’s price and our estimated demand parameters.37 The first column
indicates that average per-listing profits are estimated to have been fairly low in the offline
37

These are “gross” profits in that they do not account for the acquisition cost of the books being sold.

45

world, just $3.62 per listing. This is the product of the mean price for the titles, $11.95, and
a discount factor reflecting that sales occur probabilistically in the future. The estimated
discount factor of 0.30 reflects our estimates that many books would take many years to
sell.38
The second column gives comparable figures for the 2009 online listings. It illustrates
the dramatic increase in profits from moving online: per listing gross profits are estimated
to be over twice as large at $7.86. The higher gross profits reflect both higher average prices
and a higher estimated sales rate, which reduces the extent to which the eventual sales are
discounted. Note, however, that the ten to twenty times higher arrival rate does not reduce
the effective discount factor as much as a naive calculation would indicate: firms react to
the higher arrival rate by increasing prices and high-priced listings take longer to sell; and
the 5% discount rate we assume means that even selling a book after a decade is not such
a bad outcome.
The final column presents estimates for the 2012 listings. The estimates indicate that
per-listing profits are still well above the 2009 offline profit level, although not as high as the
2009 online profits. This reflects both that average prices have dropped and price-weighted
waiting times have (slightly) increased. The 2012 data contain more listings offered at
very low prices and it is primarily these titles that get purchased by the shoppers, so more
expensive books are predicted to take longer to sell in 2012 than they did in 2009.
Average value
per listing
Gross profit
Price × Discounting
Consumer surplus
Nonshoppers + Shoppers
Welfare

2009 offline
listings

2009 online
listings

2012 online
listings

$3.62
(0.27)

$7.86
(0.37)

$6.84
(0.41)

$11.95 × 0.30

$16.42 × 0.48

$14.87 × 0.46

$4.15
(0.35)

$9.01
(0.75)

$7.84
(0.70)

$4.15 + —–
$7.76
(0.53)

$7.74 + $1.27
$16.87
(0.94)

$6.50 + $1.34
$14.68
(0.95)

Table 6: Profit and welfare estimates
38

It is a price-weighted average so the more expensive (and faster to sell) local interest titles are getting
a higher weight in the calculation.

46

In thinking about the reliability of these estimates, it should be noted that the 2012
figures are estimated from better data – it is only in 2012 that we have a proxy for the rate
at which listings are sold. The 2009 vs. 2012 online comparison reflects both the observed
fact that average online prices were higher – recall that price distributions were otherwise
similar but 2012 had more low-priced listings – and the structural model’s inferences about
demand. The 2009 offline profit estimates are also made without a sales proxy. We know
prices were lower but are relying on the model’s inference that firms set lower prices because
they were facing lower demand.
The second row of the table presents estimates of consumer surplus. Consumers are
estimated to receive the majority of the joint surplus.39 Intuitively, the model rationalizes
the substantial price dispersion and patterns of demand with a distribution of valuations
that has a thick upper tail, This implies that the average consumer who purchases a book
receives a great deal of surplus. The bottom part of the panel provides a breakdown into
surplus accruing to shoppers and nonshoppers. This reflects both the relative number of
purchases which the model attributes to the two populations and its inference that shoppers
on average receive less surplus from their purchases. The latter effect is an implication of
the assumed constant elastic demand curve that would not be present with some other
specifications and could be leading us to underestimate shopper surplus.40
The bottom row of the table presents estimates of total welfare. Recall that our model
of the 2009 offline market departs from the simplest model in which the welfare-equals-price
theorem holds in its allowance for the possibility that some firms may be pricing randomly.
The model estimates imply that there is a high posterior probability that some of the high
prices were set randomly (as opposed to sellers having very high arrival rates for those
titles) and results in estimated welfare being well below the average price. The models
of the online markets also have a second difference – they are assumed to have shopper
populations which have the effect of pulling down the lower tail of the price distribution.
The model estimates imply that the ratio of welfare to average price is higher for this
reason. The estimates are that per-listing welfare was more than twice as high in the 2009
online market than in the 2009 offline market. Recall also that the sample being used here
involves an intentional oversampling of local interest titles – they constitute over 60% of
the titles in the estimation sample – and we think that welfare gains were much smaller for
39

Recall that given how we have specified the model, the ratio of profit to consumer surplus is assumed
to be the same in all three markets.
40
In the constant elasticity demand specification the expected difference between a consumer’s valuation
and p conditional on being willing to pay at least p is directly proportional to p.

47

these titles than for standard titles. Accordingly, we regard the results as indicating that
the shift to online sales led to quite large welfare gains.
Per-listing welfare is estimated to be 13% lower in 2012 than it was in 2009, reflecting
the increased fraction of sales to shoppers and the somewhat average lower prices. Note
though that this is a reduction in per-listing welfare. The total number of listings in the
dataset increases from 3758 in 2009 to 4229 in 2012 which is approximately a 13% increase.41
Hence, our estimates suggest that total welfare was similar in 2009 and 2012.

7

Conclusion

A number of previous studies have noted that the Internet has not transformed retail
markets as some forecast: price declines have been more moderate than revolutionary, and
the “law of one price” has not come to pass. We began this paper by noting that the
Internet market for used books shows these effects in the extreme: prices increased in a
strong sense and there is tremendous price dispersion. We feel that these facts make the
Internet market for used books a nice environment in which to try to gain insight into the
mechanisms through which the Internet affects retail markets. Crucially, we emphasized
that these basic facts do not necessarily indicate that the Internet has failed to live up
to its promise. If Internet search allows consumers to find products that are much better
matched to their tastes, then it leads to an increase in demand which can lead to higher
prices in a variety of models (particularly for goods like out-of-print books for which supply
is fairly inelastic).
The match-quality-increased-demand theory is very simple, so we devoted a substantial
part of our paper to developing and empirically examining less obvious implications of the
theory to help assess its relevance. We examined these implications using three sources
of variation. First, we examined how price distributions – as opposed to just price levels
– differ between the online and offline markets. Here, our primary observation was that
the online price distribution for standard titles has a thick upper tail where the offline
distribution had none. Second, we examined how price distributions differed for different
types of used books. Here, we noted that there was already an upper tail of prices for local
interest books in physical bookstores (which one would expect if physical bookstores were
already an effective institution for matching such books to high-value owners) and that the
41

Note also that this statistic underestimates listing growth because we have taken a sample of titles all
of which had at most 49 copies in 2009 and then either (1) truncated the 2012 sample to only include the
50 lowest priced copies; or (2) dropped the title entirely if the number of listings had grown to over 300 by
2012.

48

growth of the upper tail is less dramatic for popular books (which one would expect if the
valuation distribution had less of an upper tail). Our favorite characterization of the former
result is that it appears as if the Internet has made all books of local interest. Third, we
examined how online price distributions changed between 2009 and 2012. Here, we noted
that the Amazon-induced increase in viewing of aggregated listings would be expected to
increase the number of sellers offering very low prices but have little impact on the upper
part of the price distribution, and found that this was strikingly true in the data. Our
demand analysis also revealed patterns that seem consistent with the model’s assumption
that demand includes a shopper segment that is very sensitive not only to price, but also
to differences in the order in which firms appear on a price-ordered list.
The structure of our model – in particular the use of one-dimensional unobserved heterogeneity and the assumption that firms maximize relative to steady-state beliefs – makes
it relatively easy to estimate structurally. The one-to-one mapping between unobserved
consumer arrival rates and observed prices makes it easy to control for endogeneity in demand and to estimate the model via simulated maximum likelihood. Our implementation
of the model suggests that there were substantial increases in both profits and consumer
surplus from the move to online sales of used books. We estimate that per-listing welfarewas about 80% higher online than offline in 2009, and feel that this is a very conservative
estimate because local interest books are overrepresented in our sample and we would argue
(and our reduced-form results suggest) that local interest books have much lower welfare
gains from being sold online. Amazon’s subsequent incorporation of used-book listings may
have slightly reduced the per-listing profits of used book dealers, but the precision of our
estimates is such that it is difficult to make precise comparisons, and an overall assessment would also need to consider Amazon’s effect on the number of listings which are now
available.
Our analysis has a number of limitations that could provide opportunities for future
research. On the theory side it would be interesting to analyze a similar dynamic pricing problem without the steady-state beliefs we have imposed in the model: there could
be interesting swings in pricing as duopolists hold off on selling in hopes of becoming a
monopolist and then lower prices substantially when entry occurs and the potential for
monopoly profits becomes less relevant. On the empirical side we think that the combination of assumptions we have used could make other analyses tractable as well, but think
that it would also be worth exploring generalizing our model in other ways and allowing
for multidimensional heterogeneity among firms. With regard to used books, we think that

49

among the most important elements we have not incorporated is a relation between market
prices and the flow of used books into used book dealers. As is, the model is most relevant
to markets in which the supply response to a price increase is limited. This could include
markets for collectibles and services like home repair contracting in which small businesses
play an important role, the latter because a proprietor’s time constraint can limit the number of jobs that a small firm can accept. Building out the model to incorporate a supply
response, however, would be useful both in the used book context and in improving our
understanding of how different markets have been affected by the Internet.
We hope that this work may also spur further attention to match-quality gains in other
markets. In many other retail and personal services markets, there is a great deal of
heterogeneity in consumer valuations, and an important welfare consideration is the extent
to which each good or service ends up being purchased by the correct consumer. The recent
literature on market design has explored this issue in depth in a number of applications
in which it had not historically been a prominent concern – medical residents matching,
school choice, kidney allocation, etc. – and it may be that greater insights can be obtained
in many other industrial organization and labor applications as well.

50

References
Ackerberg, Daniel (2009): “A New Use of Importance Sampling to Reduce Computational
Burden in Simulation Estimation,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 7, 343-376.
Armstrong, Mark, and Jidong Zhou (2016): “Search Deterrence,” Review of Economic
Studies 83, 26-57.
Arrow, Kenneth J., Theodore Harris, and Jacob Marschak (1951): “Optimal Inventory
Policy,” Econometrica 19, 250-272.
Baye, Michael R., Babur De los Santos, and Matthijs R. Wildenbeest (2015): “Searching
for Physical and Digital Media: The Evolution of Platforms for Finding Books,” in Shane
Greenstein, Avi Goldfard, and Catherine Tucker (eds.) Economics Analysis of the Digital
Economy, University of Chicago Press, 2015, 137-165.
Baye, Michael R., and John Morgan (2001): “Information Gatekeepers on the Internet and
the Competitiveness of Homogeneous Product Markets,” American Economic Review 91,
454-474.
Baye, Michael R., John Morgan, and Patrick Scholten (2004): “Price Dispersion in the
Small and the Large: Evidence from an Internet Price Comparison Site,” Journal of Industrial Economics 52, 463-496.
Baye, Michael R., John Morgan, and Patrick Scholten (2006): “Information, Search, and
Price Dispersion,” in Terence Hendershott (ed.) Handbook on Economics and Information
Systems. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Brown, Jeffrey R., and Austan Goolsbee (2002): “Does the Internet Make Markets More
Competitive? Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry,” Journal of Political Economy
110, 481-507.
Brynjolfsson, Eric, Yu Jeffrey Hu, and Michael D. Smith (2003): “Consumer Surplus in
the Digital Economy: Estimating the Value of Increased Product Variety at Online Booksellers,” Management Science 49, 1580-1596.
Burdett, Kenneth and Kenneth L. Judd (1983): “Equilibrium Price Dispersion,” Econometrica, 51, 955-969.

51

Butters, Gerard (1977): “Equilibrium Distributions of Sales and Advertising Prices,” Review of Economic Studies, 44, 465-491.
Celerier, Claire, and Boris Vallee (2017): “Catering to Investors Through Security Design:
Headline Rate and Complexity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1469-1508.
Chevalier, Judith, and Austan Goolsbee (2003): “Measuring Prices and Price Competition
Online: Amazon vs. Barnes and Noble,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 1, 203-222.
Chioveanu, Ioana, and Jidong Zhou (2013): “Price Competition with Consumer Confusion,”
Management Science 59, 2450-2469.
Clay, Karen, Ramayya Krishnan, and Eric Wolff (2001): “Prices and Price Dispersion on
the Web: Evidence from the Online Book Industry,” Journal of Industrial Economics 49,
521-539.
Cohen, Adam (2002): The Perfect Store: Inside eBay. Boston: Little, Brown, and Company.
De los Santos, Babur, Ali Hortacsu, and Matthijs R. Wildenbeest (2012): “Testing Models
of Consumer Search Behavior Using Data on Web Browsing and Consumer Purchases,”
American Economic Review, 102(6), 2955-2980.
Ellison, Glenn (2005): “A Model of Add-on Pricing,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
120(2), 585-637.
Ellison, Glenn, and Sara Fisher Ellison (2009): “Search, Obfuscation, and Price Elasticities
on the Internet,” Econometrica 77(2), 427-452. 10570.
Ellison, Glenn and Alexander Wolitzky (2012): “A Search Cost Model of Obfuscation,”
Rand Journal of Economics 43, 417-441.
Grubb, Michael D. (2015): “Consumer Inattention and Bill-Shock Regulation,” Review of
Economic Studies 82, 219-257.
Hortacsu, Ali, and Chad Syverson (2004): “Product Differentiation, Search Costs, and
Competition in the Mutual Fund Industry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 403-456.
Hong, Han, and Matthew Shum (2006): “Using Price Distributions to Estimate Search
Costs,” RAND Journal of Economics 37 (2), 257-275.

52

Kaplan, Greg and Guido Menzio, “The Morphology of Price Dispersion,” International
Economic Review 56 (4), 1-41.
Karlin, Samuel (1962): “Stochastic Models and Optimal Policy for Selling an Asset,” in
Kenneth J. Arrow, Samuel Karlin, and Herbert Scarf (eds.) Studies in Applied Probability
and Management Science. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Kim, Jun B., Paulo Albuquerque, and Bart J. Bronnenberg (2010): “Online Demand Under
Limited Consumer Search,” Marketing Science 29, 1001-1023.
Koulayev, Sergei (2013): “Search for Differentiated Products: Identification and Estimation,” Rand Journal of Economics 45, 553-575.
McCall, J. J. (1970): “Economics of Information and Job Search,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 84, 113-126.
McDonald, Stephen, and Colin Wren (2013): “Multiple Price Posting and Consumer Search
Obfuscation: Evidence from an Online Market,” International Journal of Industrial Organization
Moraga Gonzalez, Jose Luis, and Matthijs R. Wildenbeest (2008): “Maximum Likelihood
Estimation of Search Costs,” European Economic Review 52, 820-848.
Moraga Gonzalez, Jose Luis, Zsolt Sandor, and Matthijs R. Wildenbeest (2013): “SemiNonparametric Estimation fo Consumer Search Costs,” Journal of Applied Econometrics
28, 1205-1223.
Moraga Gonzalez, Jose Luis, Zsolt Sandor, and Matthijs R. Wildenbeest (2017): “Prices
and Heterogeneous Search Costs,” Rand Journal of Economics 48, 125-146.
Piccione, Michele, and Ran Spiegler (2012): “Price Competition Under Limited Comparability,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 97-135.
Reinganum, Jennifer (1979): “A Simple Model of Equilibrium Price Dispersion,” Journal
of Political Economy, 87, 851-858.
Salop, Stephen and Joseph Stiglitz (1977): “Bargains and Ripoffs: A Model of Monopolistically Competitive Price Dispersion,” Review of Economics Studies, 49, 3-13.
Smith, Michael D. and Erik Brynjolfsson (2001): “Consumer Decision-Making at an Inter-

53

net Shopbot: Brand Still Matters,” Journal of Industrial Economics 49, 541-558.
Spiegler, Ran, “The Market for Quacks,” Review of Economic Studies, 73, 1113-1131.
Stahl, Dale O. (1989): “Oligopolistic Pricing with Sequential Consumer Search,” American
Economic Review 79, 700-712.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1976), “Monopoly and the Rate of Extraction of Exhausitble Resources,” American Economic Review 66, 655-661.
Talluri, Kalyan and Garrett van Ryzen (2004), The Theory and Practice of Revenue Management, New York: Springer.
Varian, Hal (1980): “A Model of Sales,” American Economic Review, 70, 651-659.
Wilson, Chris M. (2010): “Ordered Search and Equilibrium Obfuscation,” International
Journal of Industrial Organization 28, 496-506.

54

Appendix A
Proof of Proposition 1
The first expression is the standard Lerner index formula for the moptimal
monopoly
D(pm )
markup. The second can be derived from the first by substituting γp
for
π ∗ and
r+γD(pm )
solving for . It also follows directly from the first order condition for maximizing π(p):
rpm D0 (pm ) + rD(pm ) + γD(pm )2 = 0.
QED
Proof of Proposition 2
As noted above, the monopoly price can be defined by
pm = argmax(p − π ∗ (γ/r))D(p).
p

The function π ∗ (γ/r) is increasing because π(p, γ/r) is increasing in γ/r for all p. Hence,
the function (p − π ∗ (γ/r))D(p) has increasing differences in γ/r and p and the largest
maximizer is increasing in γ/r. QED
Proof of Proposition 3
m

1−F (p (γ/r,F ))
Let k = 1−G(p
m (γ/r,F )) be the ratio of demands under the two distributions when the
m
firm charges p (γ/r, F ). The desired result follows from a simple two-step argument:

pm (γ/r, G) ≥ pm (kγ/r, G) ≥ pm (γ/r, F ).
The first inequality follows from Proposition 2 because k ≤ 1. (This follows because
1−F (0)
k ≤ 1−G(0)
= 1.) The second holds because π(p; kγ/r, G) and π(p; γ/r, F ) are identical
m
at p (γ/r, F ) and their ratio is increasing in p. Hence for any p < pm (γ/r, F ) we have
π(p; kγ/r, G) ≤ π(p; γ/r, F ) ≤ π(pm (γ/r, F ); γ/r, F ) ≤ π(pm (γ/r, F ); kγ/r, G). QED
Proof of Proposition 4
With constant elasticity demand expected consumer surplus of the consumer who purp
chases the good is directly proportional to the monopolist’s profits, E(v − p|v > p) = η−1
.
Result (i) follows immediately: the maximizer of the sum of profits and consumer surplus
is the same as the maximizer of profits.
Welfare is given by



Z ∞
γD(pm ) m
1
pm
m
E(W ) =
pm +
e−rt γD(pm )e−γD(p )t dt =
p
1
+
.
η−1
r + γD(pm )
η−1
0
The FOC for profit maximization, rpm D0 (pm )+rD(pm )+γD(pm )2 = 0, can be manipulated
to show that r+γD(pm ) = rη and γD(pm ) = rη−r. Result (ii) then follows from simplifying
the formula for welfare given above. QED
Proof of Proposition 5
55

Let V (p−i ) ≡ maxp π(pi , p−i ) be firm i’s profit when it plays a best response to p−i .
The best response correspondences satisfy
BRi (p−i ) = argmax(pi − V (p−i ))D(pi , p−i ).
pi

This will be montone increasing if the function on the RHS has increasing differences in pi
and p−i . Writing π̃(pi , p−i ) for the function and differentiating twice we see
∂2
∂2
∂V ∂D
π̃(pi , p−i ) =
((pi − c)D(pi , p−i ))|c=V (p−i ) −
.
∂pi ∂p−i
∂pi ∂p−i
∂p−i ∂pi
The first term on the right is nonnegative by the assumption about the static profit function
because we only need to consider prices above V (p−i ) (because demand is a probability and
hence less than one). The second is positive because firm i’s demand is decreasing in pi
and the value function are increasing in p−i . As in Milgrom and Roberts (1990), this also
suffices to guarantee equilibrium existence. QED

56

Appendix B
To estimate the model by maximum likelihood we choose the
P parameter vector ∆ to
maximize the likelihood of observing p1 , . . . , pN given ∆, i.e.
i log(L(pi |∆)). To avoid
computational difficulties that arise in finding exact solutions to first order conditions and
evaluating the change of variables derivative ∂g 1
that appears in the likelihood for∂γ

(γik )

mula, we treat each observed price as if we are observing that the price lies in an interval with width of 5 cents centered at the observed price. The likelihood then contains
two parts. The first part is the likelihood assuming the firm optimally sets the price in
[p − 0.025, p + 0.025]. Note that holding fixed the parameters ∆ we can regard optimal
price pi = g(γi ; p−i , ∆) as a function of γ, so we calculate the value of γik =g −1 (p + 0.025)
and γ ik = g −1 (p − 0.025) , and let the likelihood be Fγik (γ ik ) − Fγik γ ik , according to
the parameterized CDF of γik .42 The second part is the likelihood assuming the firm sets
price randomly in [p − 0.025, p + 0.025] , so the likelihood is f (pik ) × 0.05 according to the
parameterized CDF f of random price setting. To summarize,

 
L(pi |∆)) = (1 − q) Fγik (γ ik ) − Fγik γ ik + Rp f (pik ) × 0.05
Note for many of the combinations of ∆, γ ik or γ ik is complex number or negative for at
least one pik . If γ ik is complex or negative, we take γ ik = 0 instead; if γ ik is complex or
negative, the first item is regarded as zero.
To account for the random coefficients we consider a fixed grid of possible (γ0k , δk )
n
o
n
o
(n) N
(m) M
constructed by crossing γ0k
and δk
. Each point is assigned an importance
n=1
n=1
weight according to the parametrized distribution,
!
!!
(n+1)
(n)
(n−1)
(n)


γ0k
+ γ0k
γ0k
+ γ0k
(n) (m)
I γ0k , δk
=
F
−F
2
2
!
!!
(m+1)
(m−1)
(m)
(m)
δk
δk
+ δk
+ δk
× F
−F
2
2
 (0) (1) 
 (0) (1) 
 (N +1) (N ) 
 (M +1) (M ) 
γ0k +γ0k
δk +δk
γ0k
+γ0k
δ
+δ
with adjustments F
=F
= 0 and F
=F k 2 k
=
2
2
2
1. Conditional on each (γ0k , δk ) evaluate the likelihood of the full set of prices for the titles,
i.e. we maximize
!


X
X
X
(n) (m)
(n) (m)
log(L(p1k , . . . , pnk k |∆)) =
log
L(p1k , . . . , pnk k |γ0k , δk , ∆)I γ0k , δk
k

n,m

k

=

X
k

log

"
X Y
n,m

#
(n) (m)
(L(pik |γ0k , δk , ∆)

I



(n) (m)
γ0k , δk



!

i

42
We have done several things to ensure at γ̄ik , p + 0.025 is indeed profit-maximizing. First, we check the
second order condition to rules out that it is a minimum. Second, we compare the profit, assuming γ̄ik and
p + 0.025, to the profit assuming the firm just optimally choose price with γ̄ik and no shoppers. If the latter
is higher, γ̄ik is reduced to the level such that p + 0.025 is the firm’s optimal choice assuming no shoppers.

57

For many of the (γ0k , δk ) the likelihood will be zero for at least one pik . We simply set the
product to zero for all such (γ0k , δk ).
For some observations we observe an indicator qik for whether the book is sold alongside
the price pik . When this occurs we compute the joint likelihood of (pik , qik ) given the
parameters and a value for the random coefficients as a sum of two terms. The first comes
from the possibility that the price was set at the solution to the first-order condition for
optimal pricing. Here, we set γ̃ik be the mean of the upper and lower bounds on the
arrival rate justifying prices in the 5 cent interval43 and multiply the likelihood of the price
observation by
(Rq + (1 − Rq )(1 − e−dik ∆t ))wI(qik =1) (1 − Rq − (1 − Rq )(1 − e−dik ∆t ))wI(qik =0) ,
where dik is the arrival rate of consumers willing to buy the book,
dik = γ0 Do (pik , p−ik ) + γ̃ik Dm (pik ).
The second term is a corresponding term reflecting the probability that the price was set
to pik randomly. We evaluate the joint probability that (pik , qik ) arose in this manner as
the product of the term we used earlier, Rp fq (pik ) × 0.05, the probability that the good was
sold assuming that its arrival rate matches the sample mean. The inclusion of the weighting
parameter w in the exponents effectively makes the log-likelihood we compute a weighted
sum of the log likelihoods of the price and quantity data. In preliminary investigations we
found that the quantity data was sometimes poorly fit without such a weight and adopted
a weight of 3.
To calculate
 expectedprofit and consumer surplus for a listing we first need a posterior
(n) (m)
weight on the γ0k , δk
, computed by


(n)

(m)

I γ0k , δk |p1k , . . . , pnk , q1k , . . . , qnk





(n) (m) Q
(n) (m)
I γ0k , δk
i (L(pik qik |γ0k , δk , ∆)
nh 

io
=P
(n) (m)
(n) (m) Q
I γ0k , δk
n,m
i (L(pik qik |γ0k , δk , ∆)

Average per-listing welfare for title k can then be computed as
 1
X  (n) (m)
I γ0k , δk |p1k , . . . , pnk , q1k , . . . , qnk
Nk
n,m

!
E(CSk ) +

X

(n) (m)
E(πik |pik , γ0k , δk )

,

i

where Nk is the number of listings for title k, CSk , is the total discounted consumer surplus
generated by the eventual sales of all the listings and πik is the discounted expected profit
that the firm listing copy i will earn. Both CSk and πik have two parts. The first part is
calculated assuming the firm chose price optimally. We first derive the posterior probability
of random price setting to be
q̃ =

Rp (F (p + 0.025) − F (p − 0.025))
L(pi |∆))

43

In practice the upper and lower bounds are quite close together so we simply set γ̃ik equal to the interval
mean rather than worrying about integrating over the small interval.

58

The profit assuming optimal price setting can be computed using the same profit functions we use in estimating the model. Given the price pik and any pair of the random
(n) (m)
coefficients, γ0k , δk , for which the price can be rationalized given the the other estimated
parameters, we back out a value for γik again as an average of upper and lower bounds and
compute expected profits as
(n)

(m)

E(πik |pik , γ0k , δk , optimal price) =

pik (γik Dm (pik ) + γ0k Do (pik , p−ik ))
r + γik Dm (pik ) + γ0k Do (pik , p−ik )

Expected profit conditional on random price setting is computed by assuming γik equals
its expected value given the estimated parameters44 and plugging it into
(n)

(m)

E(πik |pik , γ0k , δk , random price) =

pik (E [γik ] Dm (pik ) + γ0k Do (pik , p−ik ))
.
r + E [γik ] Dm (pik ) + γ0k Do (pik , p−ik )

So the total expected profit is
(n)

(m)

(n)

(m)

E(πik |pik , γ0k , δk ) = (1 − q̃) E(πik |pik , γ0k , δk , optimal price)
(n)

(m)

+q̃E(πik |pik , γ0k , δk , random price).
As noted in the text, we calculate consumer surplus of the shoppers as if they have the
same distribution of valuations as do the shoppers who purchase at the observed price. With
1
this observation, total consumer surplus is simply η−1
times the profit. Accordingly, once we
have estimated profit we simply multiply the estimate by this fraction (given the estimated
η̂) to obtain an estimate of consumer surplus. To divide this into portions attributable to
shoppers and nonshoppers, we compute the nonshopper portion as the weighted sum
(n)

(m)

(n)

(m)

E(CSkns |pik , γ0k , δk ) = (1 − q̃) E(CSkns |pik , γ0k , δk , optimal price)
(n)

(m)

+q̃E(CSkns |pik , γ0k , δk , random price).
Each term is computed analogously to how we computed profits.
(n)

(m)

E(CSkns | {pik }i , γ0k , δk , optimal price)
X
=
E(e−rti )Prob{i sells to a nonshopper}E(v − pik |v > pik )
i

=

X

=

X

i

i

γik Dm (pik ) + γ0k Do (pik , p−ik )
γik Dm (pik )
pik
m
o
m
o
r + γik D (pik ) + γ0k D (pik , p−ik ) γik D (pik ) + γ0k D (pik , p−ik ) η − 1
pik γik Dm (pik )
1
r + γik Dm (pik ) + γ0k Do (pik , p−ik ) η − 1
(n)

(m)

and again, E(CSkns |pik , γ0k , δk , random price) is computed by replacing γik with its
expectation given the estimated parameters.
To compute standard errors, we resampled at the title level and reestimated the model.
Our current standard errors were computed with 200 resamplings.
44

Here, the approximation error relative to integrating over the space of possible values of γik may be
larger.

59

