                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           DO BLACK POLITICIANS MATTER?

                                      Trevon D. Logan

                                     Working Paper 24190
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24190


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2018




I thank Lee Alston, Rodney J. Andrews, Renee Bowen, John J. Clegg, William Collins, Lisa D.
Cook, Stanley L. Engerman, Vicky Fouka, Stephen Hahn, Anna Harvey, Damon Jones, Suresh
Naidu, John M. Parman, Jon Pritchett, Richard H. Steckel, Melissa Thomasson, Ebonya L.
Washington, Gavin Wright, audiences at Williams, Maryland, Ohio State, Yale, Vanderbilt,
Emory, the NBER DAE Spring Meeting, WEAI, EHA, PIEP, SSHA, and Brookings for feedback
and suggestions. Eric Bloomfield, Jacob Ginsberg, Isaac Kebe, Spencer LaHue, Matthew
Mahoney, Alan McClain, Adaeze Okoli, Tiara Shanklin, and Taylor Smith provided excellent
research assistance. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Trevon D. Logan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Do Black Politicians Matter?
Trevon D. Logan
NBER Working Paper No. 24190
January 2018
JEL No. H2,H7,J1,N3,R5

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper exploits the history of Reconstruction after the American Civil War to estimate the
causal effect of politician race on public finance. I overcome the endogeneity between electoral
preferences and black representation using the number of free blacks in the antebellum era (1860)
as an instrument for black political leaders during Reconstruction. IV estimates show that an
additional black official increased per capita county tax revenue by $0.20, more than an hour's
wage at the time. The effect was not persistent, however, disappearing entirely at
Reconstruction's end. Consistent with the stated policy objectives of black officials, I find
positive effects of black politicians on land tenancy and show that exposure to black politicians
decreased the black-white literacy gap by more than 7%. These results suggest that politician
race has large effects on public finance and individual outcomes over and above electoral
preferences for redistribution.


Trevon D. Logan
The Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 N. High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
logan.155@osu.edu
”You never saw a people more excited on the subject of politics than are the negroes of the South.
They are perfectly wild.”
                                             - John H. Parrish to Henry Watson, Jr., August 6, 1867
”I do not hesitate to assert that the Southern Reconstruction Governments were the best
governments those States ever had.”

                                                - John R. Lynch, The Facts of Reconstruction, (1913)



1     Introduction

What is the effect of politician race on government policy? In standard political models, specific
candidate demographics have no effect— policymakers reflect the preferences of the electorate (Downs,
1957). At the same time, politician race may affect the electorate by increasing or depressing turnout,
leaving the median voter endogenous to the demographics of the candidates for office (Washington,
2006; Vogl, 2014; Ferreira and Gyourko, 2009). In citizen-candidate models, which allow for politicians
to differ from the median voter’s preferred policy, there would be a race effect only to the degree that
politicians of the same race have the same policy preferences (Alesina et al., 1999). Despite the
limited empirical literature on the topic, public policy has adopted mechanisms designed to racially
diversify the demographics of elected officials. For example, the Voting Rights Act of 1965 led to
the creation of super-majority black congressional districts to ensure racial minority representation
in Congress. The focus of previous literature has been the effect of majority-minority districts, the
electorate, or the racial composition of officeholders as opposed to the demographics of politicians
themselves (Washington, 2012; Cascio and Washington, 2014; Shotts, 2003; Friedman and Holden,
2008; Beach and Jones, 2017).
    But does the race of the policymaker have an effect on policy outside of racial composition and
preferences of the electorate? Racial segregation, the geographic concentration of blacks in cities
in regions outside of the South, endogenous incorporation and municipal boundaries, and political
districting and redistricting make it difficult to disentangle contemporary candidate demographics
from the communities they represent (Grofman and Handley, 1989; Ananat and Washington, 2009;
Eisenger, 1982; Grose, 2005; Taylor, 1998; Grofman and Handley, 1989; Vogl, 2014). At the same
time, political debates in the United States are often racialized so that candidate demographics act as

                                                   2
policy signals. The existing literature has found that the racial composition of officials matters more
than individual demographics (Beach and Jones, 2017; Ferreira and Gyourko, 2009, 2014).
   This paper exploits the unique history of Reconstruction after the American Civil War to estimate
the causal effect of black political officeholders on local government finance. Reconstruction offers a
unique opportunity to analyze politician race on public finance due to the unanticipated enfranchise-
ment of roughly one million African Americans and the immediate influx of black political leaders
that followed. Black officeholders faced competition for office, created and exploited local black po-
litical organizations and voter education efforts, and articulated a policy platform that was at odds
with antebellum Southern institutions. From essentially no black political participation in the United
States before the Civil War, the dramatic entry of blacks into American political life led to more than
1,300 blacks holding offices ranging from local school boards to Governor from 1866 to 1880 in the
South.
   While the conditional correlation between black officeholders and local public finance is inher-
ently interesting, the confounders of political competition, local preferences for redistribution, white
resistance, and black political mobilization could lead to biased or spurious estimates of the effect of
politician race on local tax revenue. To overcome these endogeneity concerns I use the within-state
distribution of free blacks in 1860 as an instrument for black policymakers during Reconstruction.
Intuitively, areas with more free blacks antebellum had a larger supply of potential officeholders
during Reconstruction for reasons unrelated to local political preferences for redistribution. While
well-motivated by the historical literature, I check that this instrument satisfies the exclusion restric-
tion via a number of supplementary empirical test. I show that the within-state distribution of free
blacks is not related to (1) the date of entry of black politicians, (2) the date of exit, (3) the average
length of term in office, (4) Reconstruction-era voting outcomes, (5) Reconstruction-era vote shares,
or (6) voter registration.
   The conditional correlation between county taxes per capita and the number of black politicians
is positive and significant, with each additional black politician correlated with a $0.09 increase in
per capita county tax revenue. IV estimates are twice as large as OLS estimates, with each additional
black politician increasing per capita county revenue bv more than $0.20, which is more than a


                                                    3
laborer’s hourly wage at the time. The IV estimates imply that a one standard deviation increase in
the number of black officials increased per capita county tax revenue by 0.62 standard deviations, a
remarkably large effect.
   Results also show that the effect is not simply a product of black politicians representing majority
black electorates and is concentrated in legislative officials who had jurisdiction over tax policy. As an
additional check to ensure that the result works through black officeholders and not community-level
preferences for redistribution, I measure how local public finance changed after Reconstruction ended.
Beginning in the mid 1870s, Southern whites began to restrict the political participation and influence
of blacks, known as Redemption. By 1877, a super majority of black officeholders had stopped serving
and were replaced by whites. If the tax revenue effect in 1870 is driven by local electoral preferences
for redistribution, then the result should be persistent even after black policymakers are out of office.
I find, however, that the effect of black politicians entirely reverses— the same increase (which, after
Reconstruction, is a decrease) in black politicians decreases tax revenue (1880-1870) by 0.86 standard
deviations. Put another way, the tax effects of black policymakers left no lasting effects on local
public finance.
   Moving beyond the aggregate tax effects, I use the narrative record to show that black politicians
had policy agreement on the use of taxes for two specific redistributive purposes– public education
and land redistribution. To examine whether these tax revenue effects were related to outcomes, I
analyze the effects of black politicians on land reform and education. I find that black politicians were
related to increased tenant farming and decreased sharecropping, consistent with tax policy altering
incentives for land use resulting in better labor contracts. I also find large education effects for both
blacks and whites exposed to black politicians. A back-of-the-envelope calculation shows that a one
standard deviation increase in black politicians increased black male literacy by two percentage points.
Difference-in-difference and DDD estimates (for black literacy and black-white literacy differences,
respectively) show that exposure to black politicians increased black male literacy by 6% and closed
the black-white literacy gap by 7%.
   This paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, the results here add to the grow-
ing literature on policymaker demographics and political outcomes (Beach and Jones, 2017; Ferreira


                                                    4
and Gyourko, 2009, 2014; Pande, 2003; Chattopadhyay and Duflo, 2004). This analysis shows that
politician race affects outcomes over and above electoral preferences. Moreover, this work is con-
sistent with the literature which finds large public finance effects for black enfranchisement (Cascio
and Washington, 2014), suggesting that political representation can strengthen the electoral effects
of enfranchisement. Second, this work leverages the historical record to determine, ex ante, the spe-
cific areas of policy agreement among black officeholders and allows me to analyze whether specific
policy goals were achieved, consistent with models of citizen candidates (Alesina, 1998; Osborne and
Slivinski, 1996; Besley and Coate, 1997). Third, this paper speaks to the literature on American
politics, labor, schooling, and institutional development. The majority of existing Reconstruction
studies focus on specific states or biographies of specific leaders, not the broad policies advocated by
black political leaders. Similarly, little analysis in economics has focused on the political economy
of Reconstruction, when postbellum labor relations and the public school system in the South were
established. The political gains during Reconstruction by blacks had real effects in a region of the
country with traditionally low investment in public goods and human capital. The results here show
that black political leadership is an important and omitted factor in black socioeconomic outcomes.



2         Black Policymakers and Reconstruction Politics

The enfranchisement of black males in the South began in 1867 when Congress ordered Southern
states to form new governments under suffrage laws that were racially neutral. More than one million
black men were enfranchised and a significant number of blacks held office during Congressional
Reconstruction.1 Though black officeholding was extensive, in proportion to the population it still
marked underrepresentation for blacks. Nevertheless, the widespread election of southern blacks was
a striking revolution in both American and global political history.
        One key issue facing any policymaker during Reconstruction was public finance. The antebellum
tax base in some Southern states was predicated on slavery. In Louisiana, for example, slaves ac-
counted for between one-third and one-half of the tax base. The decline of the cotton system, falling
agricultural prices, and decline in black labor supply were only part of the problem. Given that the
    1
        See the Appendix for a brief history of Reconstruction.

                                                              5
majority of Civil War battles were fought in the South, there was infrastructure repair that placed
additional demands on public finance. Even more, the humanitarian needs of the newly emancipated
slaves were not fully addressed at the federal level and required local public support.
       Bond (1938) argues that tax rate increases were driven by two factors between 1860 and 1870– a
decrease in the value of assessed property and increased spending during Reconstruction. Thornton
(2016) shows that tax increases were significant during Reconstruction, and argues that tax increases
were a key reason for Reconstruction’s failure. The self assessment of property values came to an end
with Reconstruction, where administrative offices were established to asses property values and where
tax rates increased to finance an increasing range of public goods including infrastructure, education,
and public assistance.2 Another issue was slavery itself– farm value was positively related to the
extent of slaveholding within the South (Wright, 2006). Lynch (2012) details several officials whose
duties included assessing taxes or collecting taxes at the local level. There was variation in the duties
and the degree to which local officers could influence tax revenue under regulatory authority, but for
the first time blacks held these positions and/or otherwise held positions which would influence tax
levels. Such titles included levee commissioner, collector of taxes, internal revenue assessor, auditor
of the treasury, and tax assessor in addition to offices which had legislative authority to tax.3
       There has been remarkably little economic analysis of the effects of this dramatic increase in black
political participation on public finance, public schooling, land reform, and a host of additional factors
which could have been influenced by black political participation. While Alston and Ferrie (1999);
Naidu (2012); Kousser (1974); Wright (2006, 1986); Margo (1990); Ransom and Sutch (2001); Pritchett
(1985, 1989) and others have detailed the links between political disenfranchisement and public goods
after Reconstruction, few have considered the role of black politicians during Reconstruction. For
example, Margo (1990) and Pritchett (1989) concentrate on schooling after Southern whites seized
control of school boards and consolidated school financing at the state level in the South. Naidu
(2012) and Kousser (1974) concentrate on voting restrictions which were enacted after widespread
voter intimidation limited black political participation. Alston and Ferrie (1999) and Ransom and
   2
     The lower levels of taxes in the South continued and are evident when the first income taxes were filed in 1913
(Woodward, 1971).
   3
     Foner (2014) gives additional positions at the local level with assessment or collection duties. He finds that blacks
were increasing in their positions in the roles until the Depression of 1873.


                                                            6
Sutch (2001) focus on labor contracts in periods where blacks lacked access to organizations such
as the Freedmen’s Bureau to negotiate contracts. Ager (2013), Larsen (2015) and Acharya et al.
(2016) consider the persistence of the political power, but the role of black political success during
Reconstruction is not directly addressed in the existing scholarship.4
       Part of this neglect may reflect the shifting historiography of Reconstruction, most recently de-
scribed by Foner (2014). The earliest histories of Reconstruction were heavily influenced by the
Dunning School, which held that Reconstruction was a failure, that black political participation led
to incompetent leadership, and that federal influence in the former Confederacy was unwarranted and
ultimately unsuccessful (Dunning, 1907). While this narrative was first challenged by Du Bois (1935)
and followed by several scholars in African American history (Bennett, 1962, 1967; Franklin, 1961), the
narrative on Reconstruction and black policymakers has only recently been added to the mainstream
historical narrative (Hahn, 2005; Rabinowitz, 1982; Lynch, 2012; Foner, 1996, 2014; Woodward, 1971).
The current consensus is that the Reconstruction governments were not as incompetent as previously
believed. The efficacy of these governments, however, has not been documented quantitatively.


2.1       The Political Ideology of Black Policymakers

Investigating potential effects of black officeholding is an empirical task as the relationship between
politician race and policy is theoretically ambiguous. In models of citizen-candidates, politicians are
concerned about specific outcomes and they cannot credibly commit to moderate policies, and in
these cases there will be policy divergence depending on which candidates are elected (Alesina, 1998;
Osborne and Slivinski, 1996; Besley and Coate, 1997). While contemporary surveys show that blacks
have greater preferences for distribution than whites (Beckman and Zheng, 2003), the ideological con-
sensus of black policymakers during Reconstruction must be established. Before turning to empirical
estimates of the effect of black politicians it is important to detail their political preferences and to
highlight areas where they held broad agreement.
   4
     Larsen (2015) uses Confederate deaths to estimate the effects on labor ratios and voting behavior. Ager (2013)
does analyze violence against black officeholders after Southern Redemption and finds it more likely in counties with
more skewed antebellum wealth distributions. One complication is that the violence begins after Redemption starts,
and another is the question of how such persistent political power coincided with black officeholding, which should be
less common in areas with a persistent ruling elite. Cook et al. (2016) find no effects of black political leadership on
lynchings in the Jim Crow era.

                                                           7
       Drawing on an extensive review of the historical record of Reconstruction, I used a narrative
approach to establish areas of policy agreement among black policymakers. I adopted a criteria to
identify the policies. Specifically: (1) there had to be direct narrative evidence about a specific
policy, (2) the policy and its reasoning had to be explicitly stated by policymakers at the time, (3)
numerous examples of policy discussion had to be found over several states during Reconstruction,
(4) no evidence of broad disagreement in the policy goals and objectives among black policymakers
could be found, and (5) the policy had to be one whose efficacy could be empirically validated ex post.
There were two key issues that black political leaders thought most important– land redistribution
and public education (Du Bois, 1935; Foner, 2014; Hahn, 2005; Rabinowitz, 1982; Williamson, 1965).5


2.1.1      Black Policymakers and Land Reform

Southerners of both races noted that the low taxes in the antebellum era encouraged the acquisition
of unimproved land by wealthy landowners (Foner, 2014). While land productivity was high in the
antebellum South, more than two thirds of Southern farmland was unimproved in 1860 (Fogel and
Engerman, 1974). During Reconstruction, black policymakers sought to use tax policy to induce the
sale of unimproved land (Foner, 2014). The basic idea was not to use taxes on land to seize property
for non-payment of taxes, but rather to alter the opportunity costs of large landholding. Most states
designed policy where land seized for taxes was to be sold in small lots, similar to land lotteries in the
antebellum era for land acquired through treaties with Native American tribes. As noted by Foner
(2014), Abraham Galloway, an influential black politician in North Carolina, stated that ”I want to
see the man who owns one or two thousand acres of land, taxed a dollar on the acre, and if they
can’t pay the taxes, sell their property to the highest bidder...and then we negores shall become land
holders” (p. 376).
       The narrative record establishes that this policy was not restricted to a few black leaders in
selected states. For example, Williamson (1965) describes the case in South Carolina as ”a heavy tax
on unused land. This tax was expected to force owners of such lands either to bear the burden of the
   5
     There were areas of disagreement among black politicians as well. Foner (2014); Williamson (1965) describe the
debates surrounding railroad finance, where black politicians disagreed. Testing these policies is difficult, however, as
railroad finance was a state issue and whites disagreed on the policy as well. As such, there is not a clear distinction
along racial lines in the policy space.


                                                           8
tax from their other resources, to put the land under cultivation and thus employ laborers or renters,
or to allow the land to be sold...” (p. 148). He further notes that a black delegate to the South
Carolina convention stated that the high tax rates ”would force owners of large tracts of waste lands
to sell and give us a chance” (p. 149). Similarly, Foner (1996) describes ”several officials, including
Matthew Gaines of Texas...urged heavy taxation of unoccupied land, to force it onto the market” (p.
xxvii). The system of taxation became the preferred means of land redistribution, as the emerging
Southern leaders feared that confiscation would meet with negative reaction in the North.
       It is important to distinguish this policy from land seizures for non-payment of property taxes.
While seizures were relatively common during Reconstruction, they rarely resulted in significant land
redistribution. Even at the time, policymakers of all political stripes noted the limited ability of pubic
property sales for tax liens to redistribute land due to the potential of collusion in the land markets
(Foner, 2014).6 Overall rates of black landowning were relatively low and while tax policy has been
seen as an ineffective method of land redistribution, there have been few empirical tests for any effects
(McPherson, 1875).


2.1.2      Black Policymakers and Public Education

The key issue for education was creating and financing a public education system that would serve both
black and white students. Although Federal Freedmen’s Bureau schools have received more attention,
they educated relatively few black students– the public school system was far more important (Margo,
1990). As noted by Du Bois (1935) and others, the South did not invest heavily in human capital
before the Civil War. Public education necessitated a drastic change in public financing in the South.
Estimates from historians suggest that one-fifth of local taxes were used to fund public education
(Du Bois, 1935). Attempts to use federal funds to finance public education were futile, although
Senator Charles Sumner repeatedly attempted to have federal assistance for public schools.7 While
some advocated the sale of federal lands or unclaimed Civil War bounties to finance education, the use
   6
       One reason why property holding among blacks may have been related to high assessment rates could be the fact
that they would be more likely to acquire property in areas with higher assessments, which could be related to higher
taxes in general (Margo, 1984; Higgs, 1984).
     7
       James Rapier, a Congressman from Alabama, sought to provide more aid to schools in states with the highest
illiteracy rates (Rabinowitz, 1982), but was also unsuccessful.



                                                         9
of poll taxes and property taxes proved more amenable to finance local public schools (Rabinowitz,
1982; Lynch, 2012; Marszalek, 2008; Foner, 2014; Williamson, 1965). Since these were administered
at the county level, the county became the canonical boundary for Southern school districts.8
       The specific policy mechanisms advanced by black politicians for public education varied– in
Alabama a property tax was proposed, in Texas the sale of public lands, in Maryland changes to the
state tax code to allow local taxation, in South Carolina Murray suggested that unclaimed Civil War
bounties could be used, and North Carolina debated a specific consumer tax for education. Harrison
Reed’s plan in Florida was to increase land assessments to fund public goods, and this model was
followed in other Southern states by black political leaders (Current, 1988). Fitzgerald (2007) notes
that property tax increases were the key drivers of tax revenue in Mississippi and Louisiana, while
Valelly (2004) also shows that poll taxes played a critical role. It was common during Congressional
Reconstruction that state taxes were supplemented with local tax revenue. As Williamson (1965)
notes, ”each county taxed its property owners for the administration of regular county affairs and
for special purposes such as new buildings and roads. Furthermore, the school tax was often quoted
separately” (pp. 150-151). Gillette (1982) has argued that the prospects of federal land sales to finance
education was an impetus for the Civil Rights Acts passed during Reconstruction. In general, the
contemporary historical record has documented the primacy of public education in black policymaker
decisions.


2.2       Southern Redemption

Beginning in the early 1870s, Southern whites began a wide-spread campaign to undo the Con-
gressional Reconstruction process. Southern Redemption was concentrated on reducing the level of
black political involvement and reestablishing antebellum social relations (Rable, 2007; Lemann, 2007;
Woodward, 1971). The eventual establishment of Jim Crow and de facto disenfranchisement after
Reconstruction were not automatic but required southern states to overturn Congressional Recon-
   8
     Lynch (2012) sketches the geography where school districts and counties were mapped one-to-one for efficient
collection and distribution of taxes. Fischel (2009) notes the distinctive nature of the geography of Southern school
districts. Constitutional conventions in some states, such as Louisiana, advocated one public school per parish. It is
not clear whether this was for population density concerns or simply reflecting the reality that most public goods were
provided at the county level, which is also the level at which taxes were assessed.



                                                          10
struction policies. As such, Southern Redemption was predicated on the political events of Recon-
struction.9 One aspect of the racial nature of the Redemption is that white Southern populists were
vocal in their opposition to any black political power or enfranchisement. Fitzgerald (2007), Rable
(2007), and Lemann (2007) claim that political arguments over ”excessive” taxation were related to
increasing Klu Klux Klan activity and overt acts of racial intimidation, many of which were aimed
at black voters and officeholders.10 Some resistance to taxes was due to the belief that high tax rates
were keeping capital investment out of the South, even though tax rates in the South were relatively
low (Hesseltine, 1935). Woodward (1971), Ayers (1992), and Williamson (1965) note that Redemp-
tion came with state policies which limited the ability of local bodies (such as school boards and
boards of equalization) to levy taxes and even created systems where board members were selected
by the governor as opposed to the local electorate. Despite the appeals to states’ rights, Redemption
featured strong federalism in public finance when it limited black political prerogatives.11
       Local and grassroots white resistance to Reconstruction-era public finance was common during
Redemption. The Charleston Chamber of Commerce passed a resolution in 1871 to encourage local
businesses to simply stop paying all taxes, and withholding of taxes became a means to overthrow
local black political leaders (Current, 1988; Bellesiles, 2010). Duncan (1986) outlines the general
restrictions on local public finance during Redemption, and Rabinowitz (1982) shows how whites sys-
tematically removed black politicians from offices which controlled public finance during Redemption.
   9
      Ager (2013) argues that Redemption was a return to antebellum political institutions, and finds that the post-
Redemption constitutional conventions, which undid the Reconstruction-era policies, featured an inordinate number of
representatives from the Presidential Reconstruction constitutional conventions. Acharya et al. (2016) find even longer
persistence of slaveholding on political preferences.
   10
      One extreme example can be found in the Colfax Massacre of 1873, which eventually provided legal cover to white
voter intimidation. The contested 1872 elections in Grant Parish, Louisiana, resulted in blacks being seated in the
offices of judge and sheriff. Blacks seized control of the courthouse and were attacked by whites on Easter Sunday,
April 13, 1873. Even after the blacks in the courthouse raised a white flag of surrender, whites continued cannon and
rifle fire. After the courthouse was seized by whites, it was burned with blacks still inside and many remaining survivors
were led off two by two to be shot dead. The death toll is believed to be somewhere above 100 slain in the massacre.
Attempts to prosecute the perpetrators under the Enforcement act led to the United States v. Cruikshank decision of
1876 which disallowed federal prosecution of conspiracy charges under the Enforcement Acts. This left gangs of armed
whites essentially immune from prosecution, and the decision emboldened whites in Southern states to re-double their
efforts to intimidate black voters (Rable, 2007; Foner, 2014). Even before the Supreme Court decision the die had been
cast in Louisiana– whites seized control of counties and forced black officials to resign from their elected offices (Rable,
2007).
   11
      This is consistent with the political ideology which led to succession, which Dew (2002) argues which was less
related to political concerns as opposed to hostility to blacks. Similarly, Jones et al. (2012) show that informal forms
of voter suppression were effective deterrents to black political participation after Reconstruction’s end.



                                                            11
For example, Foner (2014) documents the abolition of several state boards of education during Re-
demption. In 1875 there was a tax limit for public schools placed into the Alabama state constitution
by landowners (Bond, 1938). In Vicksburg, criticism of taxes was used as a justification for racial
violence (Gillette, 1982).12 In Texas, Governor Roberts vetoed appropriations for public schools as a
matter of fiscal conservatism (Woodward, 1971).
       Fitzgerald (2007) notes that while some white officials sought to drastically reduce all education
expenditures after Redemption, the popularity of public schooling among whites led to fewer reduc-
tions in educational expenditures for whites. When white Democrats petitioned Congress over the
issue of increased tax rates, South Carolina’s Governor instructed State Treasurer Francis Cardozo to
issue an itemized response which listed state and normal school expenses as two of the four largest
categories of expenditure accounting for the growth in government outlays, which made dramatic
cuts more politically difficult (Williamson, 1965; Sterling, 1994). Nevertheless, Woodward (1971) and
Valelly (2004) describe how the length of the school term declined by 20% and expenditures per pupil
declined by 60% from 1871 to 1880. In Virginia, the governor promised planters that the property tax
which funded public schools would not be enforced (McPherson, 1992).13 Williamson (1965), consis-
tent with other histories, describes how black/white school funding ratios diverged considerably after
Redemption. Du Bois (1935) notes the decrease in school enrollment from 1874-1876 when Democrats
seized control of the Arkansas legislature. Political disenfranchisement was linked to education– white
legislators justified the disenfranchisement of black citizens by arguing that it was not ”incumbent”
upon them to educate blacks and that, as uneducated citizens, they should not vote.
       The narrative history of events after Reconstruction give some important clues as to effects of
the end of black political leadership. While narrative histories stress voting and racial intimidation,
public finance played a significant role as well. The tax policies adopted during Redemption are further
  12
     Conservatives also hoped that the Supreme Court would invalidate the provisions of the Civil Rights Bills that
provided for equal access to public education (Gillette, 1982).
  13
     Also see Butchart (2010), pp. 153-178. There is evidence that black policymakers acted consistently to defend
public education, in contrast to other public expenditures such as infrastructure. In Mississippi, black officials in the
state legislature united to defeat a measure advanced by white Democrats which would have reduced the tax base for
public schools. As another example, in Louisiana blacks petitioned to have local taxes as a source to continue funding
public schools after the tax that funded local education expenditures was suspended by state government (Du Bois,
1935). W.F. Brown, State Superintendent of Education in Louisiana, further investigated the wholesale disappearance
of funds intended for public schools after white Democrats returned to power.



                                                           12
suggestive evidence of the stark policy preference differences between black and white officeholders in
the South after the Civil War.



3        Data and Empirical Strategy

3.1       Data

3.1.1      Black Policymakers During Reconstruction

Information on black policymakers comes from Foner (1996), which is the most comprehensive source
of black officeholders during Reconstruction. While not a complete catalog of every black officeholder
during Reconstruction, which would be impossible, Foner (1996) contains the entries of all major
officials and the supermajority of black officials (”all the major black officials at the national and state
levels and a majority of local officeholders”) during Reconstruction.14 As noted by Foner (1996), they
had ”control over such matters as public expenditures, poor relief, the administration of justice, and
taxation policy, local officials had a real impact on the day-to-day lives of all Southerners” (p. xxvi).
       One concern is selection in the officials appearing in Foner (1996) which would be correlated with
their political success. The historiography of Reconstruction, however, strongly suggests that this
would not be the case. The existing scholarship about the known black politicians was often incorrect
and narratives about the illiteracy and poverty of the black politicians continued to be repeated in
the historical narrative until the archival work in Foner (1996) and other histories were compiled.
Indeed, the histories of Reconstruction that noted black officials did so derisively– Coluter (1968), for
example, described black officials in Georgia as swindlers who could not read, although the majority
were literate. Black officials were not included as examples of political effectiveness but most often as
prime examples of incompetence and unfitness for office. The consensus of the ineffectiveness of black
officeholders before the revisionism suggests that the black officials in the historical record would not
be listed due to their perceived effectiveness.
  14
    As one sign of its comprehensive nature, there have been few subsequent additions to the list compiled in Foner
(1996) since its revised publication, which added 48 officials from the first edition, deleted three white politicians, and
corrected the biographies of several entries. See Hahn (2005) for information on political leadership more broadly,
which includes Union League officials, Republican Party officials, journalists, and prominent community organizers.



                                                            13
       The data compiled by Foner includes not only the name and position held, but also the place
of officeholding. I exclude those whose only elected office was a delegate to a state constitutional
convention. (Given their small number their inclusion does not alter the results.) All officeholders
are matched to the county from which they served. The information was compiled and classified by
officeholder and type of office. Figure 1 shows the map of black officeholders by county. As the figure
shows, there is a great deal of variation within states of the number of black officeholders.15
       Additional information on officeholders includes term in office and additional information for of-
ficeholders that could be determined in Census records and contemporaneous sources such as their
occupation, literacy, and slave status at birth. Table 1 shows summary statistics for the black politi-
cians.16 More than 25% of the leaders could be confirmed to have been born slaves. Consistent with
the narrative record, a disproportionate number of the officeholders were born as free blacks, more
than 40% whose slave status at birth could be determined were born free. Of all of the officeholders,
more than 20% were born free. When considering the extent of manumission, this is a conservative
estimate of the over-representation of free blacks among officeholders, but establishes that free status
was disproportionate among black officeholders. As a comparison, of the total US black population
of 1860, 10.7% of were free.
       Another dimension of their status would be literacy. Of the officeholders in the data, more than
60% were literate. Of those whose literacy status could be determined by matching to census enu-
meration, more than 80% were literate. This level of literacy is far above estimates of literacy for the
black population as a whole. Margo (1990) estimates that less 30% of the black population in 1880
was literate. Nearly a quarter of officeholders owned property valued at more than $100 at the time
of census enumeration, at least an order of magnitude above the rate of property ownership for blacks
in the late nineteenth century (Margo, 1984; Higgs, 1984).
       Occupations are another dimension of their elite status. Less than 25% of the officeholders were
farmers or laborers, the most common occupations for southern blacks at the time. Nearly 13%
  15
     Of special note, Tennessee was not required to call a new state constitutional convention under the Reconstruction
Act of 1867 as it had ratified the Fourteenth Amendment prior to the passage of the Reconstruction Acts. As such,
Tennessee has far fewer black officials as they were not subject to Reconstruction Acts. Figure A2 shows the distribution
of officeholders by date of service. The majority of black officeholders began their service before 1870.
  16
     These summary statistics are from the sample defined above. See Foner (1996) for summary measures of the
complete data.


                                                           14
were ministers and more than 7% were merchants. In terms of branch of government in which they
served, more than half (56.7%) served in legislative capacity, and roughly one third (33.5%) served in
executive positions. The remaining 9% served in judicial offices.17


3.1.2      County Level Data

County level information comes from the 1870 and 1880 census as well as electoral return data at
the county level (Haines and ICPSR, 2005; Clubb et al., 2006; ICPSR, 1999; Atack, 2016).18 The
focus on county taxes is due to the fact that very few municipalities collected any taxes in either
1870 nor 1880. For historical public finance, county tax revenue is the key metric for within-state
variation (Sylla, 1986).19 For example, in Alabama fewer than 20% of the counties reported any local
or municipal taxes. Out of all municipal taxes collected in Alabama, more than 80% came from two
urban counties, Mobile and Montgomery. Other southern states followed a similar pattern of very
little municipal taxation.
       Table 2 shows the summary statistics of county-level information. It also shows means by whether
the county had a black officeholder. Nearly one third of all Southern counties had a black officeholder
during Reconstruction. For the counties that were represented by black officeholders, they averaged
more than four officeholders during Reconstruction. There are some differences between the counties
represented by black officeholders. For example, officeholders were more likely to serve in urban
  17
      The first position held is used unless that position was as a delegate to a state constitutional convention. Those
elected as delegates to state constitutional conventions could not have had an impact on local politics since their
task was a state level constitutional framework, and not the operation thereafter. This excludes a small number of
politicians– only 74 officials served as constitutional convention delegates and did not enter another office subsequently.
For determining the type of office held, a qualitative assessment of the office was necessary. A value of Legislative was
given if the politician himself or the governmental entity with which he was associated with was tasked with drafting
laws. This would include such titles as a state house representative or a clerk for the state house. A value of Executive
was given if the politician himself or the governmental entity with which he was associated was primarily focused on
carrying out or enforcing laws or making decisions on what to adopt into law. This includes such titles as alderman,
county commissioner, postman, or a clerk for an entity primarily tasked with these duties. A value of Judicial was given
if the politician himself or the governmental entity with which he was associated was tasked with the interpretation of
the law or establishing penalties for criminals in courts of law. This includes titles such as magistrate, justice of the
peace or a clerk for any court of law.
   18
      While the 1880 tax records are more detailed, for consistency I construct the 1880 tax data as the 1870 tax data.In
1880 a separate line item for state and county taxes collected for schooling was created, and to be consistent these were
summed for 1880 as they could not be further divided. Even when adding and subtracting these amounts the results
remain as the overall tax revenue declined significantly in the between 1870 and 1880.
   19
      Outside of the census data, there are few sources which are comprehensive over all Southern counties for the
Reconstruction era.



                                                            15
counties, but slightly less likely to serve in counties with large Republican vote shares. Per capita
taxes, farm values, manufacturing wages, and manufacturing output are all larger in counties that
had black officeholders.


3.2     Empirical Strategy

As noted above, there were a variety of mechanisms available at the local level to increase revenue.
While the specific channels varied by state, I test for the effect on county tax revenue. One intuitive
strategy would be to control for economic and political differences between counties in the same state
and estimate the effect of black politicians on per capita tax revenue net of those controls. County
tax revenues are a function of local economic activity, the value of property in an area, and political
preferences of voters. Using this straightforward idea as a guide, the model would be:


                              τi,s = α + βBlackP oliticiansi,s + ΓXi,s + θs + i,s                                 (1)

    Where τ is county taxes per capita in county i in state s. X includes a host of controls that should,
in the absence of any racial effect of politicians, determine per capita county taxes. In this analysis
the measures include not only the value of farms and real estate and wealth (the basis for property
tax assessment), but also percent black in the county (a proxy for black voting and the need of any
policymaker to account for the preferences of the black electorate), total population (a proxy for the
provision of poll taxes), average manufacturing wages, the value of manufacturing output (both of
which proxy for industrial interests), illiteracy (a proxy for voter education), Republican vote share in
the 1868 Presidential election (a proxy for baseline political preferences of the electorate), the Logan-
Parman measure of racial residential segregation (Logan and Parman (2017), a measure of physical
racial separation), and indicators for rail access, water access, and whether the county is urban (each
of these being shifters of land values).20 For example, if the claims of Alesina et al. (1999) hold and
  20
     The urban indicator also controls for potential substitution between municipal and county taxes in urban counties.
Total population and population shares eligible to vote are highly correlated, and model fit was not improved by using
the fraction of the county of voting age as a proxy for property tax payments. Total population may also reflect
the presence of more children, which could be related to preferences for redistribution. Additional specifications with
several additional controls, such as farm output, the value of machinery in agriculture, etc. showed that they did not
have any influence on the results here. Specific agricultural output measures did not improve fit, consistent with farm



                                                          16
ethnic diversity leads to lower levels of public good expenditure, the effect should be captured in
measures of segregation and black population shares and not via officeholders themselves.
    The key variable is BlackP oliticians, the number of black political leaders in the county. The
baseline specification shown in Table 3 shows that the effect of black politicians on within-state per
capita county tax revenue is positive. These are the first results in the literature to estimate the
effect of black politicians on Reconstruction-era public finance. In regressions with fewer and more
controls the effect of politicians is quite robust and around $0.10 per officeholder. With the number
of political and economic controls in Table 3, the results appear to be inconsistent with median voter
predictions to the extent that the number of black politicians is well correlated with per capita tax
revenue. The results are consistent with the narrative record about the activities of black officeholders
during Reconstruction.21 At a minimum, the robust correlation between black politicians and local
public finance supports the narrative about the general efficacy of black political leaders during
Reconstruction.


3.3     Endogeneity

The potential endogeneity of the number of black officeholders and county per capita tax revenues
in Table 3 is a serious concern. During Reconstruction, black officeholding was a function of several
factors which reflected contemporaneous local political and economic realities. The first would be the
political power of blacks themselves but also the degree to which whites would be able to mount a
successful challenge to black political goals, which featured starkly different attitudes towards redis-
tribution, particularly across racial lines. Southern Redemption was particularly focused on taxes.
The high likelihood of violence that black officeholders faced during Redemption is suggestive that
areas of black political success were also areas with significant white resistance.22 If white resistance
output being capitalized in land values. Similarly, religious diversity, as used by Rhode and Strumpf (2003), did not
have an effect on county per capita taxes. While there was significant diversity between states, the within-state religious
diversity was not correlated with county tax revenue. Following Abadie et al. (2017), I do not cluster the standard
errors as state fixed effects are included.
  21
     Du Bois (1935) shows extensive evidence that black officeholders sought to use public finance to create and sustain
the public education system in the South. Foner (2014) documents how black politicians used public finance to fund
public goods such as hospitals and other welfare services. Egerton (2014) details how Southern newspapers predicted
that black officials would enact aggressive tax regimes to support public services.
  22
     See Rable (2007) for more on how whites viewed themselves as under foreign attack, rationalizing the racial violence
that was endemic during and after Reconstruction.

                                                            17
and preferences for low levels of redistribution were an increasing function of black political suc-
cess, the relationship between politicians and tax revenues could be understated. At the same time,
black political leadership could have been more likely in areas which had more progressive attitudes
towards racial relations and/or redistribution, which would overstate the relationship. This would
include postbellum activities of the Freedmen’s Bureau and Union League, who were explicitly tasked
with political education efforts which could have altered the terms of political competition and policy
choices. For example, areas with large numbers of voters educated by Union League organizers could
have been more politically active and more desirous of redistribution policies. While the estimates in
Table 3 show that there is a robust positive correlation between black officeholders and tax revenues,
there are several facts of the historical record that would make a causal interpretation difficult. Given
the opposing forces it is difficult to say whether the correlation in Table 3 is overstated, understated,
or whether the two effects offset each other.23
       To overcome this endogeneity concern I use an instrumental variable for black policymakers during
Reconstruction: the number of free blacks in 1860. As noted by the historical record (Lynch, 2012;
Du Bois, 1935; Foner, 2014; Hahn, 2005; Rabinowitz, 1982; Franklin, 1961; Williamson, 1965), a highly
disproportionate number of black politicians were free blacks. The summary evidence in Table 1
shows that free blacks were disproportionately represented among officeholders. As such, we would
expect the within-state distribution of free blacks in 1860 to be well correlated with the within-state
distribution of black politicians during Reconstruction.24
       There are theoretical justifications for this instrument as well, following from standard citizen-
candidate models. If the utility of a free black’s ideal policy (relative to the chosen policy) is greater
than that of Freedmen (those former slaves emancipated during or after the Civil War) due to the
restrictions imposed upon free blacks in the antebellum era, better knowledge of the benefits of partic-
ular policies, or larger gains from proposed policies, they would be more likely to be candidates. For
example, free blacks may have been particularly aware of the positive externalities of public education
given their antebellum experience in the labor market, or could derive more business opportunities
  23
     It is relatively straightforward to show that blacks would have preferences for land taxation, but this does not
necessarily apply to policymakers. A simple model of preferences for land taxation is presented in the Appendix.
  24
     While difference-in-differences approaches would appear appropriate, the distribution of black voters before enfran-
chisement was directly related to economic activity, leaving justification of the parallel trends assumption difficult.


                                                           18
if more blacks were landowners and patronized their businesses. Citizen-candidate models also sup-
pose that the cost of seeking office is uniform (Besley and Coate, 1997; Osborne and Slivinski, 1996;
Alesina, 1998), but it is easy to show that if the cost of being a candidate is different for certain
types they would be more likely to seek office. If free blacks faced lower costs of running for office
their distribution would reflect exogenous differences in the cost of blacks seeking office as a function
of the number of free blacks.25 It is important to note that these are intuitive appeals to theory,
however. The narrative record does not provide clear evidence that free blacks derived greater utility
from policies nor faced lower costs of seeking office.26 Below, I show the use of free blacks in 1860 as
a measure that is well correlated with the number of black officeholders but free from the errors in
the estimating equation is justified on several grounds.27


3.3.1    Narrative Justification of the Free Black Instrument

For the instrument of free blacks to be valid, the exclusion restriction requires that free blacks are
correlated with the number of officeholders, but not also some other channel that would be related to
per capita tax revenues, such as electoral preferences. There are several historical facts which assure
us that free blacks satisfy the exclusion restriction.28 First, free blacks comprised only 2% of the
Southern population.29 Furthermore, more than two thirds of free blacks lived in the countryside, not
in urban areas. As such, it is not the case that free blacks reflect urban/rural differences in political
preferences.30 Second, the distribution of free blacks in 1860 is not related to later migration flows
  25
     See Chattopadhyay and Duflo (2004) for a policy experiment which lowered the cost of being a candidate for women
in India.
  26
     Foner (1996) gives several examples of black politicians losing customers, being forced to move, or meeting violent
attacks after serving in office
  27
     Using the population of free blacks as the instrument also implies that it is less likely to be subject to the concerns
of inframarginal effects which would violate the exclusion restriction, as detailed by Jones (2015). Such an argument
would hold if greater numbers of free blacks led to more redistributive policies among the locations that would have
always had more black policymakers, or claims of more effective leaders if there were more free blacks. The history
of Reconstruction, and the changes in tax policy after Redemption described below, are inconsistent with such an
argument.
  28
     For a history of free blacks see Berlin (1975) and Chapter 11 of Franklin (1980). For a history of legislation
concerning free blacks see Johnson (1919).
  29
     The average number of free blacks over all counties was 247.4 (s.d. 1094.5). For counties with black politicians the
mean was 288.48 (s.d. 799.2), and for counties without black politicians the mean was 229.47 (s.d. 1199.5).
  30
     This leaves aside the debate that there were qualitative differences in slavery in rural and urban areas. See Goldin
(1976); Wade (1967) for salient examples.




                                                            19
of blacks within the South after the Civil War.31 Third, the distribution of free blacks is not related
to carpetbagging– the movement of Northern whites South for political and economic gain. The
largest political gains came from areas where there were more black voters in general, and free blacks
would not be related to such effects given their small number. Fourth, the within-state distribution
is driven by idiosyncratic differences in manumission, the length of settlement, and restrictions on
between-state or between county movement for free blacks.32
       The most pressing issue is that free blacks in 1860 could not be thought of to have any more than
negligible amounts of political influence. Even in large urban areas where they were more numerous,
free blacks did not enjoy political representation in local politics (Foner, 2014; Wade, 1967; Johnson,
1919).33 Free blacks were completely disenfranchised in the antebellum era– the only Southern state
to allow free blacks to vote upon their admission to the Union was Tennessee, where they were
disenfranchised in 1834. The right of free blacks to assemble had been abolished by 1835 in every
Southern state (Franklin, 1961; Johnson, 1919). States frequently restricted their movement or banned
free black immigration, and autonomous social and civic organizations among from blacks were illegal
under state law.34 Religious groups of free blacks were required to be supervised by white ministers.
The citizenship status of free blacks was settled in Dred Scott v. Sandford, when the Supreme Court
ruled in 1857 that all blacks where not citizens, had no standing to sue in federal court, and further
had ”been regarded as beings of an inferior order and altogether unfit to associate with the white
race, either in social or political relations; and so far inferior that they had no rights which the white
  31
     While Logan (2009) finds that human capital was related to migration, the movement of blacks after the Civil War
has never been suggested to be motivated by a desire to link with a free black community.
  32
     Given the relatively lower number of free blacks in the New South, (Franklin, 1980; Berlin, 1975), it is important
to control for such differences. For example, states with longer histories of free blacks and larger free black populations,
such as Virginia and Maryland, had registries. See Figure A1 and Johnson (1919) for more on state policies.
  33
     In fact, Hesseltine (1935) shows that conservative Democrats won their first victories at the start of Congressional
Reconstruction, in 1868, and in areas with large numbers of free blacks. Such events would be unlikely if free blacks
drove local political decisions. In general, there was little political participation by blacks on either side of the Mason-
Dixon line in 1860. Delaware, a state with a large share of free blacks, required holding property to vote, disqualifying
blacks from the franchise (Gillette, 1982). Only five northern states allowed free blacks to vote before the Civil War, and
these states contained less than 5% of the Northern black population. In 1865, attempts to ban racial restrictions on
voting failed in Connecticut, Minnesota, and Wisconsin. Even in 1868, only two states (Iowa and Minnesota) banned
racial restrictions on voting (Foner, 2014). In fact, the discussions surrounding the Fifteenth Amendment revealed
Northern states’ concerns about their continued use of poll taxes, property requirements, and other restrictions on
voting which remained legal until the Voting Rights Act.
  34
     North Carolina, for example, prohibited free blacks from venturing beyond the adjoining county they resided in.
Other states forbade free blacks from leaving for any extended length of time and returning.



                                                            20
man was bound to respect” (60 U.S. 393, emphasis added). There is little in the narrative record to
suggest that free blacks had any influence on preferences for redistribution.
       Even within this restrictive legal framework, free blacks had to manage their own affairs and seek
employment from local firms and households (Wade, 1967). They were inherently more likely than
enslaved blacks to have autonomous relationships in the community and were the natural source of
leadership given the relative lack of human and social capital among recently emancipated blacks.35
Free blacks were also property owners, with real property in 1860 valued at over $500,000 in North
Carolina, Virginia, Louisiana, Tennessee, and South Carolina, respectively. Given that free blacks
had generally high levels of social interactions with whites, they had some route of semi-formal access
and more intimate knowledge of the political process, even if only as observers. Indeed, after the
Civil War, some free blacks sought political access at the expense of Freedman, and only sought
racial solidarity after Southern whites showed resistance to any form of black enfranchisement (Foner,
2014).36
       The areas with the greatest amounts of political activity were those with extensive Union League
activity, which organized local communities and provided political and voter education, and the Freed-
men’s Bureau, which assisted former slaves in negotiating disputes, accessing government services,
and provided economic assistance. These organizations, however, were designed and used primarily
by former slaves, not free blacks. The distribution of slaves would certainly be related to black po-
litical activity, voter education, and political preferences, but free blacks are weakly correlated with
the slave population (r=0.159).37 The institutions and organizations which encouraged black political
involvement were squarely aimed at the majority of the black population– Freedmen. Indeed, fewer
than 5% of black politicians were known to have worked for the Freedmen’s Bureau or were involved
in Union League activities. As such, free blacks are related to the supply of black officeholders but
not to the factors which would determine preferences for public finance at the local level.
  35
      As an example, (Bodenhorn, 2011) shows that manumitted slaves in Virginia were more likely to be skilled as they
had a stronger labor market whereby they could purchase their freedom.
   36
      Russ (1934a,b); Foner (2014) note that Lincoln did not advocate for universal black suffrage, but rather only for
literate blacks who held property valued at more than $250, a proposition supported by many free blacks in Louisiana.
Once whites countered against any black political participation, free blacks sought the franchise for all blacks, which
was secured in the first Reconstruction Act.
   37
      See the Appendix for results which control directly for the slave population.



                                                          21
3.3.2      Empirical Justification of the Free Black Instrument

The key threat to the validity of free blacks as an IV for black politicians is that free blacks could be
related to political outcomes or preferences before and during Reconstruction. Since local economic
conditions and demographics are explicitly controlled for in the specification, this is the most likely
threat to the validity of the instrument. It would be inconsistent with the narrative record to argue
that free blacks would be related to preferences for redistribution given their exclusion from politics
(Foner, 2014), and this borne out empirically by the lack of a correlation between free blacks and
local public finance in 1860.38 Free blacks are also poorly correlated with factors that could indirectly
affect public finance in 1870.39
       One concern is that free blacks would be correlated with vote shares for Republican or Demo-
crat candidates for office during Reconstruction, which would reflect voter preferences, the extent of
political competition, and voting coalitions which could factor into policy. A related concern would
be that places with free blacks would have not only more black officeholders, but officeholders who
were longer tenured and would arguably have more influence on local issues than those with shorter
tenures. Still another concern would be that free blacks came from areas with higher levels of polit-
ical participation during Reconstruction precisely because free blacks were more likely to seek office.
Below, I use available data to investigate each of these concerns.
       In Table 4 I show the relationship between the number of free blacks in a county in 1860 and
political outcomes over the entire Reconstruction era. Congressional elections feature greater within-
state variation in candidates and more frequent elections, the types of electoral outcomes which would
be most likely to detect a relationship. If there is any endogeneity between candidates for office and
free blacks it would be more likely to be detected in elections which feature within-state variation in
candidates. Indeed, these congressional elections sent 16 black representatives to Congress. Panel A
  38
      In a regression analogous to Table 3, where the dependent variable is 1860 per capita county taxes, the coefficient
on Free Blacks is 0.0001717 (0.0001082 standard error, t = 1.59) and with additional controls the coefficient becomes
0.00003 (0.00103 standard error, t =0.29).
   39
      Free blacks have a weak correlation with every covariate in the regression equation for per capita county taxes, even
without state controls. There is no correlation above 0.6 with any variable included in the the regression specifications.
For example, the correlation with farm values (0.335), percent black (0.069), and illiteracy (0.373) are all indicative of
a weak relationship. Only for the total population (0.5325) and manufacturing output (0.5643) is the correlation with
free blacks above 0.5. For every other variable the correlation is moderate at best.




                                                            22
shows that free blacks are unrelated to vote outcomes in any Congressional election between 1868 and
1876. In addition, they have no correlation with the total number of votes casts in those elections.40
This is consistent with free blacks being a relatively small fraction of the population and not related
in a significant way to the overall political climate.
       In Panel B of Table 4 I analyze the officeholders themselves and find that free blacks are unrelated
to the average starting year in office, length in office, nor year of exit from office for black officeholders.
This is consistent with the narrative history of Reconstruction, where there was a large increase in the
number of black officeholders which began roughly in 1868 and ended in the middle of the 1870s as
Southern Democrats regained office. Overall, Table 4 shows that the number of free blacks were not
related to political outcomes nor the extensive margin of black officeholding during Reconstruction.
While more officeholders were free blacks, it is not the case that coming from communities with more
free blacks led to earlier entry into office nor longer tenure in office. This, too, is consistent with the
narrative record that Reconstruction saw a dramatic influx of black officeholders who were placed
into office at the start of Congressional Reconstruction and were displaced in the mid 1870s (Foner,
2014).41
       In Panel C of Table 4 I investigate the relationship between voter registration by race and free
blacks. Registered voter counts are an important measure of political participation, and an important
guide to the distribution of preferences in the electorate. Scholars have noted that black voting rates
were particularly high during Reconstruction (Foner, 2014). Voter registration for state constitu-
tional conventions, mandated by Congressional Reconstruction, was recorded by race, allowing me to
estimate the relationship between political participation by race at the very beginning of black en-
franchisement. I use the detailed voter registration recorded by Hume and Gough (2008) to estimate
the relationship between voter registration and the distribution of free blacks in 1860.42 The results
in Panel C show that the distribution of free blacks was unrelated to black, white, and total voter
registration. Moreover, free blacks are also unrelated with the black share of total voter registration.
Overall, there is little empirical support for the argument that free blacks were correlated with any
  40
     Results are similar in Presidential election outcomes.
  41
     It is also the case that the sudden departure of black politicians at the beginning of Redemption tempers any
concerns that black politicians were more prone to corruption than others.
  42
     I thank John Clegg for sharing his coding of the tables in Hume and Gough (2008).


                                                       23
measure of political preferences during Reconstruction nor at the beginning of black enfranchisement.



4        The Effect of Black Political Leaders

4.1       Instrumental Variable Estimates

The effect of black officeholders on public finance is estimated in a standard two-stage least squares
framework where free blacks are used as an instrument for black officeholders:


                        BlackP oliticiansi,s = φ + ηF reeBlacksi,s + ΛXi,s + ρs + i,s                                  (2)



                                                    ˆ
                              τi,s = α + βIV BlackP oliticians i,s + ΓXi,s + θs + i,s                                  (3)

       To motivate the interpretation of the IV estimates it is useful to think of the experimental analog.
Locations with few free blacks serve as a control group and those with more free blacks serve as a
treatment group. The ”treatment effect” is identified via the relationship between per capita tax
revenue and the size of the free black population. If black politicians influence public finance, we
would expect to see larger per capita revenues in counties with larger free black populations.43 If the
exclusion restriction holds this identifies the causal effect of politicians since free blacks, conditional
on the controls, have no direct effect on 1870 per capita county tax revenue.
       Table 5 shows the results from the first and second stage specifications, as well as the OLS
relationship for comparison. The estimates from the first stage suggest that for every 1,000 free
blacks in a county, there was an additional black officeholder. Essentially, a one standard deviation
increase in the number of free blacks in a county results in an additional black official. The instrument
is quite strong– the F-statistic on the excluded instrument is well above 20 in all specifications, all of
which include state fixed effects.44 Even with the set of controls in X, which include factors such as
  43
     This is seen in the reduced-form specification where free blacks are included as an independent variable. This is
shown in Table A4.
  44
     While BlackP oliticians is a count variable, in the two-stage least squares setting the first stage relationship should
be linear unless one would have strong priors about non-linearities in the first stage. See Angrist and Kruger (2001);
Kelejian (1971).



                                                            24
urban county, population size, and economic factors, the effect of free blacks on black officeholders is
quite strong.
       The key is how βOLS differs from βIV . The IV estimates in Table 5 show that the OLS results
understate the effect of black officeholders on per capita county tax revenues. While the OLS estimates
were close to $0.10 per black elected official, the IV estimates are more than double the OLS estimates,
$0.20.45 From estimates of hourly wages in 1870, this is more than one hour’s wage for an unskilled
worker at the time.46 More specifically, a one standard deviation increase in black officeholders
increases per capita county taxes by 0.62 standard deviations, a sizable effect.
       Another way to scale the size of the results is historical– in 1874 Southern whites in South Carolina
organized a Taxpayer’s Convention to protest high local taxes in Congressional Reconstruction. The
commissioned report noted that taxes were increased by $0.38 per capita despite providing for an
extensive amount of public goods that were not available in the antebellum era (Du Bois, 1935). The
IV results here suggest that each additional black politician could explain roughly half of the increase
in per capita taxes from the antebellum era to Reconstruction that was the focus of contemporaneous
political protests. All of these results reach the same conclusion– black elected officials had a large
and significant causal effect on local public finance.


4.2       Placebo Tests and Heterogeneous Effects

In thinking through the experimental analog to the IV approach, it should be the case that different
treatments would yield different effects. It should also be the case that controlling for majority
black electorates would not alter the results if they were driven by politicians. Third, conditional on
estimating the effect via all free blacks, different types of officials should be differentially related to
tax revenue.
       First, free blacks who would be most likely to serve as officials should be more strongly related to
tax revenues. Black officeholders during Reconstruction were almost universally males of prime age.
Those who were children during the antebellum era would not be old enough during Reconstruction to
  45
    In 2016 dollars, this would be roughly $4.
  46
    Long (1960) reports the Aldrich Report estimate of the hourly wage of an unskilled worker in 1870 as $0.156 (Table
43, p. 99).



                                                         25
serve in office, and therefore would not be an appropriate instrument for black officeholders, but can
act as a placebo test. Additionally, if local political preferences favorable to free blacks were related
to higher levels of free black fertility, a strong relationship between free black children and black
officials would be suggestive evidence that the exclusion restriction does not hold. Table 6 replicates
the regression in Column IV of Table 5 by age cohorts of free black men in 1860. Free black men
aged 20-59 in 1860 are well correlated with black officeholders, and the IV estimate for this group is
slightly larger than the results in Table 5, which used the total free black population. The opposite
is true for males aged 0-14 in 1860, the oldest of whom who would not have been 30 years old at the
very end of Reconstruction. Table 6 shows that they are less well correlated with black officeholders
and the IV estimate is indistinguishable from zero.47 The result shows that the effect is driven by men
who would have been the most likely to serve as officeholders given their age during Reconstruction.
       Second, the effect for black politicians may be due to black voting as opposed to politicians.48 It
could also be the case that white politicians would be more supportive of black political goals in areas
where blacks were the electoral majority. While the specifications in Table 5 controlled for percent
black, they did not include an indicator for a majority black electorate. If the effect of politicians
is due to majority black electorates, the inclusion of a measure of black electoral majorities could
diminish the result. On the other hand, if politician race has an effect it will not be due to black
electoral majorities alone. In Table 6 I test this possibility in three ways. First, Panel C shows the
results where percent black is replaced with an indicator for black electoral majority. Second, Panel
D includes the indicator and percent black. Third, Panel E includes the indicator, percent black,
and the indicator interacted with percent black. In all three instances, the control for black majority
counties, even allowing black population effects to differ in majority black counties, does not alter the
effect of black politicians on county taxes.
       Third, even allowing for the different mechanisms that can be used to increase county tax revenue,
it should still hold that the basics of tax policy be consistent with the separation of powers. Judicial
  47
     Results for women of similar ages are the same, due to the high correlation between male and female free blacks
by age in 1860.
  48
     In probit specifications the marginal effect of a majority black electorate, an indicator is equal to one when at least
50% of the adult males in the county are black, on the likelihood of having a black official was βp = 0.5883 (t=12.87).
In negative binomal specifications, the effect was βnb = 2.056 (t=16.06).



                                                            26
officials, for example, should be unrelated to tax receipts– during Reconstruction there is little evidence
that judicial decisions were related to tax policy nor public goods expenditures (Foner, 2014; Franklin,
1961; Du Bois, 1935). Similarly, executive offices were not related to tax revenue during Congressional
Reconstruction. Tax policy was related to local officials with legislative authority, which included tax
policy and collection. At the time, poll taxes and property taxes were two of the most important
sources of local tax revenue, and the tax rates were set by those in legislative positions (Foner, 1996;
Sylla, 1986).49
       As a check to ensure that the effect works through a channel related administratively to public
finance, I decompose the officials into branch of government and replicate Column IV of Table 5
for each branch of government. The results are shown in Table 7 and reveal two facts. First, the
instrument of free blacks is weak for both judicial and executive officials. In both instances the F-
statistic from the first stage relationship fails all conventional levels of significance. For legislative
officials, however, the instrument is particularly strong. Second, the effect by branch show that
executive and judicial officials have no effect on per capita county taxes. This is evidence that the
effect of black politicians on public finance is not driven by a spurious relationship to officeholders who
would have a tenuous impact on tax revenues. In both instances the IV estimates are not statistically
different from zero. For legislative officials, however, the effect is more than 35% larger than the IV
estimates in Table 5. These results confirm that the effects of black politicians are concentrated in
those with taxing authority, which is consistent with the effect of politicians working through the
legislative process.50



5        Was the Effect of Black Politicians Persistent?

Given the size of the results in Table 5 it is important to investigate whether these results were
long-lived. If the results for 1870 taxes are driven by local time-invariant electoral preferences for
redistribution, then the effect of black politicians would not be due to their presence. It could also
  49
    See the Appendix for a description of the branch of government rubric.
  50
    The specification where the effect is estimated over legislative officials and free black adult men are used as the
IV yields βOLS = 0.139 (0.0232 standard error, t=5.99) versus βIV = 0.3069 (0.112 standard error, t=2.74). The first
stage relationship is βF irst = 0.00425 (standard error 0.000694, t=6.13, F-statistic 37.58).



                                                          27
be the case that local public finance was a substitute for federal finance via agencies such as the
Freedmen’s Bureau.51 Even more, to the extent that blacks began to experience voting restrictions
in the waning years of Reconstruction, arguments about the persistence of electoral preferences are
implicitly about the preferences of white voters as free blacks were not enfranchised before Congres-
sional Reconstruction and black voting restrictions were in place after.52 Since these black political
leaders were not in office by the mid 1870s and the Freedmen’s Bureau ended in 1872, the effects on
1880 taxes acts as a check to see if local preferences for greater public goods provision were persistent.
    The results in Table 8 show that there was no persistent effect of black political leaders. In looking
at the effect on 1880 taxes I find that black politicians had a slightly negative effect, implying that
the counties where more black politicians serving during Reconstruction had slightly lower per capita
taxes than others in 1880. This is evidence that 1870 expenditures were not substitutes for federal
outlays, as counties with black officials spent less in 1880 than other counties. The second panel
of Table 8 looks at the changes in per capita county taxes from 1870 to 1880. There, we see that
the removal of black politicians had a large and negative effect on tax changes from 1870 to 1880.
Indeed, a one standard deviation change in the number of black politicians (which, in this instance
would mean more black politicians being removed from office) results in a 0.85 standard deviation
change in per capita county tax differences between 1870 and 1880. This essentially implies that the
removal of black politicians at the end of Reconstruction more than reversed the differences in taxes
seen earlier. Tax revenue per capita for counties without a black politician went from $0.96 in 1870
to $0.98 in 1880, while for counties with black politicians revenue went from $1.56 in 1870 to $0.89 in
1880. There is little evidence that the areas which had black politicians had long-standing preferences
for redistribution that outlived the tenure of black officeholders.
  51
     Since Freedmen’s Bureau activity would be related to Freedmen’s distribution, this also supposes that slaves should
be included in the relationship. See Table A2 to see the effects are the same when slaves are included.
  52
     There is some historical disagreement on the degree to black voting restrictions before 1890. Kousser (1974) argues
that blacks held political strength until 1890 while Foner (2014), Franklin (1961), Du Bois (1935) and others argue that
there was considerable resistance beginning in 1876. In either case, to argue that there were persistent preferences for
redistribution before and after the war is to claim that these preferences were due to the white electorate.




                                                          28
6     The (Lasting?) Impact of Black Politicians

Given that black politicians appear to have an impact on tax revenue, the open question is if those
revenue effects impacted the two areas of agreement among black politicians. As discussed earlier,
black politicians articulated reforms along two main channels– land redistribution and education.
Theoretically, citizen-candidate models predict that these policy differences would be measurable.
Below, I present evidence of the effects of black politicians on land reform and education.


6.1    Land Redistribution and Black Politicians

Comprehensive land ownership data by race is unavailable in the Reconstruction and immediate Post-
Reconstruction eras for most Southern states (Margo, 1984). Therefore, I analyze land redistribution
in general, a necessary condition for racial redistribution. To estimate the effect of taxes in 1870 on
land distribution in 1880 I estimate the following regression:


                             ∆F armsi,s = α + βτ1870,i,s + ΓXi,s + θs + i,s                          (4)

    The change in number of farms in county i is estimated from 1870 to 1880 (∆Farms = 1880−1870).
The regression tests whether higher taxes in 1870 led to more farms in the same county, which would
be suggestive evidence of the breakup of existing farms. The results in Table 9 show that higher taxes
in 1870 led to fewer farms in the same county in 1880, exactly the opposite effect of the tax policies
advocated by black politicians. In Panel A of Table 9 the effect of taxes on changes in farm size
is negative. Taxes have no effect on farm value changes, however. Panel A includes a dichotomous
indicator for whether the county had a black politician, to investigate whether there was an effect due
to politicians that was not channeled through taxes. The results there show that the effect of taxes
does not change with the inclusion of the indicator. The consolidation of farms over time, however,
suggest that this was not successful.
    While property was seized by Southern states for the non-payment of taxes, there is little narrative
evidence of large-scale changes in landholdings driven by Reconstruction era tax policy. Indeed, the
failure of land redistribution has long been held as a key failure in Reconstruction institutional change.


                                                   29
Few of the large landholdings were broken up into the smaller parcels, and very little of the land was
redistributed to those new to landownership (Foner, 2014; Du Bois, 1935). For example, Foner (2014)
notes that more than 20% of Mississippi farmland was confiscated for non-payment of taxes during
Reconstruction, and yet more than 95% eventually returned to the original owner.53 Yet another
complication is that the tax policy was not permanent. While land was seized and ”nearly every state
provided that such property should be divided into small lots when thrown on the market...often the
threat of land sale led owners to satisfy their tax liabilities, and neighbors frequently conspired to
prevent bids on land placed at auction” (Foner (2014), p. 376). Williamson (1965) similarly details
the failure of permanent land reform in South Carolina.54 Overall, the evidence is inconsistent with
black politicians leading to land redistribution, and the findings in Table 9 are consistent with that
assertion.55
       The tax policy could have spurred landowners to put more land in production, however, and this
could have altered the terms of labor negotiations for black farmers. In Panel B of Table 9 we see
that taxes had a positive effect on the share of all rental farms that were tenant farms, which suggest
a marginal improvement in black economic position. The results estimate the value of politicians
on rental contract type by calculating γ ∗ βIV ∗ σBlackP oliticians , which estimates the effect of a one
standard deviation change in the number of black politicians on the number and share of farms by
rental type, respectively. As an additional check, Panel B also shows results where black officials
were used as an instrument for per capita tax revenues, to scale the results by the effect of black
officials on taxes. There, we see that, when scaled by the effect of black politicians on per capita
taxes, each additional dollar of per capita tax revenue increased the share of tenant farming by 4%.
The results show that while black landownership did not appear to be influenced by tax policy, the
relative position of farmers was improved.
  53
      Part of this could be due to problem of property rights. The original owner could reclaim the land for payment of
the property taxes owed, even after the land was sold to another party.
   54
      Williamson (1965) does show casual empiricism by noting that the counties in South Carolina with the most land
forfeited had the largest shares of black voters, but he cannot connect this to actual land redistribution. He deduces
that nearly 70% of black landowners acquired their land through private sales, but this does not imply a statistically
significant relationship to land policy. Another complication is that blacks payed the same tax per acre on their small
landholdings, making it difficult to acquire land and keep it.
   55
      An IV strategy where the number of black politicians is the key dependent variable for the change in number of
farms shows that black politicians had no effect on the change in number of farms. Similarly, results by farm size
further show that there was no change in the number of very small and small (less than ten acre) farms.


                                                          30
6.2       Education and Black Political Leaders

6.2.1      Evidence from Educational Outcomes

The largest impetus for tax policies advocated by black politicians was public education (Du Bois,
1935; Foner, 2014; Hahn, 2005; Franklin, 1961). As with the land data, we do not have comprehensive
race-specific school expenditure data for the Reconstruction and immediate Post-Reconstruction eras
(Margo, 1990). Therefore, I assess this possibility of politician’s effect on education in two ways. The
first is a casual empirical analysis. This proceeds by first estimating the relationship between taxes
and educational outcomes and then using the effect of black politicians on taxes to estimate the effect
attributable to black politicians. First, I estimate:


                           EducationOutcomei,s = α + γτ1870,i,s + ΓXi,s + θs + i,s                                   (5)

       Then one can estimate the value of politicians on educational outcomes by calculating γ ∗ βIV ∗
σBlackP oliticians , which estimates the effect of a one standard deviation change in the number of black
politicians on the educational outcome of interest via the effect of black politicians on taxes. The
results for a number of educational outcomes are given in Table 10. The within-state variation in
county taxes was positively related to school enrollment for both blacks and whites. The results imply
that a one standard deviation increase in the number of black politicians resulted in an additional 34
black students enrolled in school and an additional 125 white students enrolled in school. The results
also imply that the same change led to a decline in black illiteracy– a one standard deviation increase
in black politicians reduced black illiteracy at age 10 by more than 30 persons and illiteracy at age
15 by 15 persons. Interestingly, there is no similar effect of black politicians on white literacy.56
       Another approach is to look at adult literacy after the end of Reconstruction. To do so Table 10
presents estimates where the dependent variable is literacy of those 21 and above in 1900, who would
have been of school age during the time of black officeholding. The results show that a one standard
deviation increase in black politicians increased adult black male literacy by 1.6%. Given the baseline
  56
    It is unlikely that the results are driven by per-pupil tax allocations for education, given the local control of
education at the time. This is especially true considering that the literacy results are not driven by a per pupil funding
formula.



                                                           31
literacy rate of black men above the age of 21 was 50% in 1900 (Margo, 1990), this implies a more
than 3% increase in black male literacy due to black politicians. While black politicians also play a
role in white school enrollment, they are not significantly related to white literacy rates. In Panel B of
Table 10 the addition of the black official indicator shows that having a black politician in the county
does not result in differences in counties for most educational outcomes by itself. This is suggestive
evidence that while schooling policies advocated by black officeholders increased school enrollment in
general, the educational benefits led to larger increases in human capital for blacks.


6.2.2      Difference-in-Differences Estimates

The casual estimates presented above are clearly a back-of-the-envelope calculation. To infer the
effects one must assume that the effect of taxes on educational outcomes extends to the marginal
effect of black politicians. A more direct strategy would be to consider exposure to black politicians
during school age and to see if such exposure altered the time-trend of black literacy. A first step is
to simply look at baseline literacy for those in areas exposed to black politicians versus those who
were not, to investigate whether the extensive margin of exposure to black politicians was related to
literacy differences. Taking the complete census returns in 1920, I estimate birth cohort literacy by
race.57 As a first step, we see that cohort literacy was lower for black men from counties represented
by black politicians. Black literacy was 37.3% for black men from counties where blacks held office
(versus 39.0% where blacks did not), while for whites the literacy rate was 88.1% (versus 85.4% where
blacks did not hold office). Restricting to those exposed to Reconstruction schooling policy, however,
shows that the difference in educational outcomes is reversed. Black literacy was 54.7% for black men
in counties represented by black politicians, and 53.2% for those not represented by black politicians.
       Extending this analysis, Table 11 shows estimates from a difference-in-differences specification for
cohorts of black men.58 Using adult literacy as the outcome, I estimate:
  57
    The use of 1920 is to ensure that schooling for the men was completed.
  58
    The results based on the 1920 Census are preliminary. The counts for some counties are not complete. For
those counties with incomplete information, the neighboring counties within the state were used for interpolation. As
a conservative estimate, I only interpolate from counties which did not have politicians. This results in estimates
that would be biased against an effect as counties with no politician are averaged with counties without politicians and
counties with politicians are averaged with counties without politicians. That is, the treatment counties are deliberately
given control values where they are incomplete.



                                                           32
                BlackLiteracy i,j,s = α + β1 P ostReconstructionj,s + β2 BlackP oliticiani,s


                                + β3 P ostReconstruction ∗ BlackP oliticiani,j,s
                                                + φj + γs + i,j,s (6)

For cohort j in county i in state s. The parameter β3 estimates the difference-in-differences of literacy
rates for black cohorts exposed to black politicians during Reconstruction. This effect is estimated net
of state fixed effects (γ) and non-linear time trends in cohort literacy rates (φ). Using all black men
born from 1820 to 1870, who would have come of age with some exposure to Reconstruction schooling,
Table 11 shows that black men exposed to politicians indeed have higher literacy rates.59 Given the
overall literacy rates of 53.7% for black men exposed to Reconstruction schooling, the estimate of
0.033 implies a 6.1% increase in literacy due to exposure to black politicians.
    Equally important, exposure to black political leaders could have altered the gap in literacy be-
tween blacks and whites. The difference in literacy (white - black) rates overall was 46.7%. For those
exposed to schooling in Reconstruction the gap narrowed to 35.2%. To see if exposure to politicians
narrowed the gap in racial literacy differences I estimate a similar regression where the dependent
variable is the cohort-specific racial difference in literacy rates. Using all men born between 1820
and 1870, Table 11 shows that the gap in literacy between black and white men was lower for those
exposed to black politicians. Given a baseline difference in literacy of 35.2% for those exposed to
Reconstruction schooling, Table 11 shows that the literacy gap closed by 7.6% for those exposed to
black politicians.60
  59
     While one concern in using the 1920 census is that the oldest cohorts would experience education-correlated
mortality (where literate men would be more likely to survive), this would influence the results only to the extent that
this varied significantly by race and residency in a county which has black officeholders.
  60
     Results for both specifications (DD and DDD) are similar when using only men born from 1840-1870.




                                                          33
7     Conclusion

The unique history of Reconstruction offers an opportunity to investigate the causal effect of politician
race on public finance. Using the antebellum distribution of free blacks to overcome the endogeneity
between black politicians and local tax revenues, I showed that counties with black politicians had
much larger county tax revenues than others. Black politicians were related to significant public
goods provision, consistent with models of citizen candidates influencing policy (Alesina, 1998; Besley
and Coate, 1997). The counties where they held office had higher rates of tenant farming, school
enrollment, and literacy rates for whites and blacks and showed more convergence in black-white
literacy rates. The specific policy of education reform advanced by black politicians appears to have
had a large effect on human capital among blacks. The causal effect of politicians was acute– black
politicians during Reconstruction mattered.
    Overall, this study provides the first quantitative evidence consistent with the historical arguments
of Du Bois (1935); Foner (2014); Franklin (1961); Hahn (2005); Williamson (1965); Coates (2017),
and others who argued with narrative evidence that black politicians were important during the
Reconstruction era. Building on those narrative histories, this study identified an instrument to yield
causal estimates of black politicians on local public finance and the specific areas of policy agreement,
allowing for tests of the efficacy of the policies they advocated. Further, the narrative guided the
search for specific policies and found that while land reform failed the educational priorities of black
politicians had a large impact on literacy both among blacks. True to being a political effect, the
result holds for legislative officials but is not evident for judicial nor executive officeholders.
    The effect of black politicians, however, was not persistent. When whites reclaimed control of
political offices during Redemption, tax revenue in areas where blacks held political leadership declined
substantially. While the effect of the end of black officeholding was equally dramatic, Redemption
policy also signaled a dramatic intensity of social and legal racial restrictions in the South. The
combined economic, social, and political changes at the end of the nineteenth century were far more
persistent than the Reconstruction era policies. The dramatic gains to black political involvement and
their nearly complete reversal is an important historical caution to models that posit the permanence
of political change with extension of the franchise. Indeed, the reversal of Reconstruction policy has

                                                     34
been used as an analogy for the rise of contemporary ethno-national movements in the United States
(Coates, 2017).
   The framework outlined here could be used to consider a number of additional outcomes. While
the results so far have confined themselves to taxes, education, and land reform, additional outcomes
to consider would include returns to education, occupational structure, migration, and local economic
growth. This would add even further empirical evidence of the effect of black policymakers, and would
make a substantial contribution to our understanding of the Reconstruction era, its long-term effects
on outcomes, and the role of candidate demographics in shaping policy and individual outcomes.




References
Abadie, A., Athey, S., Imbens, G. W., and Wooldridge, J. (2017). When should you adjust standard
 errors for clustering? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Acharya, A., Blackwell, M., and Sen, M. (2016). The political legacy of american slavery. Journal of
  Politics, 78(3):621–641.
Ager, P. (2013). The persistence of de facto power: Elites and economic development in the us south,
  1840-1960. Technical report, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Alesina, A. (1998). Credibility and Policy Convergence in a Two-Party System with Rational Voters.
  American Economic Review, 78(4):796–805.
Alesina, A., Baqir, R., and Easterly, W. (1999). Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 114(4):1243–1284.
Alston, L. and Ferrie, J. (1999). Southern Paternalism and the American Welfare State: Economics,
  Politics, and Institutions in the South, 1865-1965. Cambridge University Press.
Ananat, E. O. and Washington, E. L. (2009). Segregation and Black Political Efficacy. Journal of
 Public Economics, 56:807–822.
Angrist, J. and Kruger, A. (2001). Instrumental Variables and the Search for Identification: From
 Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(4):69–85.
Atack, J. (2016). Historical Transportation of Navigable Rivers, Canals, and Railroads in the United
  States. [ICPSR 36353 Computer File].
Ayers, E. (1992). The Promise of the New South: Life After Reconstruction. Oxford University Press.
Beach, B. and Jones, D. B. (2017). Gridlock: Ethnic Diversity in Government and the Provision of
  Public Goods. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(1):112–136.
Beckman, S. R. and Zheng, B. (2003). The effects of race, income, mobility and political beliefs on
  support for redistribution. Technical report, University of Colorado.
Bellesiles, M. A. (2010). 1877: America’s Year of Living Violently. The New Press.

                                                 35
Bennett, L. (1962). Before the Mayflower: A History of the Negro in America, 1619-1962. Johnson
  Publishing Company.
Bennett, L. (1967). Black Power U.S.A. the Human Side of Reconstruction, 1867-1877. Johnson
  Publishing Company.
Berlin, I. (1975). Slaves Without Masters: The Free Negro in the Antebellum South. Random House.
Besley, T. and Coate, S. (1997). An Economic Model of Representative Democracy. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 112(1):85–114.
Bodenhorn, H. (2011). Manumission in Nineteenth Century Virginia. Cliometrica, 5(2):145–164.
Bond, H. M. (1938). Social and Economics Forces in Alabama Reconstruction. Journal of Negro
  History, 23(3):290–348.
Butchart, R. (2010). Schooling the Freed People: Teaching, Learning, and the Struggle for Black
  Freedom, 1861–1876. University of North Carolina Press.
Calomiris, C. and Pritchett, J. (2016). Betting on Succession: Quantifying Political Events Surround-
  ing Slavery and the Civil War. American Economic Review, 106(1):1–23.
Cascio, E. U. and Washington, E. L. (2014). Valuing the Vote: The Redistribution of Voting Rights
  and State Funds Following the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  129(1):376–433.
Chattopadhyay, R. and Duflo, E. (2004). Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from a Randomized
 Policy Experiment in India. Econometrica, 72(5):1409–1443.
Clubb, J. M., Flaigan, W. H., Zingale, N. H., and ICPSR (2006). Electoral Data for Counties in the
  United States: Presidential and Congressional Races 1840-1972 [ICPSR 8611 Computer File].
Coates, T.-N. (2017). We Were Eight Years in Power: An American Tragedy. One World.
Coluter, E. M. (1968). Negro Legislators in Georgia During the Reconstruction Period. University of
  Georgia Press.
Cook, L. D., Logan, T. D., and Parman, J. M. (2016). Racial segregation and southern lynching.
  Technical report, The Ohio State University.
Current, R. N. (1988). Those Terrible Carpetbaggers: A Reinterpretation. Oxford University Press.
Dew, C. (2002). Apostles of Disunion: Southern Succession Commissioners and the Causes of the
  Civil War. University of Virginia Press.
Downs, A. (1957). An Economic Theory of Political Action in a Democracy. Journal of Political
  Economy, 65(2):135–150.
Du Bois, W. (1935). Black Reconstruction in America, 1860-1880. Harcourt Brace.
Duncan, R. (1986). Freedom’s Shore: Tunis Campbell and the Georgia Freedmen. University of
 Georgia Press.
Dunning, W. A. (1907). Reconstruction: Political and Economic, 1865-1877. Harper Brothers.
Egerton, D. R. (2014). The Wars of Reconstruction: The Brief, Violent History of America;s Most
  Progressive Era. Bloomsbury Press.


                                                 36
Eisenger, P. (1982). Black Employment in Municipal Jobs: The Impact of Black Political Power.
  American Political Science Review, 76(2):380–392.
Ferreira, F. and Gyourko, J. (2009). Do Political Parties Matter? Evidence from U.S. Cities. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 124(1):399–422.
Ferreira, F. and Gyourko, J. (2014). Does Gender Matter for Political Leadership? The Case of U.S.
  Mayors. Journal of Public Economics, 112:24–39.
Fischel, W. A. (2009). Making the Grade: The Economic Evolution of American School Districts.
  University of Chicago Press.
Fitzgerald, M. W. (2007). Splendid Failure: Postwar Reconstruction in the American South. Ivan R
  Dee Press.
Fogel, R. W. and Engerman, S. (1974). Time on the Cross: The Economics of American Negro
  Slavery. Little, Brown & Company.
Foner, E. (1996). Freedom’s Lawmakers: A Directory of Black Officeholders During Reconstruction.
  Louisiana State University Press.
Foner, E. (2014). Reconstruction: America’s Unfinished Revolution, 1863–1877. Harper Row.
Franklin, J. H. (1961). Reconstruction After the Civil War. University of Chicago Press.
Franklin, J. H. (1980). From Slavery to Freedom: A History of Negro Americans. Alfred A. Knopf.
Friedman, J. and Holden, R. (2008). Optimal Gerrymandering: Sometimes Pack, But Never Crack.
  American Economic Review, 98(1):113–144.
Gillette, W. (1982). Retreat from Reconstruction 1869–1879. Louisiana State University Press.
Goldin, C. D. (1976). Urban Slavery in the American South, 1820-1860: A Quantitative History.
 University of Chicago Press.
Grofman, B. and Handley, L. (1989). Black Representation: Making Sense of Electoral Geography at
  Different Levels of Government. Legislative Studies Quarterly, 14(2):265–279.
Grose, C. (2005). Disentangling Constituency and Legislator Effects in Legislative Representation:
  Black Legislators or Black Districts? Social Science Quarterly, 86(2):427–443.
Hahn, S. (2005). A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political Struggles in the Rural South from Slavery
  to the Great Migration. Belknap Press.
Haines, M. and ICPSR (2005). Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United
  States 1790-2002 [ICPSR 2896 Computer File].
Hesseltine, W. B. (1935). Economic Factors in the Abandonment of Reconstruction. Mississippi
  Valley Historical Review, 22(2):191–210.
Higgs, R. (1977). Competition and Coercion: Blacks in the American economy 1865-1914. Cambridge
  University Press.
Higgs, R. (1984). Accumulation of Property of Southern Blacks Before World War I: Reply. American
  Economic Review, 74(4):777–781.
Hume, R. L. and Gough, J. B. (2008). Blacks, Carpetbaggers, and Scalawags: The Constitutional
 Conventions of Radical Reconstruction. Louisiana State University Press.

                                                 37
ICPSR (1999). United States Historical Election Returns, 1824-1968 [ICPSR 1 Computer File].
Johnson, F. (1919). The Development of State Legislation Concerning the Free Negro. Columbia
  University Press.
Jones, D. (2015). The economics of exclusion restrictions in iv models. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Jones, D. B., Troesken, W., and Walsh, R. (2012). A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political
  Economy of Disenfranchisement. Technical report, University of Pittsburgh.
Kelejian, H. H. (1971). Two-Stage Least Squares and Econometric Systems Linear in Parameters
  but Nonlinear in the Endogenous Variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  66(334):373–374.
Kousser, J. M. (1974). The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restrictions and the Establishment
 of the One-Party South, 1880-1910. Yale University Press.
Larsen, T. (2015). The Strange Career of Jim Crow: Labor Scarcity and Discrimination in the
  American South. Technical report, Vanderbilt University.
Lemann, N. (2007). Redemption: The Last Battle of the Civil War. Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Litwack, L. F. (1979). Benn in the Storm so Long: The Aftermath of Slavery. Random House.
Logan, T. D. (2009). Health, Human Capital, and African-American Migration before 1910. Explo-
  rations in Economic History, 46(2):169–185.
Logan, T. D. and Parman, J. M. (2017). The national rise in residential segregation. Journal of
  Economic History, 77(1):127–170.
Long, C. D. (1960). Wages and Earnings in the United States, 1860-1890. Princeton University Press.
Lynch, M. (2012). Before Obama: A Reappraisal of Black Reconstruction Era Politicians. Praeger.
Margo, R. (1984). Accumulation of Property of Southern Blacks Before World War I: Comment .
 American Economic Review, 74(4):768–776.
Margo, R. A. (1990). Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950. University of Chicago Press.
Marszalek, J. F. (2008). A Black Congressman in the Age of Jim Crow: South Carolina’s George
 Washington Murray. University of Florida Press.
McPherson, E. (1875). The Political History of the United States of America During the Period of
 Reconstruction. Philp Solomons.
McPherson, J. M. (1992). The Struggle for Equality. Princeton University Press Princeton, NJ.
Naidu, S. (2012). Suffrage, Schooling, and Sorting in the Post-Bellum U.S. South. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Osborne, M. J. and Slivinski, A. (1996). A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-Candidates.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1):65–96.
Pande, R. (2003). Can Mandated Political Representation Increase Policy Influence for Disadvantaged
  Minorities? Theory and Evidence from India. American Economic Review, 93(4):1132–1151.



                                                38
Pritchett, J. (1985). North Carolina’s Public Schools: Growth and Local Taxation. Social Science
  History, 9(3):277–291.
Pritchett, J. (1986). Optimal Tax Incidence in a Single Sector Economy. Technical report, Tulane
  University.
Pritchett, J. (1989). The Burden of Negro Schooling: Tax Incidence and Racial Redistribution in
  Postbellum North Carolina. Journal of Economic History, 49(4):966–973.
Rabinowitz, H. N. (1982). Southern Black Leaders of the Reconstruction Era. University of Illinois
  Press.
Rable, G. C. (2007). But There Was No Peace: The Role of Violence in the Politics of Reconstruction.
  University of Georgia Press.
Ransom, R. L. and Sutch, R. (2001). One Kind of Freedom: The Economic Consequences of Eman-
  cipation. Cambridge University Press.
Rhode, P. W. and Strumpf, K. S. (2003). Assessing the Importance of Tiebout Sorting: Local
 Heterogeneity from 1850 to 1900. American Economic Review, 93(4):1648–1677.
Russ, W. A. (1934a). Registration and Disenfranchisement Under Radical Reconstruction. Mississippi
 Valley Historical Review, 21(2):163–180.
Russ, W. A. (1934b). The Negro and White Disenfranchisement During Radical Reconstruction.
 Journal of Negro History, 19(2):171–192.
Shotts, K. (2003). Does Racial Redistricting Cause Conservative Policy Outcomes? Policy Preferences
  of Southern Representatives in the 1980s and 1990s. Journal of Politics, 65(1):216–226.
Smith, J. D. (2013). A Just and Lasting Peace: A Documentary History of Reconstruction. Penguin.
Sterling, D. (1994). The Trouble They Seen: The Story of Reconstruction in the Words of African
  Americans. Da Capo Press.
Sylla, R. (1986). Long-Term Trends in State and Local Finance: Sources and Uses of Funds in North
  Carolina, 1800-1977. Long-Term Factors in American Economic Growth, pages 819–868.
Taylor, M. C. (1998). How White Attitudes Vary with the Racial Composition of Local Populations:
  Numbers Count. American Sociological Review, 63(3):512–535.
Thornton, J. M. I. (2016). Archipelagoes of My South: Episodes in the Shaping of a Region, 1830-1965.
 University of Alabama Press.
Valelly, R. M. (2004). The Two Reconstructions: The Struggle for Black Enfranchisement. University
  of Chicago Press.
Vogl, T. S. (2014). Race and the Politics of Close Elections. Journal of Public Economics, 109:101–113.
Wade, R. C. (1967). Slavery in the Cities: the South 1820–1860. Oxford University Press.
Washington, E. L. (2006). How Black Candidates Affect Voter Turnout. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 121(3):973–998.
Washington, E. L. (2012). Do Majority Black Districts Limit Blacks’ Representation? The Case of
 1990 Redistricting. Journal of Law and Economics, 55(2):251–274.



                                                  39
Williamson, J. (1965). After Slavery: The Negro in South Carolina During Reconstruction, 1861-1877.
 University of North Carolina Press.
Woodward, C. V. (1971). Origins of the New South. Louisiana State University Press Baton Rogue,
 LA.
Wright, G. (1986). Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy Since the Civil War.
 Basic Books.
Wright, G. (2006). Slavery and American Economic Development. Louisiana State University Press.




                                                40
Figure 1: Spatial Distribution of Black Officials During Reconstruction. Source: Foner (1996)




           Table 1: Summary Statistics for Black Officials During Reconstruction


                                Variable               N        Mean     Std. Dev.


                     Entered Office                  1331     1869.016 2.677765
                     Left Office                     1331      1873.63   5.650746
                     Birth Year                      1096     1832.479 11.56974
                     Death Year                        366    1893.825 17.96578
                     Literate                        1331     0.642957 0.479295


                     Victim of Violence              1331     0.104603 0.306147
                     Born a Slave                    1331     0.288703 0.453318
                     Property Owner (>$100)          1331     0.233612 0.423276


                     Executive                       1331     0.334728    0.47206
                     Legislative                     1331     0.567643 0.495576
                     Judicial                        1331     0.094142 0.292128


                     Note: Data come from Foner (1996) for each unique black
                     officeholder.




                                                  41
                Table 2: Summary Statistics for Southern Counties


                                                  All       Black         No Black
                                            Counties     Officeholders   Officeholders


Black Officials Per County                    1.216         4.554              -
                                             (4.103)       (6.273)             -
County Taxes Per Capita, 1870                 1.135         1.557           0.958
                                             (1.369)       (1.874)         (1.044)
Total Value of Farms 1870                   23964.130      3350403         1983389
                                            (2608863)     (2820776)      (23986830)
Segregation Measure                           0.296         0.376           0.265
                                             (0.143)       (0.113)         (0.141)
Percent Black                                 0.291         0.560           0.193
                                             (0.242)       (0.175)         (0.181)
Total Population                            11655.970     16389.320        9677.384
                                            (14987.01)    (15901.02)      (14136.32)
Manufacturing Wages                         59983.960     79467.590       51839.590
                                            (396261.7)    (258244.7)      (441246.8)
Value of Manufacturing Output                294466.3      356157.6        265684.3
                                            (1180786)     (1122916)       (1206722)
Number Illiterate                            3260.420      5913.026        2153.093
                                            (3301.422)    (4287.004)      (1904.915)
Rail Access?                                  0.265         0.432           0.194
                                             (0.441)       (0.496)         (0.395)
Water Access?                                 0.368         0.498           0.313
                                             (0.482)       (0.500)         (0.463)
Urban?                                        0.036         0.086           0.027
                                             (0.185)       (0.287)         (0.130)
County Wealth                                4259823       5569868         3696304
                                            (15500000)   (14100000)      (16000000)
Republican Vote Share 1868 President          0.198         0.146           0.162
                                             (0.250)       (0.185)         (0.296)


N                                              974           311             663


Note: Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                             42
             Table 3: OLS Estimates of 1870 County Taxes Per Capita


                                         Dependent Variable : 1870 County Taxes per Capita


                                             I              II              III              IV


Black Officials Per County              0.0993***        .0993***       0.0986***        0.0925***
                                         (0.0106)        (0.0105)        (0.0132)         (0.0133)
Total Value of Farms 1870              6.11e-08***     8.93e-08***      8.51e-08***      7.24e-08***
                                        (1.88e-08)      (2.03e-08)      (2.01e-08)       (2.06e-08)
Segregation Measure                        0.214          0.3028           0.271            0.348
                                          (0.318)        (0.352)          (0.349)          (0.348)
Percent Black                              0.251         1.109***        0.988***         0.903***
                                          (0.214)        (0.252)          (0.252)          (0.253)
Total Population                         -2.77e-06    0.0000279***       -1.72e-05        -1.48e-05
                                        (2.98e-06)      (7.66e-06)      (1.28e-05)       (1.27e-05)
Manufacturing Wages                                    -1.27e-06*** -1.77e-06*** -1.80e-06***
                                                        (2.45e-07)      (2.69e-07)       (2.68e-07)
Value of Manufacturing Output                          3.37e-07***      3.68e-07***      3.67e-07***
                                                        (6.25e-08)      (6.23e-08)       (6.21e-08)
Number Illiterate                                     -0.0001638*** -9.40e-05*** -8.66e-05***
                                                       (0.0000249)      (2.94e-05)       (2.94e-05)
Rail Access?                                             0.011499         0.0382           0.0404
                                                         (0.085)         (0.0823)         (0.0820)
Water Access?                                            0.04222          0.0460           0.0408
                                                        (0.08053)        (0.0800)         (0.0797)
Urban?                                                  0.0231714          0.106           0.0680
                                                        (0.17859)         (0.178)          (0.178)
County Wealth                                                           4.95e-08***      4.89e-08***
                                                                        (1.13e-08)       (1.12e-08)
Republican Vote Share 1868 President                                                     0.00123***
                                                                                         (0.000462)


R-Squared                                  0.443          0.5139           0.525            0.529
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
N= 974 (Column I). N=825 (Columns II-IV). All Regressions include state fixed effects.




                                                 43
          Table 4: Free Blacks in 1860 and Reconstruction-Era Political Outcomes

Panel A:Congressional Elections
                                                               Election Year
                                        1868          1870          1872         1874          1876
Free Black Coefficient for:
Democrat Vote Share                   -0.00837       0.0194       -0.0133       0.0114        0.00422
                                      (0.0185)      (0.0160)      (0.0137)      (0.0152)     (0.00607)

Republican Vote Share                 -0.00885       0.0201       -0.00813      0.0123        0.00310
                                      (0.0179)      (0.0159)      (0.0139)      (0.0161)     (0.00636)

Total Votes                             -70.41        139.0        -93.86        48.43         36.12
                                       (192.9)       (155.2)      (142.1)       (133.0)       (63.06)
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 N= 828. Regressions include value
of farms in 1870, the Logan-Parman segregation measure, percent black, total manufacturing wages, value
of manufacturing output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, urban county, county welath and
state fixed effects.


Panel B: Black Official Tenure
                                   Entered Office               Left Office                Time in Office


Free Blacks in 1860                   -0.000185                  0.000200                    0.000385
                                     (0.000189)                 (0.000420)                  (0.000368)
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. N=311 (counties with black officials).
State fixed effects included.


Panel C: State Constitutional Convention Voter Registrations
                                        Black        White         Total      Share Black


Free Blacks in 1860                    -0.0657       -0.059       -0.1248      0.000004
                                      (0.0608)      (0.0523)      (0.0920)     (0.000007)
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. N=567. State fixed effects included.
Voter registreation data from Hume and Gough (2008)




                                                       44
                             Table 5: IV Estimates for Black Elected Officials

                                                   I                 II                III                 IV
OLS
Black Officials Per County                     0.0993***          .0993***         0.0986***           0.0925***
                                                (0.0106)          (0.0105)          (0.0132)            (0.0133)
First Stage
Free Blacks in 1860                            0.00275***        0.00159***       0.00118***           0.00115***
                                               (0.000216)        (0.000236)       (0.000239)           (0.000236)
F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument               161.8              45.9              24.2                 23.9


IV
Black Officials Per County                      0.197***         0.24006***        0.207***              0.205**
                                                (0.0289)          (0.0574)          (0.0787)            (0.0802)
State Fixed Effects                                X                 X                 X                    X
Local Economic Conditions                                            X                 X                    X
County Wealth                                                                          X                    X
Republican Vote Share (1868)                                                                                X
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 N= 825. All regressions include total value
of farms in 1870, Logan-Parman segregation measure, percent black, and total population. Column II includes
manufacturing wages, value of manufacturing output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, and urban county.
Column III includes county wealth. Column IV includes Republican vote Share in the 1868 Presidential Election.
All regressions include state fixed effects.




                                                            45
Table 6: Effects of Politicians by Free Black Demographics and Controls for Black Electoral Majorities

 Panel A: Free Black Men Aged 20-59 in 1860 as IV
 Dependent Variable:                          OLS -- 1870 County         First Stage Officials      IV -- 1870 County
                                               Taxes Per Capita               Per County             Taxes Per Capita
 Black Officials Per County                         0.0925***                                            0.2129***
                                                     (0.0133)                                             (0.0779)
 Free Black Men Aged 20-59 in 1860                                            0.00613***
                                                                               (0.00123)
 F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                                              25.01
 Panel B: Free Black Men Aged 0-14 in 1860 as IV (Placebo Test)
 Dependent Variable:                          OLS -- 1870 County         First Stage Officials      IV -- 1870 County
                                               Taxes Per Capita               Per County             Taxes Per Capita
 Black Officials Per County                         0.0925***                                              0.1397
                                                     (0.0133)                                             (0.1114)
 Free Black Men Aged 0-14 in 1860                                             0.00318***
                                                                               (0.00114)
 F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                                              11.14
 Panel C: Indicator for Majority Black Electorate in County Included, Percent Black Excluded
 Dependent Variable:                          OLS -- 1870 County         First Stage Officials      IV -- 1870 County
                                               Taxes Per Capita               Per County             Taxes Per Capita
 Black Officials Per County                         0.0970***                                            0.2094***
                                                     (0.0132)                                             (0.0794)
 Free Blacks in 1860                                                         0.001176***
                                                                               (0.00024)
 F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                                               24.3
 Panel D: Indicator for Majority Black Electorate in County Included, Percent Black Included
 Dependent Variable:                          OLS -- 1870 County         First Stage Officials      IV -- 1870 County
                                               Taxes Per Capita               Per County             Taxes Per Capita
 Black Officials Per County                         0.0992***                                            0.2069***
                                                     (0.0133)                                             (0.0785)
 Free Blacks in 1860                                                         0.001179***
                                                                               (0.00024)
 F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                                               24.5
 Panel E: Indicator for Majority Black Electorate, Percent Black, and Interaction with Percent Black Included
 Dependent Variable:                          OLS -- 1870 County         First Stage Officials      IV -- 1870 County
                                               Taxes Per Capita               Per County             Taxes Per Capita
 Black Officials Per County                         0.0858***                                            0.2070***
                                                     (0.0140)                                             (0.0663)
 Free Blacks in 1860                                                         0.001403***
                                                                               (0.00022)
 F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                                              39.56
 Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Note: N=825 in all regressions. All regressions
 include Republican vote share in 1868 Presidential Election, total value of farms, Logan-Parman Segregation, percent
 black (except Panel C), manufacturing wages, value of manufacturing, number illiterate, rail/water access, urban county,
 county wealth, and state fixed effects.                     46
                    Table 7: Effects of Politicians by Branch of Government

Panel A: Judicial Officials
Dependent Variable:                      OLS -- 1870 County First Stage Officials IV -- 1870 County
                                          Taxes Per Capita             Per County           Taxes Per Capita
Judicial Officials Per County                    0.0659                                            3.494
                                                (0.0608)                                          (3.005)
Free Blacks 1860                                                         6.77e-05
                                                                        (5.39e-05)
F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                                         1.578
Panel B: Executive Officials
Dependent Variable:                      OLS -- 1870 County First Stage Officials IV -- 1870 County
                                          Taxes Per Capita             Per County           Taxes Per Capita
Executive Officials Per County                  0.123***                                           1.006
                                                (0.0233)                                          (0.638)
Free Blacks 1860                                                        0.000235*
                                                                        (0.000139)
F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                                         2.883
Panel C: Legislative Officials
Dependent Variable:                      OLS -- 1870 County First Stage Officials IV -- 1870 County
                                          Taxes Per Capita             Per County           Taxes Per Capita
Legislative Officials Per County                0.139***                                         0.283***
                                                (0.0232)                                          (0.109)
Free Blacks 1860                                                       0.000837***
                                                                        (0.000135)
F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                                        38.204
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Note: N=825 in all regressions.
Regressions include Republican vote share in 1868 Presidential Election, total value of farms, Logan-
Parman Segregation, Total population, percent black, manufacturing wages, value of manufacturing
output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, urban county, county wealth, state fixed effects.




                                                        47
                         Table 8: 1880 Taxes and Changes in Taxes 1870-1880

Panel A: 1880 Per capita County Taxes
Dependent Variable:                   OLS -- 1880 County          First Stage Officials       IV -- 1880 County
                                       Taxes Per Capita                Per County              Taxes Per Capita
Black Officials Per County                  0.0309***                                               -0.0902**
                                             (0.0068)                                                (0.0460)
Free Blacks 1860                                                        0.0012***
                                                                         (0.0002)
F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                                         24.45
Panel B: Change in Per Capita Taxes, 1870-1880
Dependent Variable:                OLS -- 1870-1880 County First Stage Officials IV -- 1870-1880 County
                                       Taxes Per Capita                Per County              Taxes Per Capita
Black Officials Per County                  -0.0129***                                             -0.0629***
                                             (0.0030)                                                (0.0199)
Free Blacks 1860                                                        0.0012***
                                                                         (0.0002)
F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                                         24.45
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Note: N=825 in all regressions.
Regressions include Republican vote share in 1868 Presidential Election, total value of farms, Logan-
Parman Segregation, Total population, percent black, manufacturing wages, value of manufacturing
output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, urban county, county wealth, state fixed effects.




                                                           48
                                              Table 9: Taxes, Black Officials, Land Reform, and Land Tenancy

     Panel A: Farms and Farm Size


                                                    Change in Number of Farms, 1870 to 1880                               Change in Farm Value, 1870-1880
                                                   I               II              III            IV              V              VI                 VII         VIII
     1870 County Per Capita Taxes              -51.50***      -66.24***         -44.88***     -45.00***        -10,573         -25,211            11,623       11,252
                                                (15.38)         (16.99)          (17.10)        (17.10)        (21,214)        (24,402)           (24,342)    (24,319)
     Black Officials?                           109.6**          64.02            35.74          34.03          96,313         121,835            73,377       67,757
                                                (51.86)         (54.09)          (53.32)        (53.40)        (71,518)        (77,711)           (75,913)    (75,918)
     R-Squared                                   0.221           0.309            0.338          0.338          0.329           0.387              0.424        0.426
     State Fixed Effects                           X               X               X               X              X               X                  X           X
     Local Economic Conditions                                     X               X               X                              X                  X           X
     County Wealth                                                                 X               X                                                 X           X
     Republican Vote Share                                                                         X                                                             X
     Panel B: Farm Rental Types
                                                                          OLS                                                             2SLS




49
                                              Sharecrop         Tenant       Sharecrop -     Pct. Tenant      Sharecrop        Tenant        Sharecrop -     Pct. Tenant
                                                Farms           Farms       Tenant Farms        Farms           Farms           Farms       Tenant Farms       Farms
                                                   I               II              III            IV              V              VI                 VII         VIII
     1870 County Per Capita Taxes               -15.24*         -11.45*          -3.788       0.0154***         -4.410         170.7***       -175.1***       0.0433**
                                                (8.638)         (6.380)          (9.650)      (0.00523)        (30.91)         (32.37)            (40.70)     (0.0190)
     Effect of One Standard Deviation
     Change in Black Politicians (γ*β)          -12.82           -9.63            -3.19          0.13


                                                                                                                               First Stage Regression
     Number of Black Officials                                                                                                        0.0933***
                                                                                                                                        (0.0115)
     F-Statistic on Excluded Predictor                                                                                                    66.01
     Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 All regressions include state fixed effects.
     N= 974. Regressions include total value of farms in 1870, the Logan-Parman segregation measure, percent black, total population. Panel A:
     Column II and VI:manufacturing wages, value of manufacturing output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, urban county, and wealth.
     Column III and VII: county welath in 1870. Column IV and VIII: Republican Vote Share in 1868. Panel B: All controls listed above.
                                             Table 10: Taxes, Black Officials, and Educational Outcomes

     Panel A                                                          Black                                                       White
                                                                                            1900                                                      1900
                                                        Cannot Write Cannot Write         Age >20                    Cannot Write Cannot Write      Age >20
                                           Enrollment      Age > 10           Age >15     Literacy     Enrollment      Age > 10           Age >15   Literacy


     1870 County Per Capita Taxes           42.20***       -39.66***       -19.22***      0.0201***     156.6***         -2.854            0.428    -8.68e-05
                                             (6.603)        (5.454)           (4.618)     (0.00470)      (22.69)        (6.983)           (4.985)   (0.00322)


     R-Squared                                0.726          0.914             0.953        0.359         0.793          0.473             0.506      0.451


     Effect of One Standard Deviation          35.5          -33.4             -16.2        0.017         131.7           -2.4             0.36     -0.00007
     Change in Black Politicians (γ∗β)


     Panel B                                                          Black                                                       White




50
                                                                                            1900                                                      1900
                                                        Cannot Write Cannot Write         Age >20                    Cannot Write Cannot Write      Age >20
                                           Enrollment      Age > 10           Age >15     Literacy     Enrollment      Age > 10           Age >15   Literacy


     1870 County Per Capita Taxes           42.12***       -39.36***       -19.02***      0.0198***     156.5***         -2.888            0.391    -0.000103
                                             (6.609)        (5.447)           (4.617)     (0.00469)      (22.71)        (6.990)           (4.990)   (0.00322)


     Black Officials?                         9.098         -32.76*            -21.33     0.0316**        8.704          3.621             3.977    0.00173
                                             (20.61)        (16.99)           (14.40)     (0.0146)       (70.83)        (21.80)           (15.56)   (0.0101)


     R-Squared                                0.726          0.915             0.953        0.363         0.793          0.473             0.506      0.451
     Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     N= 974. Regressions include total value of farms in 1870, the Logan-Parman segregation measure, percent black, total population,
     manufacturing wages, value of manufacturing output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, urban county, county wealth, and
     state fixed effects
                  Table 11: Exposure to Black Officials and Education

Panel A:
                                                                   Black Literacy Rate


Black Officials in County                         -0.0221*** -0.0217*** -0.0193*** -0.0198***
                                                   (0.00388)      (0.00413)    (0.00365)   (0.00383)
Exposed to Schooling                               0.183***       0.184***     0.396***    0.388***
                                                    (0.0169)      (0.0170)     (0.00270)   (0.00274)
Black Officials * Exposed to Schooling             0.0368***     0.0361***     0.0340***   0.0334***
                                                   (0.00649)      (0.00640)    (0.00636)   (0.00629)


Observations                                         48,376        48,376       48,376      48,376
R-squared                                            0.099          0.116        0.177         0.194


State Effects                                                            X                      X
Birth Cohort Effects                                                              X             X


Percent Effect on Black Literacy Rate                 6.85          6.72         6.33          6.22


Panel B :
                                                           Racial Difference in Literacy Rate


Black Officials in County                          0.0380***     0.0388***     0.0387***   0.0397***
                                                   (0.00376)      (0.00403)    (0.00363)   (0.00399)
Exposed to Schooling                               -0.144***     -0.145***     0.297***    0.293***
                                                    (0.0150)      (0.0151)     (0.00259)   (0.00259)
Black Officials * Exposed to Schooling            -0.0269*** -0.0271*** -0.0276*** -0.0279***
                                                   (0.00709)      (0.00710)    (0.00702)   (0.00703)


Observations                                         46,130        46,130       46,130      46,130
R-squared                                            0.050          0.064        0.091         0.105


State Effects                                                            X                      X
Birth Cohort Effects                                                              X             X


Percent Effect on Literacy Rate Difference            7.66              7.72     7.86          7.95
Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustrered at birth cohort level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Regressions use 1920 complet count census. Literacy is calculated by county-birth cohort for
men born 1820-1870 in US South. Black Politicians in County is dichotimous indicator for
whether there were any black policymakers serving during Reconstruction. Exposed to
schooling is an indicator for all who would be aged 6-15 duirng the Reconstruction era
(1865-1877). Literacy rate difference is calculated as white - black.


                                                    51
       Appendix – For Online Publication Only


A        Reconstruction in Brief
A.1       Presidential Reconstruction
Even before the American Civil War ended in May of 1865, politicians and Union officials had given
serious thought to how they would rebuild the nation and incorporate the eleven states that had
succeeded from the Union between December of 1860 to June of 1861.1 Lincoln had several different
thoughts on Reconstruction, and it does not appear that he had a fully drawn strategy for the
process. Lincoln’s proposed policies would have allowed Congress to rule on the legality of Southern
elections and choose whether or not to seat elected Southern Congressmen, giving some federal role
and Congressional oversight to the process. It was not clear how much of a role Congress was to
play beyond the decision to seat representatives. Lincoln had implemented his so-called ”10-Percent
Plan” in late 1863, which allowed for recognition by the federal government any Southern state in
which 10% of the white population swore allegiance to the United States. Specifically, if 10% of 1860
voters from each Southern state pledged allegiance to the Union, abolished slavery, and prohibited
Confederate leaders and military officers from voting and officeholding they would be readmitted to
the Union.2 In his last public address, Lincoln stated that he would like to see the franchise extended
to at least the educated class of blacks and black Union soldiers in Louisiana, which was relatively far
progressed in its reconstruction in early 1865. Beyond that, Lincoln’s exact goals for black political
participation were unclear.
    After Lincoln’s assassination, President Johnson continued with a relatively lenient Reconstruction
policy and was prepared to admit former Confederate states to the union with little regard for civil
rights or political participation by blacks.3 Republicans originally confused Johnson’s antipathy for the
southern planter aristocracy with a progressive outlook on Reconstruction.4 When President Johnson
assumed office, four Confederate states had functioning local civil governments (Louisiana, Arkansas,
Virginia, and Tennessee) due to war-time reconstruction measures implemented by Lincoln. In May
of 1865 Johnson extended Lincoln’s amnesty provisions, with restrictions on high-ranking Confederate
officers and those with wealth exceeding $20,000. The next month, Johnson allowed for the calling
conventions to amend state constitutions to meet his three conditions for acceptance back into the
   1
     For well known histories of Reconstruction see Franklin (1961); Du Bois (1935); Foner (2014); Dunning (1907).
   2
     Lincoln’s belief stemmed, in part, from a belief that succession was null and void. Since blacks (free or slave) could
not vote the requirement of 10% of 1860 voters was a de facto continuation of the white votes policy of 1863.
   3
     Similar to Lincoln, Johnson believed that states had not left the Union, and therefore that states should resume
normalized relations in the Union quickly. To stipulate extensive conditions on their readmission would be unnecessary
as they had always remained states in the union. Radical Republicans in Congress and prominent abolitionists argued
that such plans were unsatisfactory for several reasons. First, requiring only 10% of support from southern states
represented a tenuous basis for the new southern governments. Second, the policy on Confederate amnesty was relatively
lenient. Third, states did not have to guarantee freed slaves nor free blacks any civil or political rights beyond abolition.
Congressional Republicans submitted their own outline for Reconstruction which required a majority of male white
voters to take the loyalty oath before a state was readmitted and with more stringent amnesty requirements for former
Confederates. At the time, this was only an outline, as the President retained authority over the Reconstruction
process.
   4
     Charles Sumner, a noted radical Republican senator, considered he and the President to be on the same page in
advocating for black suffrage, which had become the defining issue for Radicals in the spring 1865.This was based on
private conversations with Johnson in the spring of 1865 along with an oft-quoted speech of Johnson’s from October
1864 in which he promised to be their Moses to a group of African Americans in Nashville, TN.


                                                             52
Union: the abolishing of slavery, the repudiation of Confederate debt, and the repealing of ordinances
of secession. Beyond the restrictions on Confederate officers and wealthy southerners (who were able
to apply for individual Presidential pardons), each state was left to decide for itself who was eligible
to vote and hold office in elections. Radical Republicans were surprised at Johnson’s policy and were
outraged at the lack of provisions for black voting rights, which were not a stipulation for readmission
under Presidential Reconstruction.5
    In February 1866, only nine months after Johnson had issued his amnesty provision, 14,000 leading
Confederates had received pardons from the President, making them eligible to hold office. Before
Congress had resumed session, Mississippi, Alabama, South Carolina, North Carolina, Georgia, and
Florida had all held elections for delegates to constitutional conventions with few restrictions on either
former Confederate voting or officeholding and none with significant voting rights for blacks. The
governments that these conventions produced, along with subsequent elections held by the newly
constituted states, maintained a strong pro-Confederate character. For example, these states elected
to the United States Congress the Vice-President of the Confederacy, four Confederate generals, five
Confederate colonels, six Confederate cabinet members, and fifty-eight members of the Confederate
congress. These results were mirrored and even amplified at the state and local levels in the South,
and some elected officials continued to wear their Confederate uniforms while in office. Presidential
Reconstruction offered little room for black political concerns to be addressed.
    While the states did abolish slavery as directed, the reconstituted states worked to implement a
post-bellum racial policy referred to as black codes. While some of these laws did allow for blacks
to own property and initiate litigation, their chief design was to legally reinforce and re-systematize
labor control in the absence of chattel slavery.6 The codes differed from state to state, but common
provisions included requirements for black laborers to have verification of employment every year,
prohibitive taxes on black land-ownership, apprenticeship laws which allowed white employers to take
over custody of black children if their parents were deemed unfit, bans on blacks owning firearms,
and making intermarriage between a black citizen and white citizen a felony for the black individual.7
Johnson rejected and suppressed reports of the enforcement of black codes and appeared to do little
to stop widespread racial violence occurring in southern states. Many Republicans disagreed with the
policies but were reluctant to oppose them for fear of a split within the party.
    In September of 1865, Congress denied to seat representatives from the Tennessee government
which had been reconstructed under Lincoln’s war-time program. By October, many Republicans
began to express their concerns publicly when former rebel leaders were elected to office and the
inflexibility with which Johnson supported his Reconstruction program. The rapid removal of federal
troops from the South was disconcerting to Republicans as well, and this was one Johnson policy
that Republicans felt left the South vulnerable to Confederate interests.8 This growing discontent
culminated in the political maneuvering by Radicals before the December 1865 session of Congress
which persuaded the Clerk of the House of Representatives to refuse to include members from the
former rebel states on the roll call, effectively denying these states representation and re-admittance
   5
     The President nominally argued that black voting rights could be given after southern states had been re-admitted
rather than as a condition for re-admittance, but by October of the same year he was openly advocating against black
suffrage claiming it would lead to extensive racial strife.
   6
     See Smith (2013) for an example of Mississippi’s codes from 1865.
   7
     These codes, enforced upon both newly freed slaves and formerly free blacks with no distinction between the two,
ironically encouraged the development of a unified black polity in the South which would not have necessarily formed
otherwise (Foner, 2014).
   8
     By June 1866, hardly a year after the war had ended, there remained only 3,000 troops in North and South Carolina
combined.


                                                         53
to the Union. It was unclear what the next stage for readmission would be since neither Lincoln nor
Johnson had a policy if Congress refused to seat representatives.
    After refusing to seat the elected southern representatives, Congress established the Joint Com-
mittee of Fifteen to investigate the current conditions in former rebel states. Among the Committee’s
principal findings were its assertion for the continuing need of a significant federal military presence
in the southern states as well as the necessity of the Freedmen’s Bureau. Following the advice of
the Joint Committee, the Senate passed a bill which expanded the Bureaus lifespan indefinitely.9
Johnson somewhat shockingly vetoed the Bureau bill, calling it unconstitutional as it gave judicial
power to the Bureau and terming its cost prohibitive. While Congress could not unify to defeat this
Presidential veto, only a few months later Johnson again surprised nearly everyone when he vetoed a
Civil Rights Bill for Freedmen. Johnson’s obstinacy disturbed even Congressional moderates and his
veto was quickly overturned, one of the first in American history.
    Black political equality quickly became a defining issue for Presidential Reconstruction. Johnson’s
vetoing of these bills was the first third of a triad of 1866-1867 legislation which reset the Reconstruc-
tion process. In April 1866, the same Joint Committee of Fifteen proposed a set of resolutions that
would become the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution. The resolutions included a
definition of citizenship and the disallowing of states to abridge or violate these civil rights, a clause
for a reduction in the representation in Congress of any states proportional to the number of male
residents it denied the franchise to and the exclusion from Congress, the Electoral Congress, and other
federal offices of people who had left federal government, oath-sworn positions to aid the rebellion.
Southern states re-admission was to be contingent on the ratification of the 14th amendment. The
necessity of more stringent policy was reinforced by widespread southern violence in the summer of
1866.10 Johnson went on an ill-conceived press junket in the fall of 1866 to campaign for his Re-
construction policies while denouncing the Civil Rights Bill and the 14th Amendment. By the end
of 1866 seven southern states had already rejected the 14th Amendment, all but assuring the im-
plementation of a more radical program and more rigorous conditions for re-admission which would
include black suffrage. Furthermore, the results of the 1866 elections gave significant strength to
Radical Republicans– they now had the necessary two-thirds majority to override a presidential veto.
A new, wholesale Reconstruction program was passed which placed a priority on black suffrage. It
was vetoed by Johnson and quickly passed over the President’s veto. By early 1867, Congressional
Reconstruction had officially begun.

A.2      Congressional Reconstruction
The Congressional Reconstruction Act passed in the spring of 1867 divided the eleven former Con-
federate states, except Tennessee, into five military districts: 1) Virginia, 2) North Carolina and
South Carolina, 3) Georgia, Alabama, and Florida, 4) Mississippi and Arkansas, 5) Louisiana and
Texas. The Act placed the former rebel states under martial law as the army commander in charge
of each district was allowed to use military commissions rather than civilian courts to enforce laws.
The program also specified the more stringent requirements for readmission into the Union: (1) the
ratification of the 14th Amendment, (2) new state constitutions which allowed for manhood suffrage
irrespective of race, color, or religion, (3) approval of these new constitutions by a majority of a state’s
   9
     This also and validated land deeds given through the Bureau or Military Field Orders such as Sherman’s Field Order
15, which had reserved a strip of land running down the Charleston to Jacksonville coastline for freedmen homesteads.
  10
     Most notable of these murderous instances was the bloody New Orleans Riot in June where 44 blacks and 4 whites
were killed attempting to attend a constitutional convention and the massacre in Memphis of 45 blacks and 2 whites
over two days in May.

                                                          54
eligible voters, and (4) the establishment of governments under the new constitutions to replace the
governments established under Presidential Reconstruction. Subsequent Reconstruction Acts were
passed strengthening the original legislation. In March of 1867, voters were required to take a loyalty
oath. In July, federal voting registrars were authorized to disenfranchise those thought to be taking
the oath dishonestly. A fourth act passed in March 1868 which changed the requirement for passage
of state constitutions from a majority of a state’s registered voters to merely a majority of the voters
who voted in the election, as many white Southerners had registered and then did not vote in hopes
of preventing the ratification of the new constitutions.
    The passage of the Reconstruction Act, effectively enfranchising more than one million southern
black males, instantly stimulated black political activity in the South. Indeed, the potential of blacks
to be active in politics was one the largest areas on conflict during Reconstruction. Black institutions
and leaders, particularly churches and ministers, quickly became politicized channels of Republican
organization in the South. The Union League, previously a Northern middle-class organization,
became a conduit of black political activity in the South through political education initiatives and
the building of churches and schools, aimed primarily at Freedmen(Hahn, 2005; Foner, 2014). While
black support for the Republican Party was extensive to point of being unanimous, in only three
southern states (South Carolina, Mississippi, and Louisiana) did blacks hold an outright majority,
and even with this influx of newly eligible voters there was extensive local political competition.
This meant that attracting the support of whites living in the South would be critical in founding a
foundation for the Republican Party in the region.11
    In many areas of the South, black turnout for constitutional ratification and subsequent elections
exceeded 90%, even under the consistent threat of losing employment or physical violence in retaliation
for voting (Du Bois, 1935; Foner, 2014). Disenfranchisement of former Confederates varied, as some
states disenfranchised only those barred from office by the 14th Amendment while others had more
far-reaching proscriptive measures. The resulting constitutions drafted and passed by these southern
state conventions are notable for their progressiveness. Public responsibilities were greatly increased
as provisions were made for the establishing of public school systems, orphan asylums, and homes
for the mentally ill. The constitutions also abolished the extremely high poll-taxes which existed in
most southern states and also rewrote the antebellum tax codes so that tax revenues now came from
assessed land values as opposed to high poll and licensing fees.
    Along with the progressive nature of the newly adopted state constitutions, the Reconstruction-
era southern governments also boast many noteworthy accomplishments. One of the major and first
actions of these governments was the repealing of the black codes implemented under Presidential
Reconstruction. With these discriminatory laws gone, freedmen were finally able to move somewhat
freely throughout the South and engage in labor contracts that were much more equitable than
before.12 In addition, the institutional infrastructure to provide a higher level of public goods was
established. With expanded civil rights, blacks began to assert themselves more fully by, for example,
seeking legal redress for disputes. The expanded social responsibilities of government as well as the
accompanying costs are best demonstrated in South Carolina. In the six years between 1870 and
1876 the enrollment in the state’s public schools increased from 30,000 to 123,000 while the state
budget more than doubled between 1860 and the end of Reconstruction. The period of Congressional
  11
     Republicans originally hoped to attract former Whigs to the party, as the Democrats had a firm base among the
southern elite.
  12
     See Litwack (1979), Foner (2014), and Higgs (1977), for white responses to black labor’s new ability to negotiate
contacts. Many white planters responded by suggesting that landowners collude to set low wages, while others argued
that such strategies were against free labor ideals.



                                                         55
Reconstruction represents a dramatic change in the political and social organization of the American
South.


B      Considering Other Potential Instruments
Free blacks may not be the only instrumental variable available, and it is useful to consider other IVs
and what they would identify. First, one may think of environmental factors such as crop suitability
as IVs for black officeholders under the assumption that crop suitability is related to long-standing
political institutions which have their roots in agricultural productivity. The key problem with such
an IV would be the fact that environmental factors are obviously related to slavery, the extent of
slavery due to differences in slave labor requirements for specific crops, slave productivity, and agri-
cultural land values (Fogel and Engerman, 1974). This would violate the exclusion restriction, and
environmental factors would therefore not be exogenous to political institutions as they would be
related to the tax base via farm values and the extent of slaveholding.
    Second, one could think of Confederate losses during the Civil War as an IV for black officeholders
under the logic that areas with more Confederate deaths would have fewer whites able to serve in
political positions. Another part of the logic of such an IV is that the losses would have occurred before
Reconstruction and would be unrelated to local conditions given troop movement and the locations of
battles during the Civil War. Unfortunately, the extent of troop losses in the Confederacy is unknown
and highly suspect.13 This could lead to the numbers of losses being correlated with Scalawags,
Southern whites who were Republican during Reconstruction and derided as deserters during the
Civil War, or other factors which would be related to postbellum outcomes. Another complication
is that Confederate deaths are correlated with voting during Reconstruction (Larsen, 2015), which
violates the exclusion restriction as they may be related to political preferences. At a more basic level,
there is no evidence that there was a dearth of leaders that was related to Confederate losses during
the war.14 The first reconstructed governments, established during Presidential Reconstruction, were
completely white and staffed with former Confederates and other white sympathizers. There is no
evidence that Confederate losses left such a gap in leadership that it would lead to black leaders in their
absence. Indeed, after Reconstruction ended the governments quickly dispatched with black leaders
and replaced them with no evidence that there was a dearth of whites willing to serve (Franklin, 1961;
Foner, 2014).15
    Third, one could think that rather than the number of free blacks, the fraction of the black popu-
lation which was free would be a ideal instrument. The problems with such an IV are numerous. At
a minimum, the chief issue is that the number of slaves is contained in the denominator. Enslaved
and free blacks are weakly correlated, with a correlation of 0.1065.16 The number of slaves would
be related to agricultural productivity and land values (Fogel and Engerman, 1974). Also, slavery
and slaveholding played a critical role in political beliefs surrounding the Civil War (Calomiris and
Pritchett, 2016), but there is little evidence that free blacks were related to contemporaneous polit-
ical attitudes. There is also some evidence that slaveholding is related to persistent preferences for
distribution (Acharya et al., 2016).17 An additional problem is the identifying assumption of the IV–
  13
      See Larsen (2015), for example, who estimates death rates for seven confederate states.
  14
      Larsen (2015) argues that Confederate death rates were negatively related to lynching. Cook et al. (2016), however,
find no evidence that lynching was related to the presence of black politicians during Reconstruction.
   15
      This is not an issue of the quality of the leadership, but whether there were unfilled positions.
   16
      See above for more on the correlation of free blacks with other variables.
   17
      If this is the case then slaves should be included in the specification. The inclusion of slaves in the specification


                                                            56
it supposes that black officeholders are related to their disproportion in the overall black population,
as opposed to their number. For example, this assumption supposes that a location with 100 free
blacks would have fewer black officeholders if there were 1,000 slaves in the area as opposed to 500.18
This is a curious assumption, as it supposes that there are a fixed number of positions for black
officeholders that are more likely to be filled by free blacks where they are in larger proportion. There
is no narrative evidence that this was the case. In fact, when testing the proportion free IV the first
stage relationship is particularly weak– black politicians are not related to the relative size of the
black population, but were related to the number of free blacks.19 Given that the difference between
the free black and proportion of black free is driven by slaves, the results confirm that slaveholding is
a weak instrument.20


C       Additional Specifications
In Table A1 I show several checks of the main specification in Table 5. First, Panel A shows results
which use the percent of blacks who were free in 1860 as the instrument for black officeholders. While
the share of the black population free in 1860 has intuitive appeal, the denominator’s inclusion of
the slave population makes it difficult to argue that it would satisfy the exclusion restriction. As
the results show, the percent of blacks free is a weak instrument. The F-statistic on the excluded
instrument is below 5, falling well below conventional measures for instrument strength. This is
consistent with the argument earlier that slaves (and any function which contains slaves) will be a
poor instrument and slaves would be correlated with electoral preferences for redistribution.
    Panels B and C consider the sensitivity of the results with respect to population. The dependent
variable is in per capita terms but other variables in the main specification are not and population
enters linearly in the existing models. This may lead to a biased estimate of the effects to the extent
that black official would be located in more populous places, for which dichotomous urban indicators
would be a poor control. Also, population enters in different ways on the right- and left-hand side of
the regression. To see if population drives the results Panel B first excludes it from the specification.
The results show that the exclusion of population does not alter the results. Panel C presents estimates
where all covariates are placed in per capita terms, obviating the need to include total population
by itself and now having a specification which is consistently in per capita terms.21 The results are
similar to the main specification, where the IV estimate for black politicians is roughly twice the OLS
estimate. The results confirm that the estimates are not confounded by population nor driven by
their inclusion nor exclusion.22
    In Table A2 addition specifications are included to decompose the effect geographically as well as
to control for antebellum factors which could be related to political preferences. In Panel A of Table 7
could also be required if, for example, federal expenditures on Freedmen were substitutes for local expenditures. See
Table A2, which shows that the inclusion of slaves does not alter the results.
  18
     Note that since the regression controls for population and population shares such an IV is conditioned on these
factors.
  19
     See Table A1 for the results of the specification.
  20
     Another concern is the interpretation of the first stage. The fraction of blacks free is two variables, which alters
the critical value of the F statistic. Even using the inappropriate value of the F statistic critical value, the IV fails all
conventional weak instrument tests (see Table A1).
  21
     In particular, wealth, manufacturing wages, manufacturing output, literacy, and farm value are measured per
capita.
  22
     When total population is included in the per capital estimate the F-statistic on the excluded instrument is 134.3–
βF irst = 0.00265, t = 11.59– and the estimated difference βOLS = 0.094 versus βIV = 0.213.


                                                             57
the specification is replicated geographically. Rather than focusing on branch of government these
results show the effects of all black politicians who served in local offices as opposed to federal or state
positions. As with the results for legislative officials, the results here confirm that those serving at a
local level had a large impact on local tax revenues. In Panels B and C of Table A2 I include measures
of the extent of slaveholding to the extent that slavery may be related to persistent preferences
for redistribution (Acharya et al., 2016), or the potential for federal expenditures on Freedmen to
substitute away from local expenditures. It should be noted that since the slave population was
correlated with land values the inclusion of slaves may be an over-control in the specification. Panel
B uses includes the number of slaves in 1860 and Panel C the share of slaves as a fraction of the total
population in 1860. In both cases the inclusion of slaves does not alter the main result of the effect
of black politicians on per capita taxes, nor does the inclusion of slaveholding weaken the free black
IV in the first stage. In unreported results, the inclusion of slaves and the fraction of the population
enslaved do not alter the results for 1880 taxes nor for the change in taxes from 1870 to 1880.23
    Further estimates of the effect of taxes and the existence of black politicians is presented in
Table A3. In Table A3, the change in the number of farms is replicated for farms by size. Overall,
the results show that taxes had little effect on the change in the number of farms. While there is a
decrease in the number of farms 100-500 acres, the effect is relatively modest. When including the
indicator for black politicians, the effect is similar, but the presence of black politicians is correlated
with an increase of farms between 3 and 9 acres, which would be consistent with yeoman farming.
At the same time, it is related to a decrease in farms between 10 and 20 acres, which is also yeoman
farming. Given this inconclusive evidence it is difficult to assert that black politicians had an impact
on changes in farms.24
    The educational results presented earlier can be reformulated in a two-stage regression where the
first stage is county taxes as a function of black officials (or free blacks). This allows for a more
intuitive interpretation of the marginal effect by focusing on the variation in taxes driven by black
politicians. Table A4 shows the results for the educational outcomes in Table 10 where black officials
(Panel A) and free blacks (Panel B) are used in a first stage to predict 1870 county taxes. The
results for black officials show that the effect of taxes, predicted by the number of black officials, are
substantially greater than the OLS estimates. In proportional terms, the effect of taxes is much larger
for blacks than whites, which is consistent with the predicted taxes (via black officials) having a larger
proportional effect on black educational outcomes.
    Finally, Table A5 shows the reduced form estimates of the relationship between the number of
free blacks in 1860 and per capita county taxes in 1870, replicating the regression results of Table 3,
omitting black officials, and including free blacks in 1860.25 The results confirm that free blacks in
1860 are positively related to per capita county taxes in 1870.
    In Figure A1 the distribution of free blacks in 1860 is shown. As discussed in the text, the number
  23
      For the effect of 1880 taxes, the results with slaves were βOLS = 0.0349 versus βIV = -0.0915. For the fraction
slave the results were βOLS = 0.0277 versus βIV = -0.1402. For the effect of tax changes 1870 to 1880 taxes, the results
with slaves were βOLS = -0.0143 versus βIV = -0.0523. For the fraction slave the results were βOLS = -0.0129 versus
βIV = -0.0714. A one standard deviation increase in the number of black officials reduces 1880 taxes by 0.495 or 0.759
standard deviations, and decreases the change in taxes by 0.63 or 0.87 standard deviations, respectively.
   24
      Taxes are unrelated to changes in the amount of unimproved land per county, but taxes are positively correlated
changes in the amount of unimproved land per farm, which implies that more land was placed out of cultivation. Black
politicians are correlated with a decrease in the amount if unimproved land per farm, but the effect is quite modest– less
than 10 acres per county– and may simply reflect spacing of households in plots more distant over time. As with the
results of tax size, this evidence is inconclusive, at best, of an effect of black politicians on land and land use changes.
   25
       In specifications that contained slaves in 1860 and the percent of the population enslaved the coefficient on free
blacks in 1860 was 0.000210 and 0.000194, respectively.


                                                            58
of free blacks is greater in the Old South as opposed to the New South, but within each state there
is significant variation. Less than one fifth of the counties in the South had no free blacks in 1860.26
    A check of whether using 1870 for tax revenue is a valid for identification of black officeholders is
required. Black officeholders were elected after 1870, and if a majority entered office after 1870 the
effect they could have on public finance would be uncertain. In Figure A2 I show the year of entry for
black officeholders. More than two thirds of black officeholders began their offices before 1870. (It is
important to note that officeholders beginning during 1870 could still have an effect on 1870 taxes.)
Including those officials with uncertain start dates (some are listed only by the decade they began
service) increases this even further.


D       Description of Branch of Service Rubric
Regarding the encoding of a politician’s branch, certain qualitative assessments had to be made in
order to create a discrete variable representing which aspect of government in which the politician
participated. A value of Legislative was given if the politician himself or the governmental entity
with which he was associated with was tasked with drafting laws and/or setting rates and policies
with respect to revenue. This would include such titles as a state house representative, clerk for
the state house, or tax assessor. A value of Executive was given if the politician himself or the
governmental entity with which he was associated was primarily focused on carrying out or enforcing
laws or making decisions on what to adopt into law. This includes such titles as alderman, county
commissioner, postman, or a clerk for an entity primarily tasked with these duties. A value of Judicial
was given if the politician himself or the governmental entity with which he was associated was tasked
with the interpretation of the law or establishing penalties for criminals in courts of law. This includes
titles such as magistrate, justice of the peace or a clerk for any court of law.


E      A Model of Optimal Taxation
In this section I present a simple model which shows the preference that blacks would have for land
taxation, consistent with the narrative literature on tax policies advocated by black leaders. The
model is adopted from Pritchett (1986), which analyzes optimal taxation and forms the background
of the work in Pritchett (1989). The goal is to estimate an optimal tax rate on capital (or land)
using a two-factor model of the economy. The optimal tax (in the model this is similar to an optimal
tariff) depends on the elasticities of derived demand and supply of capital, and the factor shares
of the representative voter. Since blacks supplied relatively more labor than capital (or land), the
representative voter should support higher property taxes if he is black and lower property taxes if
he is white.
    Formally, the model starts with utility as Ui = U (Ci , Li , Ki ), where Ci is consumption of the final
product and K and L are the employment of capital and labor in the economy, respectively.
    Consumption is financed through earnings net of transfers, Gi . Assuming competitive factor
markets (wage rate, w and after tax return on capital, r), the budget constraint is Ci = wLi +rKi +Gi .
The social planner wishes to optimize utility by varying the tax rate, T . In the model this is expressed
  26
    As a technical matter, the relatively high variation in the number of free blacks per county makes it difficult to
visually show the range of distribution within as opposed to between states, especially for states in the Old South.
Another option would be to show the distribution of free blacks relative to the state mean, but this approach is analogous
to visually presenting the regression estimates with state fixed effects included.


                                                           59
as a percentage of the after tax return on capital.
                                        wL dw T        rK dr T        dG
                                  −SL     (     ) − SL    (    ) = SG                                          (A1)
                                        T dT w          T dT r        dT
    where S is the share of the factor (e.g., SK = KKi ). Higher taxes increase the gross return on
capital and reduce the net return on capital but also reduces the amount of capital in the economy.27
Since the tax burden is shared by labor and capital with lower returns, the loss to renters of capital
must equal that of loss in rent earned by labor, ρKE(ρ, T ) = −wLE(w, T ). Substituting in gives the
following:
                   rK                                            T −1
               −SK    E(r, T ) + SL rK(E(r, T ) + 1) = −SG rK(         (β + 1)E(r, T ) + 1)       (A2)
                    T                                              T
    And the optimal tax rate follows after noting that the elasticity of the derived demand for capital
is a function of the before tax return K = ρη , and that capital supply and demand should be equal
                                           η
in equilibrium, implying that E(r, T ) =        which gives:
                                         β−η
                                                 β+1          1
                                            SG (      ) − SK
                                                   β          β
                                       T =(                     )                                 (A3)
                                                  η+1         1
                                             SG (      ) − SL
                                                   η          η
                                         β+1
       When SG = SL and SK = 0, T =            . Since the supply of capital slopes upward, the optimal
                                           β
tax is where the gross return on capital equals the marginal factor cost. This case agrees broadly with
the description of tax polices in Reconstruction advocated by black politicians (Williamson, 1965;
Du Bois, 1935; Foner, 2014). Once they become owners of capital, however, the optimal tax would
change. This situation is described by Williamson (1965) for South Carolina and may explain some
of the relationship between assessment ratios and black landholding in Margo (1984).
    Moving beyond this model, it would be tempting to consider a political setting where exogenous
changes in the number of black elites lead to differentials in the supply of black officeholders, or
where black elites face lower costs of running for office. A simple model would have a normalized
population B and W such that B + W = 1. From each group elites are e(B) and e(W ) and assume
e(B) < e(W ). In such a setup black and white preferences would have to differ and in the simplest
case elites simply reflect the preferences of their reference group. Note that even in this model the
political preferences of whites and blacks must differ. If e(∗) < Ω the number of politicians is less
than those proportional to the population shares. Such a model would only be true under extremely
restrictive conditions on voter and/or politician preferences, however. First, while politicians are more
likely to come from elite groups, this is not a requirement. Voters would have to prefer elite politicians
of either race more than their preferred redistributive policy to the extent that out-group elites did
not share their policy preferences. An alternative restriction would limit political office to elites but
this would not match with the history of Reconstruction, where a significant number on non-elite
blacks and whites served in office. Second, white politicians would have to sub optimally respond to
the policy preferences of the black electorate, where their policy positions should be more likely to
conform to black electoral strength. The existing evidence from the enfranchisement of blacks in the
1960s suggests that white politicians did respond to black electoral strength (Cascio and Washington,
  27
    In particular, the percentage change in the gross return on capital is equal to the sum of the percent changes in
the tax on capital and the change in the net return on capital.

                                                         60
2014). Adding any dynamic dimension to such models would therefore require implausible discounting
by politicians for enfranchisement to have no effect. In both cases, however, the electoral preferences
of blacks would be incorporated via either a black or white politician in equilibrium, rendering the
race of the policymaker unimportant and the polices a function of electoral preferences and not the
race of the policymaker. Since neither of these assumptions in tenable, the effect of race on public
finance is difficult to model formally. More exotic models, where race is a signal which overcomes an
information problem, do not yield predictions that politician race will have an effect. While the effect
of politician race on outcomes is an empirical question, the theoretical prediction for such an effect is
difficult to derive from existing models of political behavior.




                                                   61
                                   Figure A1: Number of Free Blacks by County, 1860.



                             500


                             450


                             400


                             350


                             300
       Number of Officials




                             250


                             200


                             150


                             100


                              50


                               0



                                                       Year of Entry Into Office


Figure A2: Number of Black Politicians by Year of Entry to Office. Source: Foner (1996)



                                                            62
                              Table A1: Additional Specification Checks



Panel A: Percent of Blacks free in 1860 as IV
                                              OLS               First Stage              IV
Dependent Variable:                   1870 County Taxes       Black Officials   1870 County Taxes
                                          Per Capita           Per County            Per Capita
Officials Per County                       0.0925***                                   0.578*
                                            (0.0133)                                   (0.327)
Percent of Blacks Free 1860                                        1.982*
                                                                   (1.084)


F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                                   3.34


Panel B: Total Population Removed
                                              OLS               First Stage              IV
Dependent Variable:                   1870 County Taxes       Black Officials   1870 County Taxes
                                          Per Capita           Per County            Per Capita
Black Officials Per County                 0.0997***                                 0.2056***
                                            (0.0132)                                  (0.0787)
Free Blacks 1860                                                0.00118***
                                                                  (0.00024)


F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                                  24.24


Panel C: All Covariates Per Capita, Total Population Removed
                                              OLS               First Stage              IV
Dependent Variable:                   1870 County Taxes       Black Officials   1870 County Taxes
                                          Per Capita           Per County            Per Capita
Black Officials Per County                 0.0949***                                 0.1735***
                                           (0.00979)                                  (0.0209)
Free Blacks 1860                                                0.00317***
                                                                  (0.000206)


F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                                 237.79
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: N=825 in all regressions. All regressions include Republican vote share in 1868 Presidential Election,
total value of farms, Logan-Parman Segregation, percent black, manufacturing wages,
value of manufacturing output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, urban county, county wealth
and state fixed effects.   Panrel A includes total poputlation in 1870. Panel C uses all varianbles
which are not indecies or proportions in per capita fomulation.




                                                       63
  Table A2: Specification Checks for Local Politicians and Inclusion of Antebellum Factors


Panel A: Local Politicians
                                             OLS              First Stage               IV
Dependent Variable:                  1870 County Taxes Local Black Officials 1870 County Taxes
                                        Per Capita            Per County            Per Capita
Local Officials Per County                0.141***                                   0.291***
                                          (0.0225)                                    (0.110)
Percent of Blacks Free 1860                                   0.000837***
                                                              (0.000140)


F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                               35.57


Panel B: Number of Slaves in 1860 Included
                                             OLS              First Stage               IV
Dependent Variable:                  1870 County Taxes      Black Officials    1870 County Taxes
                                        Per Capita            Per County            Per Capita
Black Officials Per County               0.1094***                                   0.1562**
                                          (0.0132)                                   (0.0661)
Free Blacks 1860                                              0.00134***
                                                               (0.00024)


F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                               32.52


Panel C: Slaves as Share of Total Population Included
                                             OLS              First Stage               IV
Dependent Variable:                  1870 County Taxes      Black Officials    1870 County Taxes
                                        Per Capita            Per County            Per Capita
Black Officials Per County               0.0948***                                   0.1833**
                                          (0.0133)                                   (0.0873)
Free Blacks 1860                                              0.00106***
                                                              (0.000243)


F-Statistic on Excluded Instrument                               19.24
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: N=825 in all regressions. All regressions include Republican vote share in 1868 Presidential Election,
total value of farms, Logan-Parman Segregation, percent black, manufacturing wages,
value of manufacturing output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, urban county, county wealth
and state fixed effects.




                                                     64
                           Table A3: County Taxes and Changes in Number of Farms by Farm Size, 1870-1880

                                                                 Change in Number of Farms by Acreage, 1870 to 1880
     Panel A:                                  0-2       3-9         10-19       20-49       50-99       100-499      500-999     1000 +
                                                I        II            III        IV           V           VI           VII         VIII
     1870 County Per Capita Taxes             0.676     0.527        4.276       -4.469      -1.463     -13.62**      -1.344*      -0.524
                                             (0.456)   (2.215)       (3.759)    (6.672)     (2.935)      (5.334)      (0.718)      (0.419)
     R-Squared                                0.046     0.129        0.112       0.323       0.457        0.688         0.5        0.472
     State Fixed Effects                        X        X             X           X           X            X           X               X
     Local Economic Conditions                  X        X             X           X           X            X           X               X
     County Wealth                              X        X             X           X           X            X           X               X
     Republican Vote Share                      X        X             X           X           X            X           X               X


                                                                 Change in Number of Farms by Acreage, 1870 to 1880
     Panel B:                                  0-2       3-9         10-19       20-49       50-99       100-499      500-999     1000 +




65
                                                I        II            III        IV           V           VI           VII         VIII
     1870 County Per Capita Taxes             0.657     0.357        4.493       -4.315      -1.569     -13.60**      -1.347*      -0.526
                                             (0.456)   (2.209)       (3.756)    (6.679)     (2.936)      (5.341)      (0.719)      (0.420)
     Black Officials?                         1.735    15.93**      -20.35*      -14.48      9.951        -2.329       0.309       0.223
                                             (1.467)   (7.111)       (12.09)    (21.50)     (9.450)      (17.19)      (2.314)      (1.350)
     R-Squared                                0.048     0.136        0.115       0.323       0.458        0.688         0.5        0.472
     State Fixed Effects                        X        X             X           X           X            X           X               X
     Local Economic Conditions                  X        X             X           X           X            X           X               X
     County Wealth                              X        X             X           X           X            X           X               X
     Republican Vote Share                      X        X             X           X           X            X           X               X
     Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     N= 974. Regressions include total value of farms in 1870, the Logan-Parman segregation measure, percent black, total population,
     Column II and VI:manufacturing wages, value of manufacturing output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, urban county,
     and county wealth. Column III and VII: county welath in 1870. Column IV and VIII: Republican Vote Share in 1868.
     All regressions include state fixed effects.
                           Table A4: Two-Stage Estimates of Educational Outcomes as a Function of County Taxes

     Panel A: Black Officials as First                             Black                                                     White
     Stage Predictor of Taxes                                                           1900                                                      1900
                                                      Cannot Write Cannot Write       Age >20                   Cannot Write Cannot Write       Age >20
                                         Enrollment    Age > 10            Age >15    Literacy    Enrollment     Age > 10        Age >15        Literacy


     1870 County Per Capita Taxes        365.59***     -138.79***           15.55     0.0932***   391.18***      -175.25***      -127.74***     0.0351**
                                          (50.766)      (24.887)           (18.300)   (0.0205)     (92.837)       (35.575)           (25.822)   (0.0133)


     F Statistic on Excluded Predictor                                                               56.0
     Coefiicient on Black Officials (First Stage)                                                 0.09886***
                                                                                                   (0.0132)


     Panel B: Free Blacks as First                                 Black                                                     White
     Stage Predictor of Taxes                                                           1900                                                      1900
                                                      Cannot Write Cannot Write       Age >20                   Cannot Write Cannot Write       Age >20




66
                                         Enrollment    Age > 10            Age >15    Literacy    Enrollment     Age > 10        Age >15        Literacy


     1870 County Per Capita Taxes         320.16**      -112.97*           -127.79*    -0.044      461.53*       -176.935*           -87.387     -0.0352
                                          (126.28)      (64.294)           (63.852)   (0.0553)     (267.815)      (99.106)           (62.365)   (0.0368)


     F Statistic on Excluded Predictor                                                               6.859
     Coefficient on Free Blacks (First Stagte)                                                    0.000244**
                                                                                                  (0.0000931)


     Panel C: OLS Estimates
     1870 County Per Capita Taxes         42.20***     -39.66***       -19.22***      0.0201***    156.6***        -2.854             0.428     -8.68e-05
                                          (6.603)        (5.454)           (4.618)    (0.00470)     (22.69)        (6.983)           (4.985)    (0.00322)
     Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     N= 974. Regressions include total value of farms in 1870, the Logan-Parman segregation measure, percent black, total population,
     manufacturing wages, value of manufacturing output, number illiterate, rail access, water access, urban county, county wealth, and
     state fixed effects
                             Table A5: Reduced Form Estimates


                                         Dependent Variable : 1870 County Taxes per Capita


                                           I                  II            III            IV


Free Blacks in 1860                   0.000541***        0.000383***    0.000244***    0.000244***
                                       (7.84e-05)         (9.11e-05)     (9.31e-05)     (9.31e-05)
Total Value of Farms 1870             7.18e-08***        6.55e-08***    5.99e-08***    6.04e-08***
                                       (1.95e-08)         (2.10e-08)     (2.07e-08)     (2.08e-08)
Segregation Measure                      0.0499             0.303          0.284          0.281
                                        (0.326)            (0.366)        (0.360)        (0.360)
Percent Black                          0.669***           1.101***       0.954***       0.961***
                                        (0.211)            (0.262)        (0.259)        (0.260)
Total Population                       -3.11e-06         3.34e-05***     -2.34e-05*     -2.26e-05*
                                       (3.26e-06)         (8.27e-06)     (1.31e-05)     (1.34e-05)
Manufacturing Wages                                      -1.34e-06***   -2.06e-06***   -2.06e-06***
                                                          (2.66e-07)     (2.92e-07)     (2.92e-07)
Value of Manufacturing Output                            2.18e-07***    3.04e-07***    3.04e-07***
                                                          (7.20e-08)     (7.25e-08)     (7.26e-08)
Number Illiterate                                        -9.42e-05***    -1.62e-05      -1.72e-05
                                                          (2.46e-05)     (2.80e-05)     (2.82e-05)
Rail Access?                                               0.0437         0.0680         0.0689
                                                           (0.0862)       (0.0849)       (0.0850)
Water Access?                                               0.120          0.114          0.115
                                                           (0.0829)       (0.0818)       (0.0820)
Urban?                                                      0.212          0.292          0.292
                                                           (0.184)        (0.181)        (0.181)
County Wealth                                                           6.40e-08***    6.34e-08***
                                                                         (1.16e-08)     (1.18e-08)
Republican Vote Share 1868 President                                                     0.0832
                                                                                         (0.259)



R-Squared                                0.421              0.477          0.496          0.496


Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
N= 825. All Regressions include state fixed effects.




                                                    67
