                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    ENVIRONMENTAL EXTERNALITIES AND FREE-RIDING IN THE HOUSEHOLD

                                         Kelsey Jack
                                      Seema Jayachandran
                                         Sarojini Rao

                                       Working Paper 24192
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24192


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2018




We thank the Southern Water and Sewerage Company for their collaboration on the project. We have
benefited from comments made by audience members at numerous seminars and conferences, and
from conversations with Nava Ashraf, Rebecca Dizon-Ross, Gilbert Metcalf, James Sallee, Dmitry
Taubinsky, and Alessandra Voena. Flavio Malagutti, Lorenzo Uribe, Lydia Kim, and Alejandro Favela
provided outstanding research assistance. We also thank Amanda Kohn for designing an information
flyer used in the study. The International Growth Centre and J-PAL's Urban Services Initiative and
Governance Initiative provided financial support. This RCT was registered in the American Economic
Association Registry for randomized control trials under number AEARCTR-0000660. All errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Kelsey Jack, Seema Jayachandran, and Sarojini Rao. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Environmental Externalities and Free-riding in the Household
Kelsey Jack, Seema Jayachandran, and Sarojini Rao
NBER Working Paper No. 24192
January 2018
JEL No. D10,H21,H23,O10,Q56

                                         ABSTRACT

Water use and electricity use, which generate negative environmental externalities, are
susceptible to a second externality problem: with household-level billing, each person enjoys
private benefits of consumption but shares the cost with other household members. If individual
usage is imperfectly observed (as is typical for water and electricity) and family members are
imperfectly altruistic toward one another, households overconsume even from their own
perspective. We develop this argument and test its prediction that intrahousehold free-riding
dampens price sensitivity. We do so in the context of water use in urban Zambia by combining
billing records, randomized price variation, and a lab-experimental measure of intrahousehold
altruism. We find that more altruistic households are considerably more price sensitive than are
less altruistic households. Our results imply that the socially optimal price needs to be set to
correct both the environmental externality and also the intrahousehold externality.

Kelsey Jack                                    Sarojini Rao
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
Tufts University                               University of Chicago
314 Braker Hall                                5757 S. University Avenue
Medford, MA 02155                              Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                       sarojini25@gmail.com
kelsey.jack@tufts.edu

Seema Jayachandran
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Dr
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
seema@northwestern.edu
1       Introduction
Water use and energy use generate environmental externalities. They are also subject to
a second externality problem if the billing unit is a household: each individual enjoys the
private benefits of consumption but shares the costs with other household members. (Or,
conversely, each individual bears the private costs of conservation, but shares the savings
with others.) In the absence of perfect altruism within the household or a way to ascertain
each person’s usage, households will over-consume and be less price-sensitive, relative to their
first best. The socially optimal price must be set to correct the environmental externality
and this second externality within the home.
    The degree to which household members internalize each others’ welfare likely varies
across households, either because of variation in altruism or in the ability to observe and
enforce individual levels of usage. When the this misalignment of incentives within the
household is more severe, the household will be less price sensitive, all else equal. We test this
prediction in the context of water usage in Livingstone, Zambia.1 We survey customers of the
regional water utility and combine monthly administrative billing data, a lab-experimental
measure of intrahousehold altruism, and a randomized intervention that generates exogenous
variation in the eﬀective price of piped water. In our context, water is a significant expense
for households: on average, nearly 5 percent of monthly income goes to the water bill.
    We start by laying out the intrahousehold problem with a simple model that adapts
the moral hazard in teams framework.2 Each individual decides how much costly eﬀort
to put into water conservation, taking others’ decisions as given. Because the individual
bears the full private cost of conservation while sharing the benefits (via the water bill)
with the rest of the household, conservation will tend to be below the household’s Pareto
optimal level. We allow for heterogeneity across individuals and households in how much
they internalize other household members’ utility. We model this as altruism, but it could
also be thought of as a reduced-form representation of monitoring and enforcement. As
shorthand, we refer to households that internalize others’ utility more as “more eﬃcient”
because their intrahousehold free-riding ineﬃciency is smaller.
    1
     Surface water from the Zambezi River is the water source that supplies the local water utility and, in turn,
households in Livingstone, and it is a scarce resource. Seasonal scarcity results in periods of water shortage
in Livingstone, as in many developing country cities (NWASCO 2015). Use in Livingstone also imposes
negative externalities on other who depend on the river, such as farmers downstream. Poor infrastructure
resulting in distribution loss is one reason that water scarcity might be a larger problem in developing
countries than developed countries, and increased weather volatility due to climate change is exacerbating
the problem (Jacobsen et al. 2013; Van der Bruggen et al. 2010).
   2
     As we discuss later in the paper, our framework does not assume that households are non-cooperative in
general. The fact that individual water use is not observable and cannot be purchased individually precludes
a cooperative equilibrium for the specific domain of piped water.



                                                       2
    The model generates two main predictions that we test with our data. First, more eﬃcient
households will be more price sensitive. Second, individual-level prices lead to larger eﬀects,
relative to the status quo of household-level prices, for someone who is not usually responsible
for the water bill and thus typically has weak incentives to conserve.
    To test the predictions, we sample 1,282 married couples who are customers of the water
utility, and survey each spouse separately.3 Each plays a modified dictator game with his or
her spouse. Spouses will share more with each other either if they are more altruistic toward
one another or are able to recoup more of the money they transfer to their spouse in the
game. Both of these traits would also likely make individuals internalize each other’s utility
when making water consumption choices, so we use this measure as a proxy for the degree
of intrahousehold ineﬃciency in water use. We also ask other survey questions such as who
bears the financial upside or downside if the water bill decreases or increases. (Hereafter, we
refer to this person as the “eﬀective bill payer.”)
    To generate price variation, randomly selected households are given a financial incentive
to conserve water. If household water use, as measured by the monthly bill, falls below a
household-specific target, they are entered into a lottery with a 1 in 20 (or better) probability
of winning a substantial payout. This reward for reducing consumption is akin to a discrete
increase in the price of water over some range of consumption. In one third of the treated
households, the prospect of this reward is conveyed to the couple together, and in the other
two thirds it is conveyed to either the man or the woman only. This design eﬀectively
allows us to turn a household-level price into an individual-level price. We follow households
for three to nine months after treatment and observe both water usage and bill payment
behavior.4
    Overall, we find an average decrease in monthly water use of 6.2 percent in response to the
   3
     All of the households in our sample have piped water to their homes, and around 60 percent have indoor
plumbing. Half own their homes, 16 percent employ a maid, and 90 percent have regular incomes from either
salaried work or self-employment. In other words, these households are decidedly middle class by Zambian
standards.
   4
     We also investigate two other features of the billing environment that might aﬀect households’ response
to our price incentive treatment, described in detail in Section 3.3. First, water is priced on an increasing
block tariﬀ, which results in a poor understanding of the marginal price. We elicit price perceptions using a
carefully framed procedure that elicits beliefs over quantities that are salient to water use decisions. While
the median response is close to the truth, we observe a wide variance in beliefs across respondents and wide
confidence intervals around individual beliefs. All households that receive the price incentive also receive
information about the actual price of water. In addition, a sub-sample of household receive information about
prices but no incentive to conserve. Second, a lack of trust in the water provider or a misunderstanding of
the billing process might undermine customers belief that their water use translates directly into their bill.
For example, when asked whose water use is to blame for a high monthly bill, many respondents placed
blame on the water provider. We introduce a cross-cutting “provider credibility” treatment that explains
how bills are generated. Neither the price information nor the credibility treatment result in measurable
impacts on water use, even when prior beliefs about prices or the provider are taken into consideration.



                                                      3
financial incentive to reduce consumption. Consistent with the predictions from our model,
the average response is driven almost entirely by more eﬃcient households: couples that
share more with each other in the modified dictator game — our proxy for intrahousehold
eﬃciency — reduce their water use more in response to the price incentive treatment. In
addition, it matters which member of the couple is given the incentive to conserve: incentives
targeted at women lead to reductions in water use that are twice as large as either incentives
targeted toward men or to couples, although the diﬀerences across incentive sub-treatments
are not statistically significant. This greater sensitivity to a change in price targeted to
the woman is consistent with our household model given the context: in the majority of
households, men are the eﬀective bill payers.5 We test this interpretation directly and find
that, controlling for the gender of the person given the price incentive, a higher individual-
level price leads to a larger reduction in household water use when given to the non-bill
payer.
    Our result on heterogeneity by the household’s level of intrahousehold eﬃciency uses
randomized price variation but also relies on existing, non-randomized variation. This raises
the concern that unobservables correlated with both intrahousehold eﬃciency (specifically,
sharing in the dictator game) and other determinants of household-level price sensitivity
might drive our findings. We address this concern in two ways. First, and most importantly,
we develop multiple predictions about the types of households that should respond most to
our price incentive intervention, including diﬀerential predictions based on which member
of the couple (randomly) receives the incentive, a test that relies only on the design-based
variation in the price incentive. Support for multiple predictions makes it less likely (though
of course not impossible) that the patterns simply reflect omitted variables. Second, we
investigate observable possible sources of heterogeneity in price sensitivity, such as household
size or wealth, and show that our results are robust to controlling for them in parallel to our
intrahousehold eﬃciency measure. While the line between controlling for spurious correlation
and eliminating relevant variation is somewhat arbitrary, our main results largely stand up
to a series of robustness checks.
    After presenting our regression estimates, we discuss the normative and policy implica-
tions for corrective pricing. The welfare implications of our findings are analogous to those
of Allcott et al. (2014), where correcting the environmental externality also corrects the
intrahousehold “internality”, and therefore leads to an additional welfare gain and a higher
optimal corrective tax. However, like in Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2016), heterogeneity
   5
     This finding raises the question of why households do not make the woman the bill payer in the absence of
our intervention, given that she is reported to use more water than her husband in the majority of households
in our sample. We discuss qualitative evidence on this puzzle in the conclusion.



                                                      4
in the degree of the intrahousehold free-riding lowers the welfare gain relative to the case
with homogenous households. We calibrate the optimal corrective price in light of both
the average distortion and the heterogeneity that we measure in our experimental setting.
Only considering the average level of intrahousehold ineﬃciency, the optimal price would
be over 60 percent higher than the optimal price set to internalize the marginal damages
from consumption. This, however, would overshoot by roughly 40 percentage points the
welfare-maximizing price when one takes into account the variation in the degree of in-
trahousehold eﬃciency across households. Given the welfare cost of a homogenous tax to
correct a heterogenous intrahousehold distortion, it may be better to separately address the
intrahousehold free-riding problem and the environmental externality. We show suggestive
results that better information about consumption increases price sensitivity: households in
which both spouses can read their water bills or are roughly aware of one another’s con-
sumption are more price sensitive. Information interventions or individual-level incentives
for conservation that address intrahousehold ineﬃciencies in water and energy use oﬀer a
promising direction for future research.
     The study links two previously unconnected strands of literature, one on environmental
externalities and one on intrahousehold decision-making. Our contribution to the literature
on corrective pricing in environmental economics is to highlight a previously undiscussed
reason that consumers might under-respond to utility prices.6 We thus add to literature
on misperceptions of price (Ito 2014; McRae and Meeks 2016), lack of information about
the price (Jessoe and Rapson 2014; Kahn and Wolak 2013), and lack of salience (Allcott
2011; Allcott et al. 2014) as factors that dampen the price elasticity of demand. The in-
centive mis-alignment within the household that we study resembles the incentive problem
between landlords and tenants, which has been shown to lead to over-consumption of elec-
tricity (Levinson and Niemann 2004; Elinder et al. 2017) and underinvestment in eﬃciency
(Gillingham et al. 2012; Myers 2015).7 Intrahousehold ineﬃciencies might be especially im-
portant in poor countries, where gender roles are particularly imbalanced. However, while
our empirical applications focuses on husbands and wives, an analogous intrahousehold inef-
ficiency arises from children, which is likely equally applicable in richer and poorer countries.
     Our main contribution to the household economics literature is to study implications of
intrahousehold decision-making for a novel domain of consumption, namely goods whose con-
   6
     Rungie et al. (2014) point out that intrahousehold heterogeneity in preferences over water quality aﬀect
stated preference measurement of household-level preferences. They propose an alternative approach to
discrete choice modeling of preferences that takes into consideration the influence of the individual on the
collective household choice.
   7
     A related problem exists for bill sharing among groups in other situations, such as dining at a restaurant
(Gneezy et al. 2004).



                                                      5
sumption imposes environmental externalities beyond the household. Much of the previous
literature either focuses on the implications of intrahousehold decision-making on invest-
ments in children (which might also be a source of societal externalities) or tests between
diﬀerent models of the household: unitary, cooperative non-unitary, and non-cooperative.
A non-cooperative framework is applicable when, despite altruism, shared information and
long-term interactions of households, there is limited information or limited commitment (see
Lundberg and Pollak 1994). The imperfection in our context is that individual consumption
of piped water is not easily observed (which also applies to home energy), combined with
the fact that the good is delivered and billed to the household, not the individual.8 We con-
tribute to a small set of papers showing Pareto ineﬃciencies in consumption or expenditure
outcomes for households (examples include Dercon and Krishnan 2000; Duflo and Udry 2004;
Mazzocco 2007; Robinson 2012; Angelucci and Garlick 2016).9 We also add to a literature
that uses lab-experimental methods to measure diﬀerences across households in intrahouse-
hold decision-making (e.g., Ashraf 2009; Mani 2011; Kebede et al. 2013; Castilla and Walker
2013). Specifically, we join a growing literature that tests for heterogeneity in the impact
of interventions or in outcomes outside of the lab based on lab-experimental measures of a
household’s decision-making (Schaner 2015; Hoel 2015; Ashour et al. 2017; Fiala 2017).
    The paper proceeds as follows. The next section presents a simple model of water use in
the household. Section 3 describes the experimental design and implementation. Section 4
presents the results, and Section 5 discusses the implications for optimal pricing. Section 6
concludes.


2       Model of water use within the household
In this section, we model a household’s water consumption, which is a function of eﬀort spent
on conservation. We start by benchmarking the household’s choice in the absence of any
intrahousehold frictions. We then allow for individual-level water conservation choices that
diverge from the household’s first best. Two features of water use guide our modeling deci-
sions. First, there is limited observability of others’, and to an extent one’s own, conservation
    8
      Respondents in a qualitative survey conducted in markets around Lusaka (N=96) were most likely to
list water as one of the three most diﬃcult consumption categories to keep track of. This was true both for
own and spouse’s consumption. See Appendix Figure A.1.
    9
      Many papers fail to reject eﬃciency in consumption (see Donni and Chiappori (2011) for a review).
Eﬃciency in saving behavior is more often rejected than is eﬃciency in consumption, perhaps because of the
greater commitment challenge posed by intertemporal savings decisions (e.g., Schaner 2015; Ashraf 2009).
The timing of water and energy bills introduces an intertemporal dimension to the consumption decision,
which may make them more prone to consumption ineﬃciencies than other types of consumption. We discuss
the particulars around utility bills and intrahousehold decisions in Section 2.4. A much larger literature has
examined, and often rejected, Pareto eﬃciency in investment and production (e.g., Udry (1996)).


                                                      6
eﬀort. Second, water is not purchased at the individual level; a utility bill for piped water
pools all household members’ usage. We discuss these features of water in more detail at
the end of this section. Because of these features, we model water use as a non-cooperative
game. In the literature, households are more often modeled in a cooperative framework,
befitting the altruism and long-term relationship among family members. Our model setup
should not be interpreted as implying households are not cooperative over other domains
characterized by greater observability of actions or individual-level purchases.
    Our model is, in essence, a moral hazard in teams model, and similarly generates a
free-riding problem, with each individual exerting ineﬃciently low eﬀort to conserve water.
Within this model set-up, we generate predictions about price sensitivity. We model a
household as consisting of two individuals, whom we describe as husband and wife, but the
intuition extends to other household structures.


2.1     Optimal water conservation
Household aggregate water use, W , is the sum of water use by each individual i within the
home, which is given by wi = w̄(1 ei ), where conservation eﬀort ei 2 (0, 1) lowers water
use but at a convex cost, ce2i . Individuals consume a maximum quantity of water given
by w̄ if they exert no eﬀort at all towards conserving water.10 The water utility charges
                                   P
the household pW , where W ⌘ i wi . The household has total income Y and we assume
pW < Y . We assume that utility is linear in income remaining after the water bill is paid,
i.e., linear in other consumption.
     We model a household as comprising two individuals, a husband and a wife. Assuming
equal welfare weights on each person’s utility, the household’s optimal choice of conservation
eﬀort is symmetric across individuals and is given by:

                                     max Y       2pw̄(1    ei )   2ce2i .                                 (1)
                                       ei

Solving the first order condition, the household achieves its first best outcome if each member
exerts eﬀort, eFi B = 2c
                      p
                         w̄.


2.2     Individual best response
The first best equilibrium might not obtain, however, if the conservation eﬀort of the other
member of the household, i, is diﬃcult to observe. We assume that each individual i takes
  10
    This can be thought of either as the level of consumption where marginal benefits are equal to zero (i.e.,
a satiation point) or some physical constraint on water use associated with, for example, running all of the
household’s taps for 24 hours a day.


                                                      7
her spouse’s conservation eﬀort e i as given, assuming that e i is diﬃcult to observe and
therefore to contract over. We discuss this assumption in greater detail below.
     Individual bargaining weights i > 0 determine the ex post division of income Y that
remains after the household pays the water bill. (In practice, households might have diﬀerent
sharing rules for diﬀerent expenses. What is specifically relevant is the identity of the
“eﬀective bill payer,” or residual claimant on the water bill, and the sharing rule he/she
applies to the savings that accrue from water conservation.) Bargaining weights sum to 1
( i + i = 1), and aggregate water use is given by W = wi + w i = 2w̄(1 ei +e     2
                                                                                   i
                                                                                     ).
     Individual i receives utility from income available for non-water consumption and disu-
tility from water conservation eﬀort:

                                     vi =   i (Y         pW )      ce2i .

Individuals may also internalize some share 0  ↵i  1 of their spouse’s utility, with i’s utility
function given by ui = vi + ↵i v i . We model and refer to ↵i as a measure of i’s altruism
toward his or her spouse, but it might also reflect enforcement of agreements around water
use if individual water use were partially observable. Person i chooses ei to satisfy the first
order condition:


                                            p
                                  e⇤i =        w̄(   i   + ↵i (1            i ))
                                            2c

or, equivalently,

                                               p
                              wi⇤ = w̄[1          w̄(      i   + ↵i (1             i ))]        (2)
                                               2c

For i = 1 or ↵i = 1, person i fully internalizes the household’s cost of water consumption,
and the individual conservation decision is equal to the decision in the first best: e⇤i = eFi B =
 p
2c
   w̄. However, if i = 1, then i = 0, and individual i only exerts eﬀort insofar as she is
altruistic toward her spouse.
     More generally, equation (2) shows that wi⇤ is decreasing in p, ↵i and i .A higher price,
more altruism toward’s one spouse, and enjoying the monetary upside of lower water bills
all lead to lower water consumption.
     Finally, we consider a hypothetical individual price on water, Pi , such that person i
eﬀectively becomes the bill payer by bearing the full cost of water consumed by the household.
i’s indirect utility function becomes vi = i Y      Pi W ce2i , and her optimal e⇤i = 2c   1
                                                                                              Pi w̄.
Her incentive in this case is equivalent to her incentive under the household-level price if her


                                                     8
 i   = 1.


2.3         Eﬀect of a price change
Our experimental treatments are designed to make water use more costly to the household,
                                                                            @w⇤
eﬀectively increasing the price. We are interested in how price sensitivity @pi diﬀers based on
                                                          @w⇤
the inner workings of the household. Note that because @pi < 0, a negative cross-derivative
represents an increase in price sensitivity.
             @ 2 wi⇤
Result:      @p@↵i
                       <0

This results states that individuals that are more altruistic are more price sensitive. We
observe household level price responses, so the empirical prediction is that households that
have higher average levels of altruism are more price sensitive. Intuitively, i will reduce
her water use more when the price increases if she internalizes the savings that will accrue
to her spouse more. Note also that the individual eﬀect will be stronger as i decreases:
 @ 2 wi⇤          @ 2 wi⇤
@p@↵i
         | i !0 <         |
                  @p@↵i i !1
                             < 0. This result that the marginal eﬀect of ↵i is greatest when i is
low means that altruism matters more for water use when the other person pays the bill.
             @ 2 wi⇤
Result:      @p@ i
                       <0

In words, the greater the individual’s stake in the water bill, the more sensitive she is to
the price. Since we assume that i + i = 1, there is no cross-household variation in
the average value of to test this prediction. Instead, to identify how being the eﬀective
bill payer aﬀects individual (and in turn household) water use, we add a person-specific
component to the price, which we denote Pi . The individual utility function then becomes
vi = i (Y     pW ) ce2i Pi W . The eﬀect of such a manipulation depends on i’s existing
incentive to conserve water, i .
             ⇣ ⇤          ⌘
               @w    @wi⇤
Result: @@ i @pi     @Pi
                            <0

The diﬀerence between the individual response to the household water price and to a person-
specific price is smaller for someone with a larger residual claim over any savings on the
water bill (higher i ). This is because this person already internalizes the household water
price p, so a change in Pi represents a smaller proportional change in her eﬀective price,
and thus leads to a larger change in her water consumption. Conversely, as i ! 0, the
diﬀerence between oﬀering an individual a price incentive through the household price p and
an individual price Pi increases. When observing household-level water consumption, the
prediction is that directing the individual price Pi to the individual with less stake in the
bill will have a larger eﬀect on aggregate consumption.

                                               9
2.4     Discussion of assumptions
What makes water special A key feature of water consumption, or the choice of con-
servation eﬀort, implicit in our setup is that the household – not the individual – pays for
water. Household utilities such as water or electricity tend to have this feature in contrast
with, for example, clothing, where a couple could divide up income and make individual
purchases. Note that this point is distinct from saying water is a public good; (some) water
consumption is rival and excludable (e.g., drinking a glass of water) but purchases are not
made individually.
    There are also goods such as food for which households could choose to make individual
purchases but do not typically do so; this seems natural for ingredients used to prepare shared
meals, but some food consumption, such as snack food, is more often individual consumption.
The fact that households could but do not purchase snack food separately raises the other
key feature of water assumed in this setup: lack of observability of individual consumption.
A spouse’s water use is diﬃcult to observe. First, it is hard to match water quantities to
activities (e.g., how many gallons used in a 5 minute shower, how many gallons used to
wash dishes). Second, feedback on consumption is infrequent since it typically arrives once
a month with the water bill. This compounds the observability problem. Contrast this
with snack food, where the household has more information to assign consumption to each
individual: if you notice that the number of cookies in the cookie jar has decreased since the
last time you were in the kitchen, you know one of your family members stole a cookie from
the cookie jar. If water meters were more accessible and easier to interpret, an individual
could check the meter before and after a spouse’s shower to observe consumption.11 Adding
to these observability challenges, knowing one’s own consumption is often diﬃcult.12 Even
ex post, if i can only observe own consumption with some error ✏, then she can only infer
w i from the total bill with error: wˆ i = W (wi + ✏). Moreover, the fact that some part of
water consumption is a public good at the household level (e.g., washing the family’s dinner
dishes) further complicates the problem of quantifying others’ eﬀort toward conservation.
(Note that even when water is used to produce public goods, there is still some “private” ’
consumption if, conditional on how clean you get the dishes, washing them in a manner that
wastes less water requires more eﬀort and hence higher private costs.)
  11
      This improvement in intrahousehold observability may explain part of the decline in electricity use
associated with the introduction of smart metering (e.g., Jessoe and Rapson 2014).
   12
      The fact that even one’s own consumption is diﬃcult to gauge means that, even leaving aside the free-
riding problem within a group, an individual might not consume the amount of water she is targeting. For
example, if there were a prize for reducing water, a person living alone might miss the target. This problem
of only being able to choose consumption with error is a distinct one from the free-riding problem we are
focused on, and could lead to over- or under-consumption of water.



                                                    10
Altruism versus enforcement Our modeling set up abstracts from enforcement and
takes as given that the spouse’s water use is not observable. In practice, water use might be
partly observable, in which case monitoring and enforcement of intrahousehold agreements
becomes relevant. Even if water use were observable, diﬃculty enforcing intrahousehold
agreements is suﬃcient to result in ineﬃcient levels of aggregate consumption, and might
lead to variation across individual-level ↵i and household-level average ↵
                                                                         ¯ . Going forward, we
refer to ↵i and ↵
                ¯ as measures of intrahousehold eﬃciency, to accommodate the possibility that
either higher levels of altruism or better monitoring and enforcement might drive individuals
within a household to consume closer to the household optimum. While we do not explicitly
model the nature of the intrahousehold friction (i.e., what allows intrahousehold free-riding
to persist), we conjecture that households in which water use is more observable will behave
like households with higher ↵  ¯ and be more price sensitive.


3        Experimental design and data
An empirical test of our predictions requires three inputs: (1) a measure of aggregate house-
hold water consumption W , (2) variation in water prices p and Pi , and (3) measures of i
and ↵i . We describe how we operationalize each of these in turn.


3.1      Water use
We partnered with the private regulated utility, the Southern Water and Sewerage Company
(SWSC), that provides piped water to residents in Livingstone, Zambia. Households are
billed based on monthly meter readings, and charged according to an increasing block tariﬀ
(i.e., the unit price is higher for usage beyond a threshold, and continues to increase in
steps).13 Our main outcome measure is household water use per month. We obtain monthly
billing records for January 2012 through September 2016. For each household in our sample,
we create a panel that extends four months after treatment and 20 months before treatment,
ensuring that observations for all households cover a two year window, regardless of when
they were surveyed.14 Water use is measured in cubic meters based on in-person water meter
readings collected monthly between the 20th and 25th of each calendar month. We keep only
successful meter readings (i.e. drop the months in which meter readings were estimated or a
    13
      Tariﬀs are regulated by the National Water Supply and Sanitation Council, and are intended to recover
operating and maintenance costs, with cross subsidization from high to low tariﬀ blocks and across customer
types (NWASCO 2014).
   14
      Households received up to 8 months of treatment, so we discard some treated months in favor of allowing
all study households to contribute equally to the estimated treatment eﬀect. As a robustness check, we include
all treatment months in the analysis.


                                                     11
meter was reported as broken or disconnected). We log transform the consumption outcome
variable, which drops a small number of zero reading months (which are likely billing errors
or months the entire household was away, in any case). We generate an indicator for the
month following a zero or missing observation to account for the fact that the first actual
reading after an estimated reading or month with a broken meter may only partly reflect
that month’s consumption.
    The tariﬀ schedule for 2015, when our study took place, is shown in Appendix Figure A.2.
The average price in the pre-intervention period (2013-15) among households that we survey
is 4.36 Kwacha, or around 0.44 USD, per cubic meter.15 Average household consumption is
around 19 cubic meters per month, a little under half of typical US household consumption,
resulting in monthly consumption charges of around 85 Kwacha or 8.50 USD per month.16
While we do not have household level monthly income or expenditure measures for our sam-
ple, we use the 2010 wave of the Living Conditions Monitoring Survey (LCMS), restricted
to households with piped water in urban Livingstone, to calculate a median monthly expen-
diture of 192 USD (CPI adjusted to 2015 USD) and a median monthly income of 220 USD.
Thus, the average water bill is around 4 percent of median income.
    In addition to the measure of water consumption, we estimate the impacts of the inter-
vention on other customer outcomes including payment behavior and missing meter readings.
Our outcome measures and other relevant statistics related to the monthly bill are shown
in the top panel of Table 1, which also tests for balance across the treatments, as discussed
below.


3.2     Change in the eﬀective price of water
The ideal variation to test the price sensitivity implications of our model would be a change
in the marginal price of water. However, randomly varying the (regulated) water price
charged by the utility, SWSC, was infeasible in our setting. Instead, we manipulate the
household’s experienced water price by increasing the returns to water conservation through
a randomized intervention. Figure 1 summarizes the experimental design.17
    The treatment was implemented in conjunction with a household survey, run between
May and December 2015. Households in the incentive treatment are provided with a mone-
tary incentive to reduce water use. In the months following onset of the treatment, households
are entered into a lottery for 300 Kwacha (30 USD) for reductions in billed consumption,
  15
     We use an exchange rate of 10 Kwacha / USD and adjust for inflation to 2015 USD values throughout.
  16
     Customers are charged for meter rental at a rate of 5 Kwacha per month and for sanitation and sewerage
as a fixed proportion of monthly water use.
  17
     The randomization was within four strata defined by whether the household’s pre-period average monthly
water usage and outstanding balance due to SWSC were above or below our sample median.


                                                    12
relative to an account-specific reference level. Conditional on qualifying for the lottery,
households had a 1 in 20 (or better) chance of winning. To qualify, households had to reduce
their consumption by at least 30 percent relative to their average water usage in a two-month
reference window, which resulted in a mean reduction target of 5.8 (median 4.95) cubic me-
ters. The reference window was updated twice over the course of roughly eight months of
fieldwork.18
    In the notation of the household model, the incentive treatment adds a term to the
indirect utility function: vi = i (Y pW + R ⇥ 1(W  W̄ )) e2i , where R is the expected
value of the lottery payout. With 1 in 20 probability of winning, the expected value of the
lottery incentive is around 1.5 USD or 15 Kwacha.19 The average price associated with the
reference window is 5.1 Kwacha / cubic meter. With a target reduction of 5.8 cubic meters,
the expected value of the (net) price shock is 2.06 Kwacha per cubic meter or a roughly
40 percent increase in the average price.20 The treatment – in which a household receives
a fixed reward for reaching a threshold that is proportional to past usage – diﬀers from
an increase in the marginal price of water in that there is a discrete change in the eﬀective
price of water over a particular range of consumption. In addition, the reward is an expected
reward; we randomly select some households for payment to reduce implementation costs and
simplify the logistics of paying the prizes. These design decisions were based on feasibility
and transparency considerations, and we note that extrapolating from the treatment eﬀects
that we measure to price elasticities requires a number of assumptions. Rewriting our model
in terms of a discrete change in the price associated with a quantity threshold does not
change the predictions: households with higher ↵  ¯ are more likely to meet the threshold.
    Our incentive treatment consists of three sub-treatment arms. In the first, both spouses
learn about the lottery, and know that the information is provided to both. In this case, the
intervention is analogous to an increase in p. The second and third sub-treatments provide
only the wife or only the husband with information about the lottery. (Prize winners were
also informed and paid privately in these arms). These individual sub-treatments move the
  18
      The first reference period (March-April 2015) was used for households surveyed in May-early August;
this was updated using a June-July reference window for households surveyed through late September. In
September, we expanded the sample; new households had July-August 2015 as their reference period. This
sample was used from late September through December, when fieldwork was completed.
   19
      The probability of winning could be higher than 1 in 20 since we drew one winner for every 20 eligible
households. Thus, if 21 households were eligible, we drew 2 winners. This was explained to households.
At the same time, eligibility was made somewhat more diﬃcult by the fact that the utility bills in round
numbers; a household with a reduction target in fractions of a cubic meter would have to cut back to the
nearest whole cubic meter to qualify.
   20
      Note that this calculation accounts for the increasing block tariﬀ which causes the average price to fall
from 5.1 to 4.6 Kwacha per cubic meter. We therefore calculate the “net” price shock after accounting for
this mechanical reduction in the average price associated with lower consumption.



                                                      13
payoﬀ from the lottery to outside of the i term: vi = i (Y pW ) + R ⇥ 1(W  W̄ ) e2i ,
so are analogous to an increase in Pi in the model. This increases i’s unilateral payoﬀ from
water savings, which has the greatest eﬀect on overall household consumption if if i < i .
Of course, individuals could share the information with their spouse or the spouse could find
out out about it, but the individual-specific treatment comes closer to an individual price
than does the joint treatment.


3.3     Other experimental manipulations
We introduce two additional sources of variation through our experimental design. The first,
which provides price information, acts both as a potential additional source of price variation
and as a way to homogenize price beliefs. The second, which provides information about the
credibility of the water provider, was intended to address misperceptions about the billing
process.

3.3.1    Price information

We leverage the fact that most households are unaware of their marginal price to generate
additional variation in prices. As part of the survey, we elicit price beliefs for both spouses,
and then, in a price information treatment, provide accurate information about water prices.
All incentive treatment households are also in the price information treatment. A challenge in
communicating price information to households is that the units of consumption are diﬃcult
to map on to consumption. Based on extensive pre-testing, we both elicit price beliefs and
provide price information in units of time spent using water rather than in cubic meters.
Specifically, the survey asked “suppose you wanted to save 20 Kwacha from your monthly
bill; then, by how many minutes would your household as a whole have to reduce the use
of the tap each day? ” 21 Treated households received information that cutting back by 20
  21
     The question text included clarifications that we meant running the tap at a normal rate, as they would
for daily activities like washing their hands, and also that we were asking them to think about the minutes
that the tap was running during the various activities they did, and not the overall time spent doing chores.
If the respondent said they did not know and could not provide an estimate, the questions was repeated
once and they were given a second chance to respond. If they were still unable to answer the question, we
asked them about a series of narrowing intervals, e.g. less than 20, 20-40, 40-60, more than 60, and then
given their chosen 20-minute interval, we asked about 5 minute intervals within it, and then re-asked the
main price belief elicitation question. 81% of men and 83% of women answered the question the first time
it was asked, and an additional 10% of respondents answered the question in the second or third attempt.
We then asked them about the highest and the lowest that they thought the number of minutes could be,
and then asked them again for a best guess, giving them a chance to revise their previous answer if they
wanted. The price belief elicitation question was asked after a series of questions on their own and their
spouse’s water use, as we found during piloting that thinking about water-intensive chores beforehand made
it easier for respondents to understand the question. The price elicitation module was piloted with almost
300 households, who were then excluded from our sample.


                                                     14
minutes per day would save the average household 20 Kwacha on their monthly bill.
    The eﬀect of the price information depends on prior beliefs about water prices. Specifi-
cally, if households fully update, then the “price treatment” associated with the information
is just the diﬀerence between the true price and the prior. Thus, individuals with a prior
below the true price receive a positive price shock and vice versa. We categorize individuals
into beliefs above and below the price information, and construct a household level measure
that equals one if either spouse underestimated the price. The price information intervention
also serves to remove variation in price beliefs, which allows us to calculate price elasticities
associated with the incentive treatment.22 Thus, all households enrolled in the incentive
treatment also receive the price information treatment.

3.3.2    Provider credibility

In a cross-cutting provider credibility treatment, households were oﬀered assurance that water
bills are based on actual water use, to address a worry that both the lottery and price
information treatments might be ineﬀective if households do not believe that bills reflect
consumption. Treated households were given information about the timing of the billing
cycle and how their bill is calculated in the event that a meter reader is unable to read
the meter, either because it cannot be accessed (e.g., the gate is locked) or because it is
too unclear to be read (e.g., due to condensation). The information was paired with a
reassurance that the provider is committed to honest billing practices and tries to ensure
that households are only charged based on their actual water usage.23
  22
     Note that we report price elasticities because they are familiar units, but our tests of our hypotheses do
not rely on this conversion. There are several caveats to converting our treatment into a change in price, such
as the fact that we assume risk neutrality, the price change only applies to a certain range of consumption,
and individuals might diﬀer in whether they believe that the required reduction is feasible.
  23
     The script for the provider credibility treatment is as follows: “We have collected this information purely
for research and will not share any details with SWSC. However, we want to provide you with a little bit
of extra information about how SWSC calculates your bill. SWSC tries to ensure that bills are accurate by
reading your meter monthly and using the amount of water consumption shown on your meter to calculate
your bill. That is, the amount that you are charged is based on the amount of water you use. The meter
readings taken this month measure your usage since the time when last month’s reading was taken. Once
SWSC has collected all the readings for this month, this is used to calculate the bill that will be given to you
next month. For example, when you received your water bill in March you were charged for the water your
household used between the 21st of January and the 20th of February, roughly speaking. When you received
your water bill in April, you were charged for the water your household used between the 21st of February
and the 20th of March, and so on. If there are some months that they cannot get a meter reading, then
you are charged an estimate based on your previous consumption, and they try to get meter readings again
as soon as possible. Then the next time they read your meter, they adjust your bill for any over- or under-
charges from the months when they were not able to do the reading. SWSC is taking measures to make sure
that bills are fair and based on actual water usage. They are committed to honest billing practices.”




                                                      15
3.4     Intrahousehold measures
We measure proxies for i and ↵i through a household survey conducted separately (and
simultaneously) for the husband and wife. A series of questions documents water use, bill
payment responsibilities, and intrahousehold cooperation, enforcement and altruism. In
addition, we conduct modified dictator games between spouses as part of the survey visit.
Both spouses played the game concurrently and in private, and the game was run by a
trained surveyor who was of the same gender as the respondent. The game proceeded as
follows.
    The respondent is asked to pick one of two sealed envelopes and open it; the envelope
contains either 20 or 30 Kwacha, and respondents only learn the value of their own draw,
not the distribution. The surveyor explains that the money is theirs to keep and that they
will be asked to make decisions using this money, but that they are under no expectation
to share the amount. The respondent is then asked how much money they would send to
their spouse versus keeping herself, and separately, how much money she would send to a
water conservation NGO versus keeping. Before asking for their responses, the surveyor
informs them that in each case, any money the respondent chooses to send will be doubled
by the experimenter. The surveyor clarifies that the two decisions are mutually exclusive
since the recipient of any money sent will be randomly selected after the respondent has
made their decisions, with equal probability on each outcome, and that the respondent
cannot influence which recipient is chosen at the end. The random endowments as well as
the random selection of recipient ensures that the respondent can conceal her own earnings
from her spouse and, thus, her actions are based more closely on her own preferences rather
than concern about retribution from her spouse. If the respondent chooses to send some
money, and the spouse is randomly chosen as the recipient, the spouse will know how much
money was sent (since both spouses played the same game), but not how much money the
respondent started with and hence how much the respondent kept for herself. Similarly, the
respondent can also choose to send nothing to the spouse and claim that the NGO was chosen
as the final recipient. The surveyor explains these aspects of the game to the respondent
and asks questions during the explanation to check for respondent comprehension, so that
respondents know what information can and cannot be hidden from their spouse.
    The game provides a revealed preference measure of ↵i . The more the respondent sends
to her spouse, the more she cares about his financial resources.24 Sharing with the spouse
  24
    For simplicity, our model assumed that total utility is a linear combination of own and spouse’s utils,
which predicts that spouses should share either nothing or everything in the dictator game. The fact that
most sharing amounts are interior solutions is consistent with the aggregator function being non-linear, e.g.,
total utility is Cobb-Douglas in own and spouse’s utils.



                                                     16
also reflects enforcement-based income sharing within the household, which may or may not
carry over to water use; if a respondent expects that she can get back the amount she shared
with her spouse, she would share more. The game-based measured does not allow us to
separate altruism and enforcement.25
    As a proxy for i , or who eﬀectively pays the household’s water bill, both spouses are
asked whose income is used to pay the water bill and who physically pays the bill (which is
done in person in this context). If the respondent’s answers to those questions match, that
person is labeled as the eﬀective bill payer. If they do not, then follow up questions ask
about how much discretion the person making the physical payment has over savings on the
bill. We define respondent-specific indicators based on the respondent’s perception of his or
her claim on any savings on the bill (i.e. in some couples, each spouse may believe that he
or she is the eﬀective bill payer).
    We ask respondents to compare their own water use directly to that of their spouse. We
define the woman (man) as the larger water user if both members of the couple indicate
that she (he) uses more water than her (his) spouse. Unlike the eﬀective bill payer variable,
where individual perceptions drive the incentive to reduce water use, we are interested in
identifying which member of the couple actually uses more water, so we require that spouses’
answers agree to assign one as the bigger water user. We also construct an indicator for the
“stereotypical” intrahousehold arrangement, in which the husband is the eﬀective bill payer
and the wife is the larger water user.
    We measure the couple’s knowledge about household and each other’s water use, which
is necessary but not suﬃcient for monitoring and enforcement to reduce the free-riding
problem. Specifically, we ask whether the respondent looks at the water meter and also
test their knowledge of their household quantity of consumption and the total charge on
the household bill. We also ask each spouse to name the top three water-using activities of
his or her spouse, and construct a measure of whether their response matches the spouse’s
self-reported main water-using activities.
    Finally, in addition to survey questions on water use and intrahousehold decision mak-
ing, the survey collects information on demographics and socioeconomic status, as well as
attitudes toward the water utility.
  25
    It is possible that sharing in the game is also predictive of bargaining power over income within the
home, which may be correlated with i . In the analysis, we use survey questions to measure which spouse
has higher i and is the eﬀective water bill payer.




                                                   17
3.5     Sample construction and summary statistics
3.5.1   Sample construction

Our sampling takes the universe of metered household accounts as provided by SWSC and
imposes some restrictions based first on billing data, and then based on a short screening
exercise that was conducted in the field. Using the panel of billing data for metered residential
customers as of February 2015 (N=9,868),26 we eliminate households that did not have a
working meter for at least 3 out of the 4 preceding months. We also excluded households
that use no water (i.e. are billed for zero cu.m.) in more than half of the preceding 4 months.
Households with very low variation in usage over the preceding four months were considered
to have possibly tampered with the meter or have a delinquent meter reader. They were
excluded based on the following criteria: if the coeﬃcient of variation in this period was
less than 0.05, or if the quantity reported was identical for 3 or more months. Households
with consistently low usage were also excluded since they would be least able to adjust their
water consumption in response to a price shock, and, moreover, reducing water use could
be harmful, e.g., in terms of hygiene, to households using very little to begin with; we drop
households if their usage was on the lowest price tier (less than 6 cubic meters) for more
than 2 of the preceding 4 months. Households whose median water usage in the preceding
four months was above the 99th percentile were also dropped since they could also have
had malfunctioning meters, or may not be as responsive to price, and may also have been
significantly more diﬃcult to survey (because they were presumably very wealthy households
or firms mislabeled as residential customers by SWSC). Finally we drop households with an
extremely high outstanding balance with the water utility, or households that are owed a
significant amount of money by SWSC, defined as 6 times or 4 times their median bill in the
preceding four months, respectively. This yields a total of 7,425 households that we target
for an in-person screening.
    Households were visited by a surveyor to collect data on characteristics not observed in
the billing data that were also important for sampling. Specifically, we require that the
water meter not be shared with other households, that the primary bill payer be married
(or cohabiting) and that both spouses live at that address, and that the household was in
residence for at least the 4-month period prior to April 2015. We also exclude households
planning to move in the following 6 months. Our surveyors made up to 3 attempts to
screen each households; any adult member of the household could be given the screening
questionnaire. In total, 6,594 households were screened, of which 31 percent (2,051) met all
  26
     This number excludes roughly 250 households involved in a pilot of the project, who were deemed
ineligible for the full study.



                                                18
our screening criteria.27 We scheduled survey appointments with 1,817 households from our
eligible sample. Of these, we completed surveys with 1,282 households. This high “attrition”
rate is due largely to stopping our attempt to survey households at the end of December
2015. Appendix Table A.1 shows how sample characteristics evolve at each stage of sampling
and randomization.28
    Households that met the screening criteria were informed about the survey. We scheduled
a follow-up visit with the primary bill payer and his/her spouse, emphasizing that we needed
both of them to be present for the full survey. We also informed respondents they would be
compensated 40 Kwacha (4 USD) for participating in the survey. At the scheduled time and
date, a pair of surveyors (always a woman and a man) visited the screened household for a full
survey. After a few preliminary demographic questions, husbands and wives were separated
and surveyed individually in diﬀerent rooms of the house. Enumerators elicited water price
beliefs, asked for perceptions of own and family members’ water usage, and conducted the
modified dictator game. After finishing their individual questionnaires, both surveyors and
respondents met back together in a common room for the last survey questions, and to
receive the price information (if applicable). We brought the couple back together to avoid
any awkwardness that might arise from ending the survey immediately following the game
transfers with the couple separated.

3.5.2    Sample statistics

Table 1 summarizes characteristics of the sample, including elicited price beliefs and atti-
tudes toward the water provider, and tests for balance between the incentive treatment and
the control group. (Note that we use the term control group to mean the control group for
the incentive treatment, which includes some households that received the price information
and/or provider credibility treatment). The top panel shows statistics from the water bill,
and so we report means and standard deviations for the households that were screened out
of the survey for completeness. The middle panel shows household characteristics gathered
through the survey. Around half of the sample owns their own home, and the average house-
  27
     Reasons for not screening a household include that the home was vacant or under construction, that it
was occupied by a business, or that no one was home for three consecutive attempts.
  28
     As a robustness check, presented in Section 4.5, we also estimate our results adding in households that
we sampled but were excluded during the screening stage. These households were sampled using the same
criteria as the households that were ultimately surveyed, but were screened out after the surveyors’ initial
visit. This adds 5,312 households to our survey sample, which are not systematically diﬀerent from the
surveyed or treated households in terms of pre-survey consumption patterns. Because we rely on the date of
the survey to define the treatment timing in the panel billing data, we define a fake treatment date for the
households that were screened but not surveyed. For households that were screened on a day that produced
at least one completed survey, we use that survey date. When that strategy is not feasible, we use the
average lag between screening and surveying (7 days).


                                                    19
hold size is close to six. Around 16 percent employ a maid. Our analysis of intrahousehold
decision making around water use that focuses on the husband and wife clearly simplifies
the household dynamics given that there are on average four additional members, plus, in
some cases, a maid. Levels of English language proficiency are high. Price beliefs are rea-
sonably accurate; in about 60 percent of households, at least one of the two respondents
underestimated the price. Distrust of the service provider is high: in over 40 percent of
households, both spouses say that high bills are the fault of the provider, i.e. not because of
high consumption.

3.5.3   Intrahousehold measures

Our main measure of intrahousehold eﬃciency comes from the respondents’ incentive com-
patible decisions of how much to share with their spouse in the dictator game. We summarize
the measure in the bottom panel of Table 1. Husbands send a larger fraction of their endow-
ment to their wives than wives send to their husbands. Both spouses send a smaller share of
their endowment to the water NGO than to their spouse. Table 1 also reports other water
use measures associated with our theoretical predictions. In around 30 percent of house-
holds, the wife says she is the eﬀective water bill payer. In about 80 percent of households,
both spouses agree that the wife uses more water than her husband. Thus, in the typical
household, the man is the eﬀective bill payer (higher i ), and the woman is the bigger water
user. In only around 36 percent of households are the incentives aligned for household water
conservation, i.e. the eﬀective bill payer is also the bigger water user.
    The dictator game measure is correlated with a number of standard survey-based mea-
sures of intrahousehold cooperation (see Appendix Table A.2). Households in which respon-
dents indicated that they decide on budgeting or extra spending together, and in which
they make plans together and stick to their plans also share more in the dictator game.
Respondents saying they can prevent their spouses from deviating from plans or that they
do things that their spouse wants them to do predicts dictator game giving as well. These
answers could be interpreted as measures of either altruism or enforcement with some more
intuitively related to one or the other.
    Of course, measures of intrahousehold eﬃciency may be correlated with other household
characteristics that aﬀect both water use and price sensitivity. Table 2 shows correlations
between three dictator game outcomes – the share of the endowment sent by the husband,
by the wife, and whether the average share sent was above median (our main measure of
intrahousehold eﬃciency) – and individual and household characteristics. First, the share of
endowment sent to the spouse is positively correlated with the share sent to the water NGO.
While this may indicate that individuals who are more altruistic in general are also more

                                              20
altruistic toward their spouses, it may also indicate some experimenter demand eﬀect or con-
fusion about the game, though we observe no correlation with a measure of social desirability
bias (SDB score) constructed from responses to a shortened version of the Marlowe-Crowne
questionnaire (Crowne and Marlowe 1960).29 Second, neither of the other measures that gen-
erate predictions in our conceptual framework (eﬀective bill payer status or who uses more
water) are correlated with the dictator game measure, nor are variables describing knowledge
of the bill. Third, our average dictator game measure is negatively correlated with household
size, with age, and with home ownership, and positively correlated with employing a maid,
household assets, number of rooms in the home and English language fluency. On the whole,
wealthier respondents appear to share more in the dictator game, perhaps unsurprisingly.
In our robustness checks, we revisit these variables to determine if they also are associated
with diﬀerential responsiveness to our incentive treatment.


4        Results
4.1      Predictions
The experimental design and data collection described in the previous section allow us to test
the following empirical predictions, associated with a financial incentive to conserve water:30

Prediction 1: The incentive treatments decrease water consumption.

Prediction 2: The magnitude of the incentive treatment eﬀect is increasing in intrahouse-
    hold eﬃciency, measured by ↵
                               ¯ (operationalized as the household’s average sharing in
    the dictator game).

Prediction 3: The individual-specific incentive treatment is more eﬀective if it is oﬀered to
    the individual who is not the eﬀective bill payer, so who otherwise has weak incentives
    to conserve.


4.2      Estimation strategy
We use monthly outcome data before and after the intervention and estimate a diﬀerence-
in-diﬀerences regression to quantify the treatment eﬀects:
    29
      Social desirability bias might lead respondents to share more of their endowment if they think sharing
is viewed favorably by the enumerator or researcher.
   30
      The theoretical predictions in Section 2 report the marginal change in water use with respect to a
marginal price change. The predictions also hold for a discrete price change associated with a threshold
quantity change. Note also that we derive predictions in Section 2 over water use levels while our empirical
results test for eﬀects on log water use. Rewriting the model in logs generates the same predictions.


                                                    21
                    yit =   1 treatedhhi   +   2 postit   +   3 treatedhhi   ⇥ postit + ✏it               (3)

where treatedhhi is a binary indicator for whether the household was assigned to the relevant
treatment group and postit is a time-varying indicator that turns on for household i in the
month after the survey. Note that postit varies across households and not just over time
because the survey and treatment were rolled out over time. Treatments were delivered
at the end of the survey visit, so postit also represents the post-intervention period. 3
identifies the diﬀerential change in the outcome among treated households after the survey.
Even though a household was only eligible for the lottery based on consumption in the first
full billing cycle after the survey date, we set postit equal to 1 as of the survey date because
it is possible the intervention had immediate eﬀects. In our main specification, we drop the
month in which the survey occurred since it is partially treated.31
     To improve precision, we include neighborhood by time and household fixed eﬀects in
our preferred estimates. Defining treatit ⌘ treatedhhi ⇥ postit , we estimate:

                               yit =   1 treatit   +   2 postit   + ⌧t + ⌘i + ✏it                         (4)

where ⌧ are zone-month-year fixed eﬀects (a zone is a neighborhood in Livingstone) and
⌘i are household fixed eﬀects. In the presence of household fixed eﬀects, 1 identifies the
treatment eﬀect of interest, and 2 captures any independent average diﬀerence in water
use in the post period (which is possible if, for example, participating in the survey made
even the control group more attentive to water conservation). We allow for arbitrary within-
household correlation in water use over time by clustering standard errors at the household
level. Because gaps in the panel are associated with meter disconnections and other meter
reading issues, we add a time-varying indicator for months immediately following a missing
observation to control for the fact that these months may record only a partial month of
consumption. Our main predictions involve heterogeneity in the response to treatment by
household type, so we interact treatit and postit with relevant household characteristics.
    To illustrate magnitudes and as an input to our policy calibrations in Section 5, we use
the estimates of 1 associated with our incentive treatment in equation (4) to calculate short
run price elasticities as follows.32 First, with yit equal to log of monthly water quantity, we
  31
     Note that because the billing cycle starts on the 20th of each month, our definition of month corresponds
to the billing cycle, i.e. July runs from June 21 to July 20.
  32
     The elasticity calculation requires a number of assumptions: (1) that households respond similarly to a
discrete price change as to a continuous price change, (2) that households respond similarly to a quantity
target as to a continuous price change, and (3) that households respond similarly to a probabilistic payout
as to a (smaller) certain payout from conservation.



                                                       22
can interpret the coeﬃcient on treatit in the presence of household fixed eﬀects as @ln(q)/@p or
@q/q ⇥ 1/@p, such that multiplying by the pre-intervention average price delivers a short run

elasticity. We calculate customer specific average prices, accounting for the increasing block
schedule and for inflation (Zambian consumer price index), in each pre-intervention month
and use that as the basis for our subgroup-specific average marginal prices.33
    We show the exogeneity of treatment assignment to observable household characteristics
in Table 1 for the incentive treatment and Appendix Tables A.3 and A.4 for the informa-
tion and provider credibility treatments. We also plot average water use across treatment
conditions and our dictator-game measure of intrahousehold eﬃciency in the months leading
up to the survey (Appendix Figure A.3). Overall, we observe parallel trends by incentive
treatment, by our binary measure of intrahousehold eﬃciency, and between study households
and other customers in Livingstone.
    The plot of average monthly consumption by our measure of intrahousehold eﬃciency
(middle panel, Appendix Figure A.3) suggests that more eﬃcient households actually con-
sume slightly more than their less eﬃcient counterparts. Our conceptual framework predicts
the opposite, all else equal. As shown in Table 2, other covariates are correlated with our eﬃ-
ciency measure and may contribute to the higher average consumption among more eﬃcient
households. We regress household average pre-intervention consumption on our dictator
game measure (column 1) and a vector of other household-level covariates (column 2) and
show the correlations in Appendix Table A.5. Unconditional on other observables, we see
significantly higher consumption among more eﬃcient households. Conditional on observ-
ables, the coeﬃcient shrinks and becomes insignificant (but remains positive). Our main
predictions involve diﬀerences in how households respond to a price shock, but a parallel
concern arises: if unobservables aﬀect both our key sources of heterogeneity (dictator game
sharing and who in the household is the eﬀective bill payer) and price sensitivity, then we
may attribute an eﬀect of omitted variables to our measures of intrahousehold decision-
making. We address this both through testing multiple theoretically motivated hypotheses
and through robustness checks in Section 4.5.


4.3     Average treatment eﬀects
We begin by comparing the distribution of consumption in the incentive treatment group
and control group, normalized by household-specific average consumption in the incentive
  33
     Note that this approach to calculating elasticities does not impose assumptions about how households
perceive the price change, only that households knew their pre-treatment price. We increase the likelihood
of this latter assumption by including all incentive treatment households in the price information treatment.
However, given that these treatments were implemented concurrently, if the price information treatment
aﬀected price perceptions, then past usage – which we use to calculate elasticities – is unaﬀected.


                                                     23
treatment reference window. Figure 2 shows a decrease in consumption across most of the
distribution.34 It is worth noting that there is relatively little mass in either the treatment
or control group below the target level to be eligible for the prize, which was 70 percent of
reference window consumption, and most of the eﬀect is due to reductions that were not large
enough to make a household eligible for the prize. On the one hand, this is surprising because
if households could perfectly choose their consumption level, there would be bunching just
below the target level. On the other hand, the diﬃculty of knowing one’s own and others’
water use makes the pattern less surprising. In fact, the continuity in the reductions suggests
that households responded to the lumpy financial incentive treatment in a similar way as we
would expect them to respond to a standard price increase.
    Table 3 reports the average treatment eﬀect of the incentive treatment, as well as the
other two treatments (price information and provider credibility). Column 1 reports the
diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences results from estimating equation (3), without household or time fixed
eﬀects. Columns 2, 3 and 4 add household, month-year and zone-month-year fixed eﬀects,
respectively. The main eﬀect of treatment group indicators are small and insignificant,
indicating that the randomization was balanced and pre-intervention consumption is similar
across arms (column 1).
    Our main coeﬃcient of interest is on Incentive ⇥ P ost. We observe a statistically sig-
nificant 6.2 to 6.7 percent decrease in monthly consumption in response to the incentive
treatment, consistent with prediction 1 (laid out in Section 4.1): the incentive treatments
decrease average water use. The implied short run price elasticity is -0.27 (column 4, based
on an average pre-intervention price 4.36).35 We observe no significant average eﬀect from
the other treatments. Going forward, we focus on the specification shown in Column (4),
which includes household and neighborhood-by-time fixed eﬀects. Hereafter, we define the
treatment variables as time-varying and report results from estimating equation (4).
    While we observe no average eﬀect of the other treatments, the eﬀects of the price in-
formation and provider credibility treatments should depend on respondents’ prior beliefs
about water prices and about the correspondence between water use and bills, respectively.
Thus, we supplement the analysis in Table 3 with specifications that (a) interact the price
information treatment with an indicator for whether the husband and wife underestimated
the price, on average, and (b) interact the provider credibility treatment with trust in the
  34
     Appendix Figure A.4 shows the distribution of consumption pre- and post-treatment for the price in-
centive treatment and the provider credibility treatment.
  35
     Our calculated short-run price elasticity of demand is slightly below the mean found in the literature
reviewed by Dalhuisen et al. (2003) and in line with the short run elasticities summarized in Worthington
and Hoﬀman (2008). In the literature, the long run elasticity is generally shown to be larger than the short
run elasticity.



                                                    24
water provider. Both should lead to reductions in water use because they imply that the
treatments increased the eﬀective perceived water price. Table 4 shows that these treatments
had no detectable impacts, even after taking heterogeneous responses into consideration. For
the remainder of the paper, we focus on the incentive treatment. To increase power, we pool
the pure price information treatment with the control group and ignore the cross-cutting
credibility treatment; in other words, we impose the restriction, which we cannot empirically
reject, that these other interventions have zero eﬀect.36


4.4     Intrahousehold heterogeneity
4.4.1    Household price incentives

Table 5 shows the main test of the prediction that households with more intrahousehold
altruism/less ineﬃciency should be more price elastic (prediction 2). We pool the incentive
treatment arms and estimate the eﬀect of the incentive on household water use, allowing
the eﬀects to vary with the portion of the dictator-game endowment spouses shared with
each other on average (column 1) or by each spouse separately (column 2). As predicted,
column 1 shows a larger reduction for households that sent above the median on average;
the eﬀect in the above-median eﬃcient households is roughly four times larger than the
eﬀect among less eﬃcient households. These coeﬃcients correspond to an average short-run
price elasticity among households with below-median dictator game contributions of -0.10
(based on a pre-intervention average price of 4.3 Kwacha for this sub-sample), while the total
eﬀect for above-median households implies an elasticity of -0.44 (based on a pre-intervention
average price of 4.4 Kwacha for this sub-sample). Appendix Table A.10 shows the robustness
of these results to alternate approaches to aggregating the dictator game measure.37
    Columns 2 and 3 show the diﬀerential eﬀect of the incentive treatments by each spouse’s
dictator game sharing. Column 2 includes the full sample, while column 3 restricts the
sample to households that follow traditional gender roles, in which the woman is the bigger
water user and the man is the eﬀective bill payer. This restriction omits 551 households
in which either the woman is not the bigger water user or the man is not the eﬀective
  36
     Our main outcome, water use, is noisy, and even after conditioning on household and region-by-time fixed
eﬀects, we have relatively low power to detect impacts of the incentive intervention that is our main focus.
Pooling the treatments improves power, particularly around the estimation of heterogeneous treatment
eﬀects. Results that separate out eﬀects by each treatment arm are shown in the Appendix, and mirror
the tables presented here. Note that the nested, rather than cross-randomized, design of the information
treatment and the price incentive treatment (that is, all households that received the latter also received the
former) implies that any interaction eﬀect between the two treatments is not identified.
  37
     It may also matter whether spouses have similar levels of altruism. We observe similar decisions within
couples: for over half of the households we study, the diﬀerence in the share of the endowment sent by the
husband versus the wife is less than 0.25, and for only 15 percent of households is it more than 0.5.


                                                      25
bill payer. While we are under-powered to predict triple interactions between treatment,
bill-paying (i.e., income sharing) arrangements and individual level eﬃciency measures, our
model predicts that the marginal eﬀect of individual-level altruism will be decreasing with
the degree to which the person is the eﬀective bill payer. We examine this qualitatively
by comparing the results in column 3, where the woman’s altruism is predicted to matter
more because she is not the eﬀective bill payer, with those in column 2, where the prediction
is more ambiguous. Though imprecisely estimated, we observe that the coeﬃcient on the
interaction between the incentive treatment and the woman’s dictator game measure indeed
increases in magnitude by nearly five-fold, while the interaction with the man’s dictator
game measure is largely unaﬀected by this sample restriction.

4.4.2   Individual price incentives

We now turn to looking at the incentive sub-treatments separately, in which the wife, hus-
band, or couple are informed about the prize for reducing water consumption. If the house-
hold acts as a unitary agent, then these sub-treatments should have identical eﬀects, but if
interests are not fully aligned in the household, then their eﬀects could diﬀer and depend on
the recipient’s existing incentives to conserve water. Specifically, if the individual incentive
recipient is not the eﬀective bill payer, and so typically has weak claim on savings from water
conservation, then the eﬀect should be larger. The results shown in Table 6 breaks the eﬀect
down by treatment arm. Recalling the patterns of water use and eﬀective bill payer status
shown in the bottom panel of Table 1, prediction 3 implies that the lottery directed to the
wife should have a larger eﬀect, given that in the typical household she is the larger water
user and is not the eﬀective bill payer. The pattern of coeﬃcients in Table 6 confirms that
the most eﬀective lottery sub-treatment is the one directed toward the wife. Interestingly,
even though one might have thought that the husband could just reproduce the eﬀects of the
wife incentive arm by promising her the prize (or most of it) in the other two arms, it seems
that either husbands did not think of this or a commitment problem may have prevented
it. Importantly, however, we lack the precision to reject that the eﬀect of the wife lottery is
statistically diﬀerent from either of the other two sub-treatments.
    We examine the individual incentives further in Table 7, aiming to disentangle whether
the eﬀect is due to gender per se or the recipients’s status-quo incentive and scope to conserve
water. Column 1 interacts the individual-specific incentive treatment with an indicator for
whether it was given to the non-bill-payer in the household. We find that the individual
price incentive led to significant reductions in water use if and only if directed to the non-
bill-payer. Another potentially relevant factor is whether the recipient has more ability to
achieve the reduction in water use through changes to his or her water use; the bigger water

                                              26
user in the household has more ability to do so. Thus, directing the incentive to the larger
user should also be more eﬀective. Column 2 shows weak support for this prediction. Given
the considerable correlation between these two factors (the women is likely to be both the
non-bill-payer and the bigger water user), we first run both interactions together in column
3. The interaction with non-bill-payer remains significant, while the interaction with bigger
water user becomes very small and positive. Next, we simultaneously estimate the eﬀect
of directing the individual incentive to the non-bill-payer and to the woman; that is, we
estimate the eﬀect targeting the non-bill-payer, controlling for gender to determine if the
latter eﬀect is driven entirely by gender. It is not: the interaction with eﬀective bill payer
status remains marginally significant and similar in magnitude to column 1, while recipient
gender per se does not seem to aﬀect responsive to the conservation incentive. Overall, the
results presented in Table 7 suggest that the existing arrangements around who has a claim
to any savings from water consumption is an important determinant of the eﬀectiveness of
the price incentive. This raises the question of why households are not able to resolve this
conflict themselves, which we return to in Section 6.

4.4.3      Altruism versus enforcement

As discussed in Section 2.4, households may have a smaller household ineﬃciency in water
use either because spouses are altruistic toward one another or because they are able to
monitor and enforce water use. Our primary measure of intrahousehold eﬃciency – giving
in the dictator game – may reflect either or both of these explanations. We collected survey
measures of intrahousehold decision making that may oﬀer a more nuanced look into which
aspects of intrahousehold decision-making are associated with the incentive treatment eﬀect
(see Section 3.4 and Appendix Table A.2 for correlations of these measures with the dictator
game outcomes). Table 8 shows the results from replacing the dictator game measure in
equation (4) with each of the intrahousehold survey measures one by one (column 1) then
with the intrahousehold survey measures included as parallel interactions (column 2) and,
finally, with the first two principal components of the intrahousehold survey measures as
parallel interactions (column 3).38 Overall, the survey measures have relatively little ex-
planatory power and the couple of significant interaction terms go in the wrong direction.
Including them in parallel interactions (columns 2 and 3) has little eﬀect on the significance
or magnitude of the dictator game measure. It seems that the real-stakes game captures
intrahousehold dynamics better than survey questions, limiting our ability to disentangle
whether altruism or enforcement matters more.
 38
      Appendix Table A.6 shows how the variables contribute to the principal components.



                                                    27
    A necessary (but not suﬃcient) condition for enforcement is that water use is observ-
able, so we next examine the role of observability. We use measures of the accessibility of
water use data to investigate whether the potential for intrahousehold monitoring predicts
the household response to the incentive treatment. Table 9 shows heterogeneous treatment
eﬀects based on four measures of the observability of water use in the home. Columns 1 and
2 show binary measures (verified by the enumerator) of whether both spouses can identify
the consumption quantity and total charge on the bill, respectively. Column 3 shows a bi-
nary measure of whether spouses show above-median awareness of each others’ water use.39
Column 4 sums these three measures into a knowledge sum. The three individual measures
of information availability are associated with greater price sensitivity (all imprecisely esti-
mated) with the largest diﬀerential eﬀects based on knowing the consumption quantity on
the bill and knowledge of spouse’s water use. These results provide some suggestive evi-
dence that eﬃciency may be driven, in part, by the information needed for monitoring and
enforcing agreements around water use.


4.5      Robustness checks
4.5.1      Interpretation of the heterogeneity results

As shown in Tables 2 and A.5, both the dictator game measure and average pre-intervention
water use are correlated with certain observable household characteristics. To address the
concern that these other characteristics could confound our estimates of heterogeneous ef-
fects by intrahousehold eﬃciency, we add in interactions of these characteristics with the
incentive treatment indicator in Table 10, first one at a time (column 1), then all at once
(columns 2), and finally using the first two principal components of the household survey
measures (column 3).40 While we do see some heterogeneity in price sensitivity by these
other measures, our main coeﬃcient of interest (Sent above average to spouse) decreases
only modestly and remains the largest magnitude of any of the interactions in column 3.
    Note that some of these covariates should not necessarily be interpreted as sources of spu-
rious correlation. For example, households that are more altruistic in general (as measured
by Sent above average to NGO) may also be more altruistic within the home. Larger house-
holds may have a harder time enforcing income-sharing agreements of any kind. Controlling
for these (and other) variables may therefore eliminate “good” variation in our intrahouse-
hold eﬃciency measure. The robustness check shown in Table 10 is therefore a conservative
test of our main result.
 39
      See Section 3.4 for further details on these variables.
 40
      Appendix Table A.7 shows how the survey variables contribute to the principal components.



                                                    28
    These robustness checks focus on the dictator game heterogeneity. Support for our model
comes equally from the predictions of diﬀerential responses to the individual price incentives
based on the eﬀective bill payer arrangement within the home. Given that the result is not
just driven by the gender of the recipient of the individual price incentive (column 4, Table 7),
the eﬀect of unobservables has to be considerably more subtle to deliver our results. Namely,
unobserved characteristics of the individual who is not the eﬀective bill payer, conditional
on gender, would have to be associated with greater price sensitivity (at the individual not
the household level, since that result depends on the individual incentive treatment arms).

4.5.2   Specification and outcomes

We test for sensitivity to our specification by varying the outcome, sample, panel length
and aggregation of the dictator game measure. First, Appendix Table A.8 shows similar
results if we estimate the regression model in levels rather than logs (column 1) and if we use
log of the total bill amount, which includes service charges and debts (column 2). Second,
both the main eﬀect of the incentive treatment and the interaction with the above-median
dictator game measure are similar when we add in households that were screened but not
surveyed (columns 1 and 2) or include all treated months in the analysis (columns 3 and
4). The bottom panel of Appendix Table A.9 shows the eﬀect on quantity in levels and
on the total bill (in logs). Results in levels are similar to the main results in logs, and the
bill total changes in accordance with the observed consumption changes. Third, extending
the panel to include more than four months post-treatment increases the magnitude of the
treatment eﬀects (Appendix Figure A.5), but only a subset of our sample (those surveyed
first) contribute to these eﬀects. Finally, Appendix Table A.10 shows results for alternative
ways of aggregating dictator game decisions across spouses.
    We also test whether our observed consumption responses reflect other margins of house-
hold adjustment, namely bill non-payment or meter reader evasion. Appendix Table A.12
shows little eﬀect of any of the treatments on a measure of whether the household made a
payment toward their bill (columns 1 and 2) or missing meter readings (columns 3 and 4).
    Finally, as discussed in footnote 36, we pool treatments to improve power. Appendix
Tables A.11 and A.13 repeat the analyses that involve heterogeneous treatment eﬀects, and
include the information and provider credibility treatments interacted with the heterogeneity
measures of interest. We note a couple of results that appear to be influenced by the
decision to pool treatments. First, Appendix Table A.11 shows that some of the heterogeneity
with respect to average dictator game giving is associated with the information treatment.
Consequently, the eﬀects that we present in the main table might be better interpreted as the
eﬀect of the combined price incentive and price information treatment. Second, Appendix

                                               29
Table A.13 shows that the summary measure of information about water use in the home
appears to interact with the credibility treatment. Specifically, water use increases by around
5.5 percent in response to the credibility treatment for a one unit increase in the knowledge
score (relative to those scoring zero). That said, the inclusion of this additional interaction
term decreases the magnitude of the interaction with the incentive treatment only slightly.


5        Implications for optimal pricing
In our context, a household’s water use generates an environmental externality beyond the
household due to competing needs for the scarce water drawn from the Zambezi River. In this
section, we use our empirical results to calibrate the optimal corrective pricing in the presence
of such an environmental externality. Specifically, we calculate the optimal adjustment to
the price of water using an ad valorem tax to correct for both the ineﬃciencies associated
with the intrahousehold externality and the environmental externality, using the framework
developed by Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2016).41 The intuition for the adjustment builds
on Diamond’s (1973) tax adjustment using the elasticity-weighted marginal externality (but
here reflecting heterogeneous distortions to household-level demand responses, as in Allcott
et al. (2014)). We incorporate Taubinsky and Rees-Jones’s (2016) insight that heterogeneity
in the distortion generates an additional source of welfare loss if the tax adjustment is based
only on the average consumer’s elasticity. We explicitly account for the heterogeneity in the
intrahousehold distortion that we documented in the preceding sections.
    To adapt our model primitives to Taubinsky and Rees-Jones’s framework, we make the
individual conservation eﬀort choice binary, e 2 {0, 1} where each member of the household
chooses whether to exert eﬀort ei = 1 at cost c. We further simplify our setup by setting the
bargaining power parameter i = 12 , which is always the average i at the household level. We
denote the amount of water use if the individual exerts eﬀort as w < w̄. Individual i chooses
to exert eﬀort if and only if 12 (1 + ↵i )(Y p(w + E(wj ))) c 12 (1 + ↵i )(Y p(w̄ + E(wj ))).
Individuals have some expectation of their spouse’s water use wj . More importantly, the
payoﬀ from exerting eﬀort depends not only on c, w̄ and w, but also on ↵i because individual
i responds to a price p as if it were 12 (1 + ↵i )p.
    Consuming water generates an environmental externality with marginal damages denoted
by (measured in units of the numeraire), and a social planner wishes to introduce a tax
⌧ to address the environmental externality. If individuals were perceiving the price with
no distortion, the planner would just set ⌧ equal to marginal damages , and the eﬃciency
    41
    To simplify the utility’s water pricing problem, we assume marginal cost pricing and ignore any fixed
cost recovery by the utility through, for example, a monthly service charge.


                                                   30
loss associated with the externality would be reversed (assuming no other taxes or frictions
in the economy). However, in our model, the household responds to a price p + ⌧ as if it
were 12 (1 + ↵
             ¯ )(p + ⌧ ), which means the tax will not suﬃciently address the externality and
will need to be adjusted (unless, of course, ↵  ¯ = 1). Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2016) use
the parameter ✓ to denote this wedge between the actual price and the eﬀective price the
household responds to (with the eﬀective price lower due to the distortion). Thus, mapping
our notation to theirs, we can define ✓ ⌘ 12 (1+ ↵¯ ), with a household of type ✓ thus responding
to a corrective price p + ⌧ as if it were ✓(p + ⌧ ).
    To quantify ✓ for the optimal tax calculation, we use the estimated price elasticities
from our experiment. We first use the amount shared in the dictator game to categorize
households as either high or low ✓ (based on whether they have above- or below-median
sharing in the game). We then use our regression estimates of the price elasticity in each of
these two subgroups to quantify ✓. The reason we do not just use the proportion shared in
the dictator game to calculate ✓ is that, in the tax calculation, ✓ is specifically a measure of
how much the friction (intrahousehold free-riding in our case) dampens the price elasticity
of demand. Note that the elasticity estimates for the two subgroups tell us the relative
distortion between them, but do not pin down the absolute level of ✓; pinning down the
absolute level requires an estimate of the price elasticity absent any distortion. Thus, we
make the additional assumption that ✓ = 1 for the subgroup with high intrahousehold
eﬃciency. In other words, we assume that our high ✓ households are free of intrahousehold
distortions; this assumption, which we choose because it seems less arbitrary than choosing
a specific value less than 1, means that in our calculations below, we are underestimating the
average distortion. The ✓ for less eﬃcient household types can then be calculated as the ratio
of their price elasticity and the elasticity of high ✓ households.42 Note that this requires an
additional assumption that households’ distortion-free price elasticity is uncorrelated with
our measure of intrahousehold eﬃciency.
    The price elasticities for each subgroup implied by the quantity responses to our price
intervention as well as the resulting ✓ parameters are shown in Table 11. The planner
observes an empirical demand curve associated with the population average "p = 0.27.
  42
     As discussed in Section 4.2, we interpret the treatment eﬀects of the price treatment as @ln(q)
                                                                                                  @p   = @p@q
                                                                                                              ⇥ 1q
so that if we multiply by p (i.e., the average price prior to the intervention), we recover the elasticity. Here,
instead, the demand function is q = q(✓p) and not just q(p). As long as the conditional distribution of ✓
is independent of p, then @ln(q)
                              @p    = q 0 (p) ⇥ ✓ ⇥ 1q . Multiplying both sides by p gives the elasticity on the
left-hand-side in terms of ✓. We interpret our point estimates for the two types of households as representing
diﬀerent responses to an identical exogenous price shock.




                                                       31
Planner’s objective function
The optimal price can be derived by specifying the planner’s objective function. Let the
indicator Ie denote conservation eﬀort, v represent the constant marginal utility from water
use, and D be the aggregate demand for water. In keeping with Taubinsky and Rees-Jones
(2016), we make two further simplifying assumptions: (1) that terms of order ⌧ 3 Dpp and
higher are negligible; and (2) that , v, and ✓ are mutually independent. In addition, we
assume that the value of public funds equals 1, which allows us to focus on correcting the
environmental externality , and that there exist no other distortions within the house-
hold, which means that we can derive the optimal price for water by only considering the
household’s water use. The planner’s objective function is then given by:

              Z
   W (⌧ ) =           [Y   (p + ⌧ )(Ie w + (1   Ie )w̄) + (v   )(Ie w + (1    Ie )w̄)   cIe ] + ⌧ D.    (5)
                  j


In the absence of any intrahousehold distortion, the planner sets ⌧ = and the optimal
water price is p⇤ = p + . However, in the presence of an intrahousehold friction ✓, which
varies across households, the optimal price, can be shown to be as follows:43

                                                           E(✓)
                                        p⇤ = (p + )                   .                                 (6)
                                                      E(✓)2 + V ar(✓)
The optimal price given in equation (6) is increasing in E(✓) and decreasing in V ar(✓).44 In
our two-type example, the eﬀect of greater variance in ✓ can be illustrated by comparing the
optimal adjustment term for each type. For high ↵  ¯ types, the optimal adjustment is just ,
so the optimal price based on the average demand distortion is too high, leading to a loss
in consumer surplus. For low ↵ ¯ types, the optimal price based on the average distortion is
too low; the adjustment is insuﬃcient to fully correct their intrahousehold ineﬃciency. The
more diﬀerent the types, the more “oﬀ” the average adjustment is for either type.
  43
      This result matches Corollary 4 to Proposition 11 of Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2016) Appendix B.1,
except that we set the first term to zero (no deadweight loss of taxation), and the adjustment in our case
is applied to the price and the tax, not just to the tax. See Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2016) for the full
derivation of these suﬃcient statistics for the welfare cost of heterogeneity.
   44
      If the cost of a higher water bill is unevenly split across individuals within the household, then the
individual-level variance will be even higher than the household-level variance. Unfortunately, we lack the
data needed to calibrate the variance at the individual level.




                                                      32
Calibration
Calibrating the optimal price in our setting is simply a matter of substituting the parameters
in Table 11 into equation (6). The optimal price assuming homogenous consumers is:

                                            1
                          p⇤homogenous =        (p + ) = 1.64(p + ),
                                           E(✓)
while the optimal price allowing for heterogeneous consumers is

                                            E(✓)
                   p⇤heterogeneous =                   (p + ) = 1.17(p + ).
                                       E(✓)2 + V ar(✓)
In other words, the standard corrective price will fail to address the additional ineﬃciency
associated with intrahousehold frictions, while the optimal price based on the average in-
trahousehold friction will over-correct by roughly 40 percent. In this particular exercise,
where we consider just two types of households, the optimal price is closer to what the plan-
ner would choose ignoring intrahousehold frictions than if she were to wrongly ignore the
heterogeneity across households in the degree of intrahousehold frictions.


6    Conclusion
This paper highlights the importance of intrahousehold decision-making in the realm of
consumption externalities that extend beyond the household. To analyze this problem,
we combine water billing data with a measure of intrahousehold altruism and randomized
variation in the eﬀective price of water. Consistent with a simple model of household water
consumption — in which an intrahousehold free-riding problem arises and households overuse
water from their own perspective — we show that households in which spouses are less
altruistic toward one another are also less responsive to an increase in the price of water;
we generate the price increase by oﬀering a financial prize for reductions in household water
use. Also consistent with our model, targeting the conservation incentive to the individual
within the household who normally has the least incentive to conserve water leads to a larger
response.
    This free-riding problem among spouses would exist even if men and women were perfect
equals (just as moral hazard in teams exists with identical workers). However, the problem
is exacerbated when there are traditional gender roles, with women doing most of the chores
and men having more control over household finances. The husband-wife dynamic is likely
more problematic in developing countries, with their greater degree of gender inequality
(Jayachandran 2015). The welfare implications to households from overuse of water might


                                                33
also be especially large in poor countries because utility bills constitute a larger share of
total income. At the same time, our focus on husbands and wives illustrates a broader
intrahousehold problem, for example with children being wasteful of water and energy, that
is likely equally applicable in rich and poor countries.
     One puzzle about our findings is why households are not adopting what seems like an
obvious improvement: having women (or more precisely, the bigger water users) eﬀectively
pay most of the water bill so that they receive the financial upside of conservation. In
our sample, only a third of households had made the bigger water user the eﬀective bill
payer. Thus, even given the constraints on observability of water use, households could
do better than they are doing. To probe this issue, we conducted follow-up discussions
with 40 households. Most stated that it had never occurred to them to implement this
arrangement. Meanwhile, the husband often is giving the wife an allowance for groceries and
other household spending. One conjecture for why households have not applied the same
idea to water is that piped water is a new phenomenon for most of them. When women
fetched water from water sources, they were the “eﬀective bill payers”; wasting water meant
more time spent fetching water. One possible intervention is simply to suggest to people
this alternative financial arrangement for covering the utility bills. Indeed, in our qualitative
interviews, when we asked respondents if they had ever thought of this arrangement, several
who responded “no” then volunteered that it sounded like a good idea.
     However, if there are information frictions, even the constrained first best outcome will
entail water use above the household optimum and, in turn, further above the socially optimal
level. The standard solution of corrective pricing remains applicable, but will need to correct
both the environmental externality and this intrahousehold “internality” (Allcott et al. 2014).
Moreover, following Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2016), we show that the variance across
households in the degree of intrahousehold ineﬃciency significantly dampens the welfare
gains from a homogenous corrective price.
     A diﬀerent policy tack would be to try to ameliorate the intrahousehold constraints
directly. For example, giving households better information about their household usage
through smartphone apps with real-time data (as are available in many developed countries)
would enable better monitoring; knowing total household use is a first step toward backing
out each person’s use. In addition, technologies that lower the eﬀort cost of conservation
(e.g., automatic shut-oﬀs for water faucets or lights), might be especially valuable in the face
of intrahousehold moral hazard.




                                               34
References
Allcott, H. (2011). Consumers’ perceptions and misperceptions of energy costs. American
  Economic Review 101 (3), 98–104.

Allcott, H., S. Mullainathan, and D. Taubinsky (2014). Energy policy with externalities and
  internalities. Journal of Public Economics 112, 72–88.

Angelucci, M. and R. Garlick (2016). Heterogeneity in the eﬃciency of intrahousehold re-
 source allocation: Empirical evidence and implications for investment in children. Working
 Paper .

Ashour, M., T. Bernard, M. Hidrobo, and J. B. Hoel (2017). Productive ineﬃciencies in
  dairy farming and cooperation between spouses: Evidence from Senegal. Working Paper .

Ashraf, N. (2009). Spousal control and intra-household decision making: An experimental
  study in the Philippines. American Economic Review 99 (4), 1245–1277.

Castilla, C. and T. Walker (2013). Is ignorance bliss? The eﬀect of asymmetric information
  between spouses on intra-household allocations. American Economic Review 103 (3), 263–
  268.

Crowne, D. P. and D. Marlowe (1960). A new scale of social desirability independent of
  psychopathology. Journal of Consulting Psychology 24 (4), 349.

Dalhuisen, J. M., R. J. Florax, H. L. De Groot, and P. Nijkamp (2003). Price and income
 elasticities of residential water demand: A meta-analysis. Land Economics 79 (2), 292–308.

Dercon, S. and P. Krishnan (2000). In sickness and in health: Risk sharing within households
  in rural Ethiopia. Journal of Political Economy 108 (4), 688–727.

Diamond, P. A. (1973). Consumption externalities and imperfect corrective pricing. The
  Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science, 526–538.

Donni, O. and P.-A. Chiappori (2011). Nonunitary models of household behavior: A survey
 of the literature. In Household Economic Behaviors, pp. 1–40. Springer.

Duflo, E. and C. Udry (2004). Intrahousehold resource allocation in Cote d’Ivoire: Social
 norms, separate accounts and consumption choices. NBER Working Paper Series w10498.

Elinder, M., S. Escobar, and I. Petré (2017). Consequences of a price incentive on free
  riding and electric energy consumption. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
  ences 114 (12), 3091–3096.

                                            35
Fiala, N. (2017). Business is tough, but family is worse: Household bargaining and investment
  in microenterprises in Uganda. Working Paper .

Gillingham, K., M. Harding, and D. Rapson (2012). Split incentives in residential energy
  consumption. The Energy Journal 33 (2), 37.

Gneezy, U., E. Haruvy, and H. Yafe (2004). The ineﬃciency of splitting the bill. The
 Economic Journal 114 (495), 265–280.

Hoel, J. B. (2015). Heterogeneous households: A within-subject test of asymmetric infor-
 mation between spouses in Kenya. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 118,
 123–135.

Ito, K. (2014). Do consumers respond to marginal or average price? Evidence from nonlinear
   electricity pricing. American Economic Review 104 (2), 537–563.

Jacobsen, M., M. Webster, and K. Vairavamoorth (2013). The future of water in African
  cities. Report, The World Bank.

Jayachandran, S. (2015). The roots of gender inequality in developing countries. Annual
  Review of Economics 7 (1).

Jessoe, K. and D. Rapson (2014). Knowledge is (less) power: Experimental evidence from
  residential energy use. American Economic Review 104 (4), 1417–1438.

Kahn, M. E. and F. A. Wolak (2013). Using information to improve the eﬀectiveness of
 nonlinear pricing: Evidence from a field experiment. Working Paper .

Kebede, B., M. Tarazona, A. Munro, and A. Verschoor (2013). Intra-household eﬃciency:
  An experimental study from Ethiopia. Journal of African Economies.

Levinson, A. and S. Niemann (2004). Energy use by apartment tenants when landlords pay
  for utilities. Resource and Energy Economics 26 (1), 51–75.

Lundberg, S. and R. A. Pollak (1994). Noncooperative bargaining models of marriage.
  American Economic Review 84 (2), 132–137.

Mani, A. (2011). Mine, your or ours? The eﬃciency of household investment decision: An
 experimental approach. Working Paper .

Mazzocco, M. (2007). Household intertemporal behaviour: A collective characterization and
 a test of commitment. Review of Economic Studies 74 (3), 857–895.

                                             36
McRae, S. and R. Meeks (2016). Price perception and electricity demand with nonlinear
 tariﬀs. Working Paper .

Myers, E. (2015). Asymmetric information in residential rental markets: Implications for
 the energy eﬃciency gap. Working Paper (246R).

National Water Supply and Sanitation Council, Zambia (2015). Strategic plan: 2016-2020.
  Technical report, NWASCO.

NWASCO (2014). Guidelines on tariﬀ setting. Technical report, National Water Supply and
 Sanitation Council.

Robinson, J. (2012). Limited insurance within the household: Evidence from a field experi-
  ment in Kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (4), 140–164.

Rungie, C., R. Scarpa, and M. Thiene (2014). The influence of individuals in forming
 collective household preferences for water quality. Journal of Environmental Economics
 and Management 68 (1), 161–174.

Schaner, S. (2015). Do opposites detract? Intrahousehold preference heterogeneity and
  ineﬃcient strategic savings. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (2), 135–
  174.

Taubinsky, D. and A. Rees-Jones (2016). Attention variation and welfare: Theory and
  evidence from a tax salience experiment. NBER Working Paper Series.

Udry, C. (1996). Gender, agricultural production, and the theory of the household. Journal
 of Political Economy 104, 1010–1046.

Van der Bruggen, B., K. Borghgraef, and C. Vinckier (2010). Causes of water supply prob-
  lems in urbanised regions in developing countries. Water Resources Management 24,
  1885–1902.

Worthington, A. C. and M. Hoﬀman (2008). An empirical survey of residential water demand
 modelling. Journal of Economic Surveys 22 (5), 842–871.




                                           37
                                                 Control
                                              (1/4 sample)



                   Surveyed                     Price info
                  (N = 1,282)                 (1/4 sample)

                                                                     Incentive: Husband
                                           Price info +                (1/3 treatment)
                                         Price incentive
                                          (1/2 sample)

                                                                       Incentive: Wife
                                                                       (1/3 treatment)
                   Screened
                  (N = 6,594)
                                                                        Incentive: Both
                                                                        (1/3 treatment)
             Eligible for screening
                  (N = 7,425)
                                                                    Cross-cutting
                                                             Provider credibility treatment
                                                              (1/2 each treatment arm)

                                  Figure 1: Experimental design

Notes: Experimental design and sampling flow. Treatment was assigned on a rolling basis to accommodate
the high rate of ineligibility that led screened households to be disqualified from the survey sample.




                                                 38
              .8
              .6
           Density
            .4.2
              0




                     0              1                 2                3                       4
                           Post-survey consumption / Reference window consumption

                                         Control              Incentive treatment



               Figure 2: Water consumption, relative to incentive reference month

Notes: Density plots of post-survey monthly consumption relative to the average monthly consumption in
the reference months used to determine price incentive eligibility. The control group includes all surveyed
households not assigned to the incentive treatment. The dashed vertical line shows the 70 percent
threshold for lottery eligibility.




                                                    39
                                 Table 1: Sample statistics & balance

                                              Screened      No                      P-val
                                                                      Incentive
                                                only     incentive                 (2)=(3)
                                                 (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)
            Quantity consumed                  20.940      18.995      18.247       0.239
                                              (14.525)    (12.097)    (10.515)
            Any payment                         0.738       0.764       0.769       0.566
                                               (0.195)     (0.166)     (0.166)
            Missing meter reading               0.137       0.100       0.112       0.210
                                               (0.188)     (0.157)     (0.170)
            Total monthly bill                 99.848      92.925      87.309       0.124
                                              (88.152)    (69.044)    (60.949)
            Household size                                 5.860        5.888       0.822
                                                          (2.286)      (2.218)
            HH has maid                                    0.169        0.149       0.333
                                                          (0.375)      (0.356)
            Owns home                                      0.512        0.495       0.546
                                                          (0.500)      (0.500)
            Rooms in home                                  3.529        3.553       0.751
                                                          (1.264)      (1.444)
            English fluency                                0.768        0.772       0.873
                                                          (0.422)      (0.420)
            Either underestimated price                    0.619        0.637       0.551
                                                          (0.486)      (0.481)
            Blame SWSC for high bill                       0.440        0.414       0.356
                                                          (0.497)      (0.493)
            Both know bill quantity                        0.104        0.142       0.036
                                                          (0.305)      (0.350)
            Both know bill charge                          0.678        0.699       0.411
                                                          (0.468)      (0.459)
            W: Eﬀective bill payer                         0.307        0.316       0.749
                                                          (0.462)      (0.465)
            W: Bigger user                                 0.795        0.838       0.047
                                                          (0.404)      (0.369)
            Share sent to spouse by husband                0.702        0.690       0.398
                                                          (0.269)      (0.254)
            Share sent to spouse by wife                   0.520        0.513       0.597
                                                          (0.262)      (0.260)
            H: Share NGO                                   0.312        0.303       0.522
                                                          (0.253)      (0.232)
            W: Share NGO                                   0.275        0.276       0.923
                                                          (0.222)      (0.220)
            H: SDB score                                  19.938       20.010       0.640
                                                          (2.607)      (2.857)
            W: SDB score                                  19.836       19.906       0.666
                                                          (2.838)      (2.999)
            Households                         5312         664         618

Notes: Pre-treatment means for all households (top panel), and for surveyed households (middle and
bottom panels). Column 1 is restricted to households screened out of the survey sample, column 2 to the
sample that did not receive the incentive treatment, and column 3 to the sample that did receive the
incentive treatment. Column 4 reports the p-value for a test of equal means between columns 2 and 3. The
quantity consumed is measured in cubic meters per month. H and W refer to husband and wife. The share
sent to the spouse is measured as a fraction of the respondent’s endowment.
                                                   40
                           Table 2: Correlates of dictator game sharing

                                                   Husband      Wife share   Sent above
                                                  share sent       sent        median
                                                     (1)            (2)          (3)
                 Quantity consumed                 0.002***     0.002***      0.004***
                                                    (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
                 Prob(payment)                       -0.044      -0.113**     -0.187**
                                                    (0.045)       (0.045)      (0.086)
                 Prob(missing)                       -0.064       0.079*         0.051
                                                    (0.047)       (0.047)      (0.090)
                 Total charge                      0.025**        0.023*      0.063***
                                                    (0.013)       (0.012)      (0.024)
                 Household size                      -0.004     -0.009***     -0.015**
                                                    (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.006)
                 HH has maid                         0.019      0.068***       0.086**
                                                    (0.020)       (0.020)      (0.038)
                 HH assets                         0.008***     0.018***      0.030***
                                                    (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.005)
                 HH owns home                        -0.015      -0.034**     -0.060**
                                                    (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.028)
                 HH rooms in home                  0.014***     0.015***      0.034***
                                                    (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.010)
                 HH English fluency                  0.022      0.082***      0.112***
                                                    (0.017)       (0.017)      (0.033)
                 Either underestimated price         0.009          0.017        0.033
                                                    (0.017)       (0.017)      (0.032)
                 Both blame high bill on SWSC        0.012          0.016        0.000
                                                    (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.028)
                 Both know bill quantity             0.005          0.014        0.046
                                                    (0.022)       (0.022)      (0.043)
                 Both know bill charge               0.010         -0.004       -0.004
                                                    (0.016)       (0.016)      (0.030)
                 W: Eﬀective bill payer              0.003          0.001        0.013
                                                    (0.016)       (0.016)      (0.030)
                 W: Bigger water user                0.003         -0.006       -0.000
                                                    (0.019)       (0.019)      (0.036)
                 H: Share NGO                      0.192***     0.079***      0.262***
                                                    (0.030)       (0.030)      (0.057)
                 W: Share NGO                        0.034      0.198***      0.269***
                                                    (0.033)       (0.033)      (0.063)
                 H SDB score                         0.004          0.002        0.006
                                                    (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.005)
                 W SDB score                         0.003         -0.003        0.001
                                                    (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.005)

Notes: Each cell reports the coeﬃcient from a separate regression of the dictator game measures (indicated
in column headings) on a household characteristic (indicated in row headings). The share sent to the
spouse and share sent to the NGO are measured as a fraction of the respondent’s endowment. The SDB
score measures social desirability bias using an adapted Crowne-Marlowe (1964) instrument. H and W
refer to husband and wife.



                                                   41
                              Table 3: Average eﬀects of all treatments

                                                log              log           log             log
                                             (quantity)       (quantity)    (quantity)     (quantity)
                                                (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)
       Incentive x Post                       -0.067⇤⇤         -0.062⇤⇤      -0.064⇤⇤       -0.062⇤⇤
                                               [0.030]          [0.029]       [0.029]        [0.028]
       Information x Post                      -0.019          -0.011         -0.007          0.005
                                               [0.034]         [0.033]        [0.033]        [0.032]
       Credibility x Post                       0.027           0.025          0.023          0.029
                                               [0.026]         [0.025]        [0.024]        [0.024]
       Surveyed x Post                        0.194⇤⇤⇤         0.189⇤⇤⇤      -0.069⇤⇤       -0.104⇤⇤
                                               [0.028]          [0.027]       [0.035]        [0.044]
       Incentive treatment                     -0.013
                                               [0.041]
       Information treatment                    0.007
                                               [0.047]
       Provider credibility treatment          -0.011
                                               [0.033]
       HH FE                                                      x              x              x
       Month-Year FE                                                             x
       Zone-Month-Year FE                                                                       x
       Observations (HH)                       1,282            1,282         1,282           1,282
       Observations (HH-months)                26,246          26,246         26,246         26,246

Notes: Regressions of log monthly quantity of water billed on treatment indicators. The panel begins 20
months (billing cycles) prior to the month of the survey and ends 4 billing cycles after the survey. Since
treatment was provided at the time of the survey, we use the recorded survey date to define the treatment
variables. The HH assignment indicator is time-invariant, while the post-survey indicator switches from 0
to 1 in the first full billing cycle after the date the household was surveyed; observations for billing cycles
that contain the survey date are dropped. All households in the incentive treatment also received the
information treatment. Standard errors are clustered at the household level.




                                                         42
  Table 4: Heterogeneous eﬀects of price information and provider credibility treatments

                                                                log             log
                                                             (quantity)     (quantity)
                                                                (1)            (2)
                  Info treatment                               -0.018
                                                               [0.050]
                  Info x Underestimated price                  -0.002
                                                               [0.060]
                  Provider credibility treatment                               0.011
                                                                              [0.033]
                  Provider credibility x Distrust billing                      0.042
                                                                              [0.048]
                  Treatment + Interaction                      -0.020          0.053
                                                               [0.044]        [0.035]

                  HH FE                                          x              x
                  Zone-Month-Year FE                             x              x
                  Observations (HH)                            1,282          1,282
                  Observations (HH-months)                     26,246         26,246

Notes: Regressions include the post-survey indicator interacted with the heterogeneity variables. The
incentive treatment indicator is is excluded (treatments are pooled). Underestimated price equals one if
either spouse underestimated the marginal price of water. Distrust billing equals one if both spouses blame
a high water bill on the provider. The bottom panel reports the linear combination of the treatment eﬀect
and the interaction term. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. Price beliefs are imputed
for 257 households.




                                                    43
     Table 5: Heterogeneous eﬀects of incentive treatment by intrahousehold eﬃciency

                                                           log            log            log
                                                        (quantity)     (quantity)    (quantity)
                                                           (1)            (2)           (3)
        Incentive treatment                               -0.022         -0.043        -0.058
                                                          [0.031]        [0.033]       [0.043]
        Incentive x Sent above median on average          -0.080⇤
                                                          [0.048]
        Incentive x Husband sent above median                            -0.023        -0.031
                                                                         [0.050]       [0.064]
        Incentive x Wife sent above median                               -0.024        -0.107
                                                                         [0.056]       [0.073]
        Treatment + Interaction                          -0.102***
                                                           [0.037]
        Treatment + Husband Interaction                                  -0.066        -0.089*
                                                                         [0.041]       [0.054]
        Treatment + Wife Interaction                                     -0.067       -0.165**
                                                                         [0.053]       [0.071]

        Sample                                             Full            Full      Restricted
        HH FE                                               x               x            x
        Zone-Month-Year FE                                  x               x            x
        Observations (HH)                                 1,275           1,275         726
        Observations (HH-months)                          26,122         26,122       14,799

Notes: Regressions include the post-survey indicator interacted with the heterogeneity variables. The
information and credibility treatment indicators are excluded (treatments are pooled). Shared above
median equals one if the share of the endowment transferred in the dictator game was above the median.
Column 3 restricts the sample to households in which the woman is the larger water user and the man is
the eﬀective bill payer. The bottom panel reports the linear combination of the treatment eﬀect and the
interaction term. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. Dictator game outcomes are missing
for at least one member of the couple in 7 households.




                                                   44
           Table 6: Price incentives directed toward the wife, husband, or couple

                                                           log            log
                                                        (quantity)    (quantity)
                                                           (1)           (2)
                       Couple incentive                  -0.049         -0.046
                                                         [0.039]        [0.036]
                       Husband incentive                 -0.046         -0.042
                                                         [0.037]        [0.034]
                       Wife incentive                    -0.090⇤⇤      -0.089⇤⇤⇤
                                                          [0.036]       [0.033]
                       Couple = Wife (p-val)              0.350          0.337
                       Husband = Wife (p-val)             0.291          0.266

                       HH FE                               x               x
                       Zone-Month-Year FE                  x               x
                       Observations (HH)                 1,282           1,282
                       Observations (HH-months)          26,246         26,246

Notes: Regressions include the post-survey indicator. Column 1 includes the information and credibility
treatment indicators. Column 2 excludes them (pools them with the incentive and control conditions). The
bottom panel reports the p-value for a test of equal coeﬃcients for the incentive sub-treatments. Standard
errors are clustered at the household level.




                                                   45
      Table 7: Price incentive eﬀects, based on whether recipient is eﬀective bill payer

                                             log            log           log            log
                                          (quantity)     (quantity)    (quantity)    (quantity)
                                             (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)
      Individual incentive                  -0.022         -0.047        -0.019        -0.019
                                            [0.033]        [0.032]       [0.035]       [0.036]
      Incentive to non-bill-payer           -0.091⇤⇤                     -0.087⇤       -0.086⇤
                                             [0.041]                     [0.045]       [0.044]
      Incentive to bigger user                             -0.044        -0.012
                                                           [0.042]       [0.045]
      Wife incentive                                                                   -0.011
                                                                                       [0.044]
      Treatment + Payer Interaction        -0.113***                    -0.106**      -0.105**
                                             [0.034]                     [0.044]       [0.046]
      Treatment + User Interaction                       -0.091***       -0.031
                                                           [0.035]       [0.046]

      HH FE                                   x              x             x              x
      Zone-Month-Year FE                      x              x             x              x
      Observations (HH)                     1,100          1,100         1,100          1,100
      Observations (HH-months)              22,483         22,483        22,483        22,483

Notes: Regressions include the post-survey indicator interacted with the heterogeneity variables. The
bottom panel reports the linear combination of the treatment eﬀect and the interaction term. Standard
errors are clustered at the household level. The couple incentive treatment arm is excluded.




                                                  46
            Table 8: Heterogeneity by survey measures of intrahousehold decisions

                                                               log             log            log
                                                            (quantity)      (quantity)     (quantity)
                                                               (1)             (2)            (3)
    Incentive x Sent above median                             -0.080*        -0.083*         -0.083*
                                                              (0.048)        (0.049)         (0.049)
    Incentive x Decide budget together                         0.020           0.008
                                                              (0.048)        (0.052)
    Incentive x Decide extra spending together                 -0.022         -0.058
                                                              (0.062)        (0.066)
    Incentive x Never disagree                                 0.048           0.044
                                                              (0.053)        (0.056)
    Incentive x Make plans together                            0.068           0.073
                                                              (0.051)        (0.053)
    Incentive x Stick to plans                                 -0.027         -0.048
                                                              (0.056)        (0.059)
    Incentive x Respondent never deviates                      0.001          -0.092
                                                              (0.051)        (0.068)
    Incentive x Spouse never deviates                         0.105**        0.151**
                                                              (0.050)        (0.068)
    Incentive x Know if spouse deviates                        -0.066        -0.100*
                                                              (0.050)        (0.057)
    Incentive x Can prevent spouse from deviating              0.028           0.067
                                                              (0.049)        (0.054)
    Incentive x Does things spouse wants                       0.011           0.046
                                                              (0.048)        (0.057)
    Incentive x Spouse does things respondent wants            -0.025         -0.013
                                                              (0.047)        (0.057)
    Incentive x Never hide income                              0.064           0.058
                                                              (0.048)        (0.052)
    Incentive x Hard to hide income                            -0.007         -0.007
                                                              (0.050)        (0.051)
    Incentive x 1st principal component                        0.012                          0.012
                                                              (0.015)                        (0.014)
    Incentive x 2nd principal component                        0.004                          0.009
                                                              (0.018)                        (0.019)
    Observations (HH)                                         1,275           1,275           1,275
    Observations (HH-months)                                  26,122          26,122         26,122

Notes: Column 1 shows separate regressions in each cell, where each of the household level characteristics
is interacted with treatment and the post-survey variable. Columns 2 and 3 each correspond to a single
regression. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. The 7 households with missing dictator
game outcomes are excluded.




                                                    47
              Table 9: Heterogeneity by knowledge and monitoring of water use

                                                 log           log            log            log
                                              (quantity)    (quantity)     (quantity)     (quantity)
                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)
   Incentive treatment                         -0.056⇤⇤       -0.056         -0.039         -0.013
                                                [0.027]       [0.045]        [0.030]        [0.042]
   Incentive x Know bill quantity               -0.080
                                                [0.068]
   Incentive x Know bill charge                               -0.017
                                                              [0.053]
   Incentive x Know spouse’s water use                                       -0.077
                                                                             [0.051]
   Incentive x Knowledge sum                                                                -0.040
                                                                                            [0.030]
   Treatment + Interaction                     -0.136**      -0.072**      -0.116***       -0.053**
                                                [0.063]       [0.029]        [0.041]        [0.024]

   HH FE                                          x               x            x               x
   Zone-Month-Year FE                             x               x            x               x
   Observations (HH)                            1,282           1,282        1,282           1,282
   Observations (HH-months)                     26,246         26,246        26,246         26,246

Notes: Regressions include the post-survey indicator interacted with the heterogeneity variables. Look at
meter equals one if both spouses report looking at their water meter. Know bill quantity and Know bill
charge equal one if both spouses can identify the quantity and total amount owed on the bill, respectively.
Know spouse’s water use equals one if both spouses know above the median share of their spouses primary
water using activities. The bottom panel reports the linear combination of the treatment eﬀect and the
interaction term. Standard errors are clustered at the household level.




                                                    48
            Table 10: Robustness check: Controlling for household characteristics

                                                             log          log          log
                                                          (quantity)   (quantity)   (quantity)
                                                             (1)          (2)          (3)
              Incentive x Sent above median                -0.080*      -0.091*       -0.075
                                                           (0.048)      (0.050)      (0.049)
              Incentive x Quantity                          -0.002        0.002
                                                           (0.002)      (0.005)
              Incentive x Prob(payment)                     0.050        -0.074
                                                           (0.170)      (0.163)
              Incentive x Prob(missing)                     -0.167       -0.200
                                                           (0.198)      (0.219)
              Incentive x Total charge                      -0.023       -0.011
                                                           (0.040)      (0.092)
              Incentive x Household size                    -0.007       -0.006
                                                           (0.010)      (0.011)
              Incentive x Maid                              -0.039       -0.001
                                                           (0.066)      (0.066)
              Incentive x Assets                           -0.016*      -0.017*
                                                           (0.009)      (0.010)
              Incentive x Owns home                         0.003         0.022
                                                           (0.048)      (0.053)
              Incentive x Rooms in home                    -0.034*       -0.033
                                                           (0.019)      (0.022)
              Incentive x English fluency                   0.027         0.088
                                                           (0.059)      (0.068)
              Incentive x Underestimated price              -0.010        0.030
                                                           (0.046)      (0.045)
              Incentive x Blame SWSC                        0.010         0.016
                                                           (0.048)      (0.048)
              Incentive x Know quantity                     -0.060       -0.067
                                                           (0.068)      (0.070)
              Incentive x Know charge                       0.012         0.039
                                                           (0.052)      (0.051)
              Incentive x W is eﬀective bill payer          0.080       0.086*
                                                           (0.049)      (0.049)
              Incentive x W is bigger user                 -0.110*      -0.123*
                                                           (0.066)      (0.065)
              Incentive x Sent above median to NGO          -0.065       -0.038
                                                           (0.048)      (0.049)
              Incentive x Above median SDB score            0.044         0.052
                                                           (0.048)      (0.048)
              Incentive x 1st principal component           -0.016                    -0.014
                                                           (0.014)                   (0.014)
              Incentive x 2nd principal component           0.008                     0.004
                                                           (0.018)                   (0.018)
              Observations (HH)                            1,274        1,274         1,274
              Observations (HH-months)                     26,105       26,105       26,105

Notes: Column 1 shows separate regressions in each cell, where each of the household level characteristics
is interacted with treatment and the post-survey variable. Columns 2 and 3 each correspond to a single
regression. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. The 7 households with missing dictator
game outcomes are excluded.
                                                     49
                 Table 11: Parameters for calibration of socially optimal price

                                                        "p      ✓
                                        average ↵
                                                ¯     -0.27   0.61
                                        high ↵
                                             ¯        -0.44    1
                                        low ↵
                                            ¯         -0.10   0.23

Notes: Inputs for the welfare calibration for the average ↵¯ household, and for above and below median ↵ ¯
households. The price elasticities are calculated based on the observed response to the incentive treatment
and the ✓ parameter is a ratio of elasticities, normalized by the observed elasticity for above-median ↵
                                                                                                       ¯
households.




                                                    50
A.1          Model appendix
Derivations
We show the derivation of our three main results from the model, and the results both in
terms of e⇤i and wi⇤ .
   Individual utility for person i is given by ui = i (Y pW ) e2i + ↵i [(1 i )(Y pW ) e2j ]
                       ei +ej
where W = 2w̄(1           2
                              ).
   Substituting in for W gives

                                     ei + ej                                                ei + ej
        ui =      i (Y    2pw̄(1             ))       e2i + ↵i [(1    i )(Y        2pw̄(1           ))   e2j ]
                                        2                                                      2

   The first order condition with respect to ei is

                         1                                       1
      i .(   2pw̄).(       )   2ei + ↵i (1        i ).(   2pw̄).(  ) = 0
                         2                                       2
                                                                       1
                                                              =) e⇤i =     i pw̄ + ↵i (1    i )pw̄ or
                                                                       2
                                                                                1
                                                                 wi⇤ = w̄[1       pw̄( i + ↵i (1      i ))]
                                                                                2

Result 1

Our first result signs the cross partial with respect to ↵i and p.
   @wi⇤
    @p
        = 12 w̄2 ( i + ↵i (1      i)
    @     1 2                        1 2
   @↵i
       [ 2 w̄ ( i + ↵i (1    i )] =  2
                                       w̄ (1   i ).
                                     @ 2 wi⇤
Since 0 <     i   < 1 and w̄ > 0,    @p@↵i
                                               < 0.

Result 2

Our second result signs the cross partial with respect to                     i   and p.
   @wi⇤
    @p
        = 12 w̄2 ( i + ↵i (1      i)
    @    1 2                         1 2
   @ i
       [ 2 w̄ ( i + ↵i (1    i )] =  2
                                       w̄ (1 ↵i ).
                                     @ 2 w⇤
Since 0  ↵i  1 and w̄ > 0, @p@↵ii < 0.
   Note that the marginal eﬀect of ↵i is largest when i is small. For i = 1 and/or ↵i = 1,
ei = 12 pw̄ and wi⇤ = w̄(1 12 pw̄). As i ! 0, e⇤i ! 21 pw̄↵i ; as i ! 12 , e⇤i ! 14 pw̄(1 + ↵i ); and
 ⇤

as i ! 1, e⇤i ! 12 pw̄.



                                                            51
Result 3
                                                                                         @wi⇤         @wi⇤
Our third result signs how the diﬀerence between                                          @p
                                                                                                and   @Pi
                                                                                                                 varies with         i.
   @wi⇤
    @p
        = 12 w̄2 ( i + ↵i (1 i ))
   @wi⇤
        = 12 w̄2
   @Pi                                                                                                ⇣                   ⌘
                                                                                                          @wi⇤     @wi⇤
Since    i   + ↵i (1           i)   is decreasing in              i   for all ↵i < 1,            @
                                                                                                @ i        @p      @Pi
                                                                                                                              < 0.


Semi-elasticities
Our empirical estimates are semi-elasticities, @ln(wi⇤ )/@p, while our model is in levels, @wi⇤/@p.
Here we show that the model results are unchanged if we solve in semi-elasticities instead.
              @ 2 wi⇤                                @ln(wi⇤ )
Result:       @p@↵i
                        < 0 also holds for              @p

               @wi⇤
Note that             1 2
                        =
                        w̄ ( i + ↵i (1                       i ).
                @p    2        h           i                            h            i                             h                       i
                                 @ln(wi⇤ )                                       ⇤
                                                                             1 @wi              1 w̄2                         1 w̄2
   In   semi-elasticities: @↵i
                            @
                                   =@p
                                                 =                 @
                                                               i) 1 +
                                                                  @↵i
                                                                              + ↵i (1
                                                                              ⇤
                                                                            wi @p        i) .   2 wi⇤
                                                                                                      (1                      2 wi⇤
                                                                                                                                    p( i
All terms in this expression are positive. The negative sign implies that the cross-partial
derivative overall is negative.
              @ 2 wi⇤                                @ln(wi⇤ )
Result:       @p@ i
                        < 0 also holds for              @p

               @wi⇤
Note that             1 2
                        =
                        w̄ ( i + ↵i (1                       i)
                @p    2        h           i                            h            i                             h                       i
                                 @ln(wi⇤ )                                       ⇤
                                                                             1 @wi              1 w̄2                         1 w̄2
   In   semi-elasticities: @ i
                            @
                                    =
                                    @p
                                                   =            @
                                                               ↵i ) 1 +
                                                               @ i            ⇤ + ↵i (1
                                                                            wi @p          i) . 2 wi⇤
                                                                                                      (1                      2 wi⇤
                                                                                                                                    p( i
Again, all terms in this expression are positive. The negative implies that the cross partial
derivative overall is negative.
              @wi⇤                  @wi⇤ @wi⇤                @wi⇤                                @ln(wi⇤ )
Result:       @Pi
                   |    i !0
                               <     @p
                                        ; @Pi |   i !1
                                                         =    @p
                                                                        also holds for              @p

These are just first derivatives so if they hold in levels, they will also hold in semi-elasticities.




                                                                             52
A.2   Appendix figures and tables




                           53
                                      Own consumption                                                      Spouse's consumption
      entertainment                                                                  cookingfuel

        cookingfuel                                                                entertainment

          transport                                                                    transport

            alcohol                                                                   snackfood

         snackfood                                                                       alcohol

           toiletries                                                                maizemeal

        fruitandveg                                                                     toiletries

        maizemeal                                                                    fruitandveg

          electricity                                                                  electricity

              water                                                                        water

                        0   .1           .2           .3        .4       .5                          0        .2                  .4               .6
                                 Listed as hard to know consumption                                      Listed as hard to know consumption




                                          Figure A.1: Observability of consumption

Notes: Share of respondents reporting that consumption category was among the top three most diﬃcult
to observe own (left) and spouse’s (right) consumption. Respondents are a convenience sample of
market-goers in Lusaka (N=96).




                 0.702
                 0.650
                 0.588




                 0.348




                            0             6                              20                                                                   50
                                                                      Water use (cubic meters)


                                                    Figure A.2: 2015 tariﬀ schedule

Notes: Increasing block tariﬀ for residential piped water in Livingstone. The price is shown in 2015 USD
per cubic meter and is increasing in cumulative consumption over the course of the month.



                                                                              54
                                          3        2.8
                               log cu.m. water/month
                             2.4         2.6
                                          2.2




                                                         May 2014               Sept 2014                     March 2015

                                                                      Control           Incentive treatment
                                          3        2.8
                               log cu.m. water/month
                             2.4         2.6
                                          2.2




                                                         May 2014               Sept 2014                     March 2015

                                                                     Below median             Above median
                                          3        2.8
                               log cu.m. water/month
                             2.4         2.6
                                          2.2




                                                         May 2014               Sept 2014                     March 2015

                                                                    Other customers            Project sample




                           Figure A.3: Pre-treatment water outcomes

Notes: Average log monthly water consumption, in the months preceding the survey. The top figure splits
the surveyed sample into those receiving the incentive treatment and those not receiving the incentive
treatment. The middle figure splits the surveyed sample into households with a measured level of eﬃciency
below (low share sent in the dictator game) and above the median (high share sent). The bottom figure
compares sample households with households screened but not surveyed.




                                                                                55
                         .8
                         .6
                      Density
                       .4.2
                         0




                                0            1                 2                3               4
                                    Post-survey consumption / Reference window consumption

                                               Control            Information treatment
                         .8
                         .6
                      Density
                       .4.2
                         0




                                0            1                 2                3               4
                                    Post-survey consumption / Reference window consumption

                                            Control            Provider credibility treatment




               Figure A.4: Consumption, relative to incentive reference months

Notes: Density plots of post-survey monthly consumption relative to the average monthly consumption in
the reference months used to determine price incentive eligibility. The top figure compares households with
and without price information. The bottom figure compares households with and without the provider
credibility treatment. Note that the incentive treatment is excluded from these plots. The dashed vertical
line shows the 70 percent threshold for lottery eligibility.




                                                          56
                                        0
                                        -.05
              Interaction coefficient
                                        -.1
                                        -.15
                                        -.2




                                               -25   -20               -15               -10     -5
                                                       Pre-treatment panel length (months)



                                  Figure A.5: Robustness: Diﬀerent pre-treatment panel lengths

Notes: Coeﬃcients on the interaction between the incentive treatment and an indicator for above median
average share of the endowment sent to spouse in the household, as in Column 1 of of Table 5. Our main
specification includes 20 months pre-treatment.




                                                                   57
                            Table A.1: Balance at each sampling stage

                                                               Coeﬃcient on:

                                                Successfully
                                                                 Screened in       Surveyed
                                                 screened
                                                    (1)               (2)              (3)
             Price information treatment           -0.015           -0.005            0.000
                                                   [0.013]          [0.075]          [0.000]
             SWSC trust treatment                  -0.008           -0.020            0.000
                                                   [0.015]          [0.086]          [0.000]
             Lottery treatment                     -0.023            0.084            0.000
                                                   [0.015]          [0.084]          [0.000]
             Lottery to couple                   -0.030***           0.058            0.000
                                                   [0.011]          [0.048]          [0.000]
             Lottery to woman                       0.000           -0.005            0.000
                                                   [0.011]          [0.065]          [0.000]
             Lottery to man                         0.007            0.031            0.000
                                                   [0.012]          [0.060]          [0.000]

             Mean of regressor                     0.173            0.973            1.000
                                                Eligible for     Successfully
             Sample                                                               Screened in
                                                 screening        screened
             Observations                          7,391            1,282            1,247

Notes: Each cell corresponds to one regression, with each column representing a binary regressor. The
sample for regressions in each stage is conditional on surviving the previous stage. See text for further
detail.




                                                     58
         Table A.2: Dictator game correlations with other intrahousehold measures

                                                       Husband       Wife share   Sent above
                                                      share sent        sent        median
                                                         (1)             (2)          (3)
               Decide budget together                     0.035**    0.034**         0.054*
                                                           (0.015)    (0.015)       (0.028)
               Decide extra spending together             0.065***    0.048**      0.138***
                                                           (0.020)    (0.020)       (0.039)
               Never disagree                               0.008      -0.006         0.008
                                                           (0.016)    (0.016)       (0.030)
               Make plans together                        0.036**    0.039**        0.074**
                                                           (0.016)    (0.016)       (0.031)
               Stick to plans                             0.041**       0.009         0.038
                                                           (0.018)    (0.018)       (0.034)
               Respondent never deviates                    0.006      -0.022        -0.017
                                                           (0.016)    (0.016)       (0.031)
               Spouse never deviates                        0.010      -0.001         0.001
                                                           (0.015)    (0.015)       (0.030)
               Know if spouse deviates                      0.012       0.014         0.037
                                                           (0.015)    (0.015)       (0.028)
               Can prevent spouse from deviating           0.029*     0.029**      0.090***
                                                           (0.015)    (0.015)       (0.029)
               Does things spouse wants                     0.006    0.044***      0.057**
                                                           (0.015)    (0.015)       (0.028)
               Spouse does things respondent wants          0.019       0.024       0.053*
                                                           (0.015)    (0.015)       (0.028)
               Never hide income                            -0.007     -0.020        -0.027
                                                           (0.015)    (0.015)       (0.028)
               Hard to hide income                          -0.013      0.021        -0.004
                                                           (0.015)    (0.015)       (0.029)

Notes: Coeﬃcients are from separate univariate regressions of each dictator game measure on each
intrahousehold survey measure. The share sent to the spouse and share sent to the NGO are measured as a
fraction of the respondent’s endowment.




                                                     59
                               Table A.3: Balance: Information treatment

                                                 Screened                     Info         P-val
                                                               No info
                                                   only                    treatment      (2)=(3)
                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
            Quantity consumed                     22.471        19.913       19.336        0.405
                                                 (16.486)      (12.980)     (11.714)
            Any payment                            0.732         0.758        0.764        0.514
                                                  (0.193)       (0.164)      (0.164)
            Missing meter reading                  0.144         0.100        0.111        0.196
                                                  (0.181)       (0.153)      (0.158)
            Total monthly bill                    83.467        77.873       74.272        0.271
                                                 (81.532)      (61.084)     (55.673)
            Household size                                      5.860         5.888        0.822
                                                               (2.286)       (2.218)
            HH has maid                                         0.169         0.149        0.333
                                                               (0.375)       (0.356)
            Owns home                                           0.512         0.495        0.546
                                                               (0.500)       (0.500)
            Rooms in home                                       3.529         3.553        0.751
                                                               (1.264)       (1.444)
            English fluency                                     0.768         0.772        0.873
                                                               (0.422)       (0.420)
            Either underestimated price                         0.619         0.637        0.551
                                                               (0.486)       (0.481)
            Blame SWSC for high bill                            0.440         0.414        0.356
                                                               (0.497)       (0.493)
            Both know bill quantity                             0.104         0.142        0.036
                                                               (0.305)       (0.350)
            Both know bill charge                               0.678         0.699        0.411
                                                               (0.468)       (0.459)
            W: Eﬀective bill payer                              0.307         0.316        0.749
                                                               (0.462)       (0.465)
            W: Bigger user                                      0.795         0.838        0.047
                                                               (0.404)       (0.369)
            Share sent to spouse by husband                     0.702         0.690        0.398
                                                               (0.269)       (0.254)
            Share sent to spouse by wife                        0.520         0.513        0.597
                                                               (0.262)       (0.260)
            H: Share NGO                                        0.312         0.303        0.522
                                                               (0.253)       (0.232)
            W: Share NGO                                        0.275         0.276        0.923
                                                               (0.222)       (0.220)
            H: SDB score                                       19.938        20.010        0.640
                                                               (2.607)       (2.857)
            W: SDB score                                       19.836        19.906        0.666
                                                               (2.838)       (2.999)
            Households                             5312          664          618

Notes: See Table     1 for a description of the table set up. Column 1 shows averages for households screened
out of the survey    sample, column 2 for the survey sample that did not receive the information treatment,
and column 3 for     the survey sample that did receive the information treatment. Column 4 reports the
p-value for a test   of equal means between columns 2 and 3.

                                                       60
                        Table A.4: Balance: Provider credibility treatment

                                             Screened         No        Credibility    P-val
                                               only       credibility   treatment     (2)=(3)
                                                (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)
           Quantity consumed                   22.471       19.913        19.336       0.405
                                              (16.486)     (12.980)      (11.714)
           Any payment                          0.732        0.758         0.764       0.514
                                               (0.193)      (0.164)       (0.164)
           Missing meter reading                0.144        0.100         0.111       0.196
                                               (0.181)      (0.153)       (0.158)
           Total monthly bill                  83.467       77.873        74.272       0.271
                                              (81.532)     (61.084)      (55.673)
           Household size                                    5.860        5.888        0.822
                                                            (2.286)      (2.218)
           HH has maid                                       0.169        0.149        0.333
                                                            (0.375)      (0.356)
           Owns home                                         0.512        0.495        0.546
                                                            (0.500)      (0.500)
           Rooms in home                                     3.529        3.553        0.751
                                                            (1.264)      (1.444)
           English fluency                                   0.768        0.772        0.873
                                                            (0.422)      (0.420)
           Either underestimated price                       0.619        0.637        0.551
                                                            (0.486)      (0.481)
           Blame SWSC for high bill                          0.440        0.414        0.356
                                                            (0.497)      (0.493)
           Both know bill quantity                           0.104        0.142        0.036
                                                            (0.305)      (0.350)
           Both know bill charge                             0.678        0.699        0.411
                                                            (0.468)      (0.459)
           W: Eﬀective bill payer                            0.307        0.316        0.749
                                                            (0.462)      (0.465)
           W: Bigger user                                    0.795        0.838        0.047
                                                            (0.404)      (0.369)
           Share sent to spouse by husband                   0.702        0.690        0.398
                                                            (0.269)      (0.254)
           Share sent to spouse by wife                      0.520        0.513        0.597
                                                            (0.262)      (0.260)
           H: Share NGO                                      0.312        0.303        0.522
                                                            (0.253)      (0.232)
           W: Share NGO                                      0.275        0.276        0.923
                                                            (0.222)      (0.220)
           H: SDB score                                     19.938       20.010        0.640
                                                            (2.607)      (2.857)
           W: SDB score                                     19.836       19.906        0.666
                                                            (2.838)      (2.999)
           Households                          5312          664           618

Notes: See Table 1 for a description of the table set up. Column 1 shows averages for households screened
out of the survey sample, column 2 for the survey sample that did not receive the provider credibility
treatment, and column 3 for the survey sample that did receive the credibility treatment. Column 4
reports the p-value for a test of equal means between columns 2 and 3.
                                                   61
                                 Table A.5: Consumption correlates

                                                             log             log
                                                          (quantity)     (quantity)
                                                             (1)            (2)
                     Sent above median to spouse           0.086⇤⇤⇤         0.003
                                                           (0.032)         (0.027)
                     Household size                                       0.029⇤⇤⇤
                                                                          (0.006)
                     HH has maid                                          0.206⇤⇤⇤
                                                                          (0.038)
                     HH assets                                            0.041⇤⇤⇤
                                                                          (0.006)
                     HH owns home                                           0.038
                                                                           (0.028)
                     HH rooms in home                                     0.146⇤⇤⇤
                                                                          (0.011)
                     HH English fluency                                    0.073⇤⇤
                                                                           (0.035)
                     Either underestimated price                            0.002
                                                                           (0.030)
                     Both blame high bill on SWSC                         0.091⇤⇤⇤
                                                                          (0.027)
                     Both know bill quantity                               0.097⇤⇤
                                                                           (0.041)
                     Both know bill charge                                  -0.031
                                                                           (0.029)
                     W: Eﬀective bill payer                                 0.012
                                                                           (0.028)
                     W: Bigger water user                                   -0.033
                                                                           (0.034)
                     Sent above median to NGO                               0.026
                                                                           (0.027)
                     Above median SDB score                                 0.018
                                                                           (0.027)
                     Observations (HH)                       1,275          1,274

Notes: Cross sectional regression of pre-intervention log monthly water use on an indicator for whether the
households sent above median in the dictator game (column 1) and other observables (column 2).



                                                    62
                                       Table A.6: Principal components: Intrahousehold survey measures

                                                                     Comp 1         Comp 2          Comp 3           Comp 4   Comp 5
              Both say decide income use together                     -0.031          0.440          -0.461          -0.065   -0.178
              Both say decide extra money use together                0.008           0.405          -0.486          -0.132   -0.197
              Both say they never disagree                            0.328           0.067           0.009           0.204   -0.001
              Both say they make plans together                       -0.144          0.257          -0.260          -0.117    0.461
              Both say it is easy to stick to plans                   0.166           0.242           0.063           0.304    0.077
              Both say they never deviate                             0.424          -0.050          -0.047          0.224    0.364




63
              Both say other never deviates                           0.426           0.029          -0.162           0.132    0.373
              Both say they know if spouse deviates                   0.158           0.345           0.436          -0.412    0.028
              Both say they can keep spouse from deviating            0.127           0.428           0.409          -0.328    0.139
              Both say they do things for other                       -0.387          0.242           0.164           0.425    0.209
              Both say other does things for them                     -0.391          0.290           0.177           0.384    0.130
              Both say they never hide income                         0.317           0.181           0.010           0.232   -0.129
              Both say it is very diﬃcult to hide income              0.193           0.180           0.189           0.322   -0.585
              Eigenvalue                                              2.480           1.580           1.292           1.125    1.046

     Notes: Factor loadings for principal component analysis of survey measures of intrahousehold decision-making.
                                                   Table A.7: Principal components: Control variables


                                         Comp 1          Comp 2          Comp 3      Comp 4      Comp 5    Comp 6   Comp 7   Comp 8
     Quantity consumed                     0.506           0.176          -0.070     -0.033       -0.121   -0.022   -0.065    0.134
     Prob(payment)                         0.024           0.253          -0.319      0.352        0.006    0.240    0.106   -0.419
     Prob(missing)                        -0.036          -0.080           0.626     -0.121       -0.275   -0.224    0.198   -0.037
     Total charge                          0.476           0.206          -0.261     -0.007       -0.043    0.076   -0.111    0.134
     Household size                        0.016           0.457           0.122     -0.324        0.138    0.213    0.200    0.102
     HH has maid                           0.326          -0.176          -0.033     -0.070       -0.024   -0.014   0.044    -0.050
     Assets                                0.365          -0.248           0.005     -0.123       -0.014   -0.037    0.067   -0.025
     Owns home                            -0.015           0.521           0.166      0.037        0.158   -0.276   -0.011   -0.062




64
     Rooms in home                         0.384           0.153           0.232     -0.101       -0.064   -0.168    0.001    0.100
     English fluency                       0.216          -0.424          -0.013     0.150         0.039   -0.083   -0.064   -0.067
     Either underestimated price           0.016          -0.026           0.060     -0.337        0.566    0.185   -0.105    0.044
     Blame SWSC for high bill              0.123           0.121           0.149      0.023       -0.368    0.239    0.330   -0.487
     Know bill quantity                    0.184          -0.075           0.246      0.426        0.212    0.090    0.050    0.050
     Know bill charge                      0.038          -0.033           0.354      0.295        0.110    0.535   -0.098    0.096
     W: Eﬀective bill payer                0.015          -0.051          -0.078     0.227         0.177    0.027    0.755    0.457
     W: Bigger user                       -0.066          -0.083           0.010     -0.297       -0.372    0.568   -0.093    0.268
     Sent above median to NGO              0.162          -0.118           0.231     -0.140        0.409    0.135   -0.005   -0.413
     Above median SDB score               -0.001           0.186           0.254      0.399       -0.084   -0.001   -0.415    0.230
     Eigenvalue                            2.849           1.581           1.255      1.192        1.151    1.060    1.017    0.971

     Notes: Factor loadings for principal component analysis of control variables.
                             Table A.8: Robustness checks: Outcomes

       Outcome is:                                      quantity                  log (total bill)
                                                 (1)               (2)           (3)            (4)
       Incentive treatment                   -1.025⇤⇤            -0.375        -0.058⇤⇤       -0.020
                                                [0.470]          [0.552]        [0.023]       [0.031]
       Incentive x Sent above median                             -1.422                       -0.082⇤
                                                                 [0.964]                      [0.047]
       Treatment + Interaction                                   -1.797**                   -0.102***
                                                                  [0.791]                     [0.036]

       HH FE                                      x                 x            x               x
       Zone-Month-Year FE                         x                 x            x               x
       Observations (HH)                        1,282             1,275        1,282           1,275
       Observations (HH-months)                 26,246           26,122        26,246         26,122

Notes: Regressions replicate the specification in column 3 of Table 3 and column 1 of Table 5. The
outcome in columns 1 and 2 is the monthly quantity billed (in levels) and in columns 3 and 4 is the log of
the total Zambian Kwacha owed on the bill.




                              Table A.9: Robustness checks: Sample


Sample restriction:                   Including screened             All treated months       10 mo pre-treatment
                                        (1)         (2)               (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)
Incentive treatment                 -0.067⇤⇤⇤          -0.034       -0.057⇤⇤      -0.026        -0.042⇤   -0.005
                                     [0.025]           [0.032]       [0.025]      [0.032]       [0.023]   [0.031]
Incentive x Sent above median                          -0.071                     -0.064                  -0.081⇤
                                                       [0.050]                    [0.049]                 [0.047]
Treatment + Interaction                            -0.105***                     -0.089**                 -0.086**
                                                     [0.038]                      [0.038]                  [0.036]

HH FE                                   x              x               x            x             x         x
Zone-Month-Year FE                      x              x               x            x             x         x
Observations (HH)                     6,594          6,587           1,282        1,275         1,282     1,275
Observations (HH-months)             129,899        129,775          27,828       27,697        16,235    16,157

Notes: Regressions replicate the specification in column 3 of Table 3 and column 1 of Table 5. Columns 1
and 2 include the screened out households. Columns 3 and 4 include up to 9 treated months per customer.
Columns 5 and 6 restrict the sample to 10 months pre-treatment.




                                                       65
                  Table A.10: Robustness checks: Dictator game aggregation

                                            log              log          log           log
                                         (quantity)       (quantity)   (quantity)   (quantity)
                                            (1)              (2)          (3)          (4)
         Incentive treatment               -0.022           0.031       -0.049         0.074
                                           [0.031]         [0.078]      [0.054]       [0.079]
         Incentive x Above median          -0.080⇤
                                           [0.048]
         Incentive x Avg sent                              -0.150
                                                           [0.126]
         Incentive x Minimum sent                                       -0.022
                                                                        [0.112]
         Incentive x Max sent                                                         -0.176⇤
                                                                                      [0.103]
         HH FE                               x               x            x              x
         Zone-Month-Year FE                  x               x            x              x
         Observations (HH)                 1,275           1,275        1,275          1,275
         Observations (HH-months)          26,122          26,122       26,122        26,122

Notes: Regressions replicate the specification in column 1 of Table 5 showing diﬀerent measures from the
dictator game. Column 1 is the same as Table 5. Column 2 shows a continuous measure of the dictator
game endowment share sent to spouse. Columns 3 and 4 show the minimum and maximum share of
endowment sent by either spouse.




                                                     66
Table A.11: Robustness checks: Heterogeneous eﬀects of incentive treatment, including other
treatments

                                                      log            log            log
                                                   (quantity)     (quantity)    (quantity)
                                                      (1)            (2)           (3)
             Incentive treatment                     -0.022         -0.024        -0.041
                                                     [0.031]        [0.035]       [0.037]
             Incentive x Sent above median           -0.080⇤       -0.081⇤        -0.042
                                                     [0.048]       [0.048]        [0.056]
             Information treatment                                   0.004         0.039
                                                                    [0.032]       [0.042]
             Info x Sent above median                                             -0.075
                                                                                  [0.064]
             Credibility treatment                                   0.027         0.026
                                                                    [0.024]       [0.031]
             Credibility x Sent above median                                      -0.001
                                                                                  [0.048]
             HH FE                                     x              x             x
             Zone-Month-Year FE                        x              x             x
             Observations (HH)                        1275           1275          1275
             Observations (HH-months)                26,122         26,122        26,122

Notes: Regressions replicate the specification in column 1 of Table 5 adding the other treatments (column
2) and their interactions with the dictator game measure (column 3). Recall that the information
treatment was also provided to all households that received the incentive treatment.




                                                   67
                         Table A.12: Robustness check: Other outcomes

                                                                       Missing
                                                        Any pay
                                                                       quantity
                                                           (1)           (2)
                       Incentive                          0.011         -0.005
                                                         [0.014]        [0.007]
                       Price info                         0.011          0.003
                                                         [0.016]        [0.008]
                       SWSC credibility                   0.005         -0.008
                                                         [0.011]        [0.006]
                       Surveyed                          -0.046⇤⇤      0.035⇤⇤⇤
                                                          [0.022]       [0.012]
                       HH FE                               x               x
                       Zone-Month-Year FE                  x               x
                       Observations (HH)                 1,282           1,282
                       Observations (HH-months)          27,664         29,845

Notes: Regressions replicate column (3) of Table 3, with diﬀerent outcomes. Column 1 reports the
probability that a household made any payment during the month. Column 2 reports the probability that
log(quantity) is missing, conditional on the household having received a prior non-missing meter reading.




                                                   68
Table A.13: Robustness checks: Knowledge and and monitoring of water use, including other
treatments

                                                     log            log             log
                                                  (quantity)     (quantity)     (quantity)
                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)
               Incentive treatment                  -0.013         -0.013         -0.022
                                                    [0.042]        [0.042]        [0.051]
               Incentive x Knowledge sum            -0.040         -0.040         -0.033
                                                    [0.030]        [0.030]        [0.036]
               Credibility treatment                               -0.036         -0.037
                                                                   [0.042]        [0.042]
               Credibility x Knowledge sum                         0.055⇤         0.055⇤
                                                                   [0.029]        [0.029]
               Information treatment                                               0.018
                                                                                  [0.055]
               Info x Knowledge sum                                               -0.013
                                                                                  [0.040]
               HH FE                                  x               x             x
               Zone-Month-Year FE                     x               x             x
               Observations (HH)                    1,282           1,282         1,282
               Observations (HH-months)             26,246         26,246         26,246

Notes: Regressions replicate the specification in column 1 of Table 9 adding the credibility treatment
(column 2) and the information treatment (column 3).




                                                    69
