                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               TRIFFIN: DILEMMA OR MYTH?

                                       Michael D. Bordo
                                      Robert N. McCauley

                                      Working Paper 24195
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24195


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2018




The authors thank Robert Aliber, Claudio Borio, Piet Clement, Joseph Gagnon, Dong He, Krista
Hughes, Hiroyuki Ito, Steven Kamin, Eric Monnet, Hyun Song Shin and Chris Sims for
discussion, Hiroyuki Ito and Joseph Gruber for their US residuals, and Julieta Contreras, Tania
Romero and José Maria Vidal Pastor for research assistance. The views expressed are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the Bank for International Settlements or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 Bank for International Settlements 2017. Circulated with permission. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Triffin: dilemma or myth?
Michael D. Bordo and Robert N. McCauley
NBER Working Paper No. 24195
January 2018
JEL No. F32,F33,F34,F41,H63

                                          ABSTRACT

Triffin gained enormous influence by reviving the interwar story that gold scarcity threatened
deflation. In particular, he held that central banks needed to accumulate claims on the United
States to back money growth. But the claims would eventually surpass the US gold stock and
then central banks would inevitably stage a run on it. He feared that the resulting high US interest
rates would cause global deflation. However, we show that the US gold position after WWII was
no worse than the UK position in 1900. Yet it took WWI to break sterling’s gold link. And better
and feasible US policies could have kept Bretton Woods going.

This history serves as a backdrop to our critical review of two later extensions of Triffin. One
holds that the dollar’s reserve role required US current account deficits. This current account
Triffin is popular, but anachronistic, and flawed in logic and fact. Nevertheless, it pops up in
debates over the euro’s and the renminbi’s reserve roles. A fiscal Triffin holds that global demand
for safe assets will either remain dangerously unsatisfied, or force excessive US fiscal debt. Less
flawed, this story posits implausibly inflexible demand for and supply of safe assets. Thus, these
stories do not convince in their own terms. Moreover, each lacks Triffin’s clear cross-over point
from a stable system to an unstable one.

Triffin’s seeming predictive success leads economists to wrap his brand around dissimilar stories.
Yet Triffin’s dilemma in its most general form correctly points to the conflicts and difficulties
that arise when a national currency plays a role as an international public good.


Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Robert N. McCauley
Senior Adviser
Monetary and Economic Department
Bank for International Settlements
Centralbahnplatz 2
Basel 4002
Switzerland
robert.mccauley@bis.org
Contents

1. What did Triffin argue and what influence did he have? ................................................ 3

2. Bretton Woods and the pre-WWI gold standard facts? .................................................. 8

3. The current account version of Triffin ................................................................................... 12
        3.1 Current account Triffin versus Triffin ........................................................................... 12
        3.2 The dollar’s reserve role and US current account deficits .................................. 15
        3.3 What is the systemic breakdown? ................................................................................ 18
        3.4 The current account version of Triffin: conclusions............................................... 20

4. Fiscal or “safe assets” version of Triffin ................................................................................. 21
        4.1 Demand for safe assets .................................................................................................... 22
        4.2 Supply of safe assets ......................................................................................................... 25
        4.3 Historical analogy: safe assets and Empire ............................................................... 27
        4.4 The safe assets version of Triffin: conclusions ......................................................... 28

5. Legacy of Triffin .............................................................................................................................. 29

References ................................................................................................................................................ 31




2
1. What did Triffin argue and what influence did he have?

In December 1958 the western European countries declared current account
convertibility and the Bretton Woods System started to operate. Under Bretton
Woods as it had by then evolved, each member country declared its currency’s par
value in terms of US dollars and had to defend this exchange rate (within 2.5% bands)
using foreign exchange market intervention. The United States had declared its par
value at $35 per ounce of gold in 1944.
     The Bretton Woods system was an adjustable peg system in which member
countries could change their parities in the face of a fundamental disequilibrium
(never defined but presumed to be a permanent supply shock). Members used
monetary and fiscal policy to maintain full employment and stable prices, but over
time such policies aimed at internal balance had to be consistent with the external
peg. The IMF could provide temporary finance to members facing current account
deficits, ie an excess of net purchases of goods and services from the rest of the world.
Bretton Woods also condoned capital controls to limit international capital flows in
order to allow independent monetary policy.
     As the Bretton Woods System evolved in the 1950s, the US dollar became the
primary international reserve asset. The system became a gold-dollar system,
reminiscent of the interwar period, when sterling and other currency holdings
supplemented official gold holdings. The gold-dollar system arose because growth
in the global monetary gold stock was inadequate to finance the growth of world
trade and output. This in turn resulted from the post-war choice of parities that put a
low real price on gold, which restricted gold production. Moreover, the main sources
of gold supply at the time, the USSR and South Africa, were unreliable (Gilbert (1966));
Mundell (1996)). The gap between global reserve demand and supply was filled by
dollars produced by an accumulation of official short-term claims on the United
States from the early 1950s. In contemporary terms, the United States was running
US balance of payments deficits under official settlements, as it accumulated liabilities
to foreign officials without increasing official assets like gold.
      With this background, Robert Triffin testified before Congress in 1959, received
a big write-up in Business Week, and followed up with his book Gold and the dollar
crisis (1960). Combining popular persuasion and academic analysis, the book warned
that the nascent gold-dollar system was unsustainable and would implode as had
happened in 1931 and 1933.
     Triffin described his “double dilemma” to the Joint Economic Committee. If the
United States eliminated its “overall balance of payments deficits” – its accumulation
of short-term liabilities to the rest of the world – it would deprive the world economy
of international liquidity needed for the expansion of global trade. If the United States
did continue to provide international liquidity, then eventually US policy would be
unable to lower interest rates without a run on the gold stock. Either way, deflation
and depression threatened.
    In effect, Triffin argued, as Feliks Młynarski (1929) had done four years before
1933, 1 that the gold shortage and the increasing use of the dollar as official reserves
would inevitably lead to a run on US gold holdings. This would occur once
outstanding dollar liabilities to the rest of the world exceeded the US monetary gold



1
    Eichengreen (1992, pp 20, 203-204) suggests that it should be called the Młynarski Dilemma.



                                                                                                  3
stock. This run would lead the US monetary authorities to tighten monetary policy,
ushering in global deflation and, in the face of nominal rigidities, global depression.
Triffin argued that this outcome could only be averted by the creation and issuance
of global liquidity in the form of Keynes’s bancor (1941) or some other global money.
Thus, while the dilemma was posed as two-forked, Triffin’s preoccupation was with
the fork in which the US dollar continued to provide the world with liquidity until the
system broke down in a run on the dollar.
     Triffin is remembered for having rightly called the break of the gold-dollar link in
1971 in 1959-60. In the event, overall US external liabilities reached the value of the
US monetary gold holdings in 1958 (Graph 1, right-hand panel, blue dotted and red
solid lines). US liabilities to officials reached that point in 1964 (solid blue and red
lines). In 1971, just seven years later, President Nixon broke the dollar’s peg to gold.
     Triffin did not take into account what became a substantial stock of US dollars
held by foreign central banks offshore that made the US position worse according to
his analysis. Years later, the growth of the offshore dollar market led Triffin (1978, p
4) to add official eurodollar deposits to dollar reserves held in the United States, an
addition subsequently neglected by international economists. This point is not just
an historical footnote.
      The point is worth elaboration because the same misapprehension that all dollars
are held Stateside 2 afflicts the more recent versions of Triffin discussed below. Four
years after Gold and the dollar crisis appeared, the world learned of a stock of $4.45
billion of dollar bank liabilities outside the United States as of September 1963 (BIS,
1964). Then, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) upped its estimate to $6.94
billion (BIS (1965)). Central banks held about half of such offshore dollar deposits (BIS
(1966, pp 146-147)), “presumably to obtain higher earnings on these funds” than in
the United States (BIS (1964, p 132). The upshot is that central banks could and did

Triffin problem: UK pre-WWI and US post-WWII
Liabilities to officials and holdings of gold                                                                              Graph 1

Identified UK liabilities to foreign officials and Bank of         US liabilities to foreign officials and US monetary gold,
England gold, 1899 and 1913                                        1940-1971
                                                          USD m                                                              USD bn




Source: Lindert (1969, Table 3 and p 37); Bordo (1993), based on Tables SC-8, columns 1 and 2, and SC-10, column 3 in Gold Commission
Report, Washington, DC: US Congress, March 1982; 1972 Supplement to International Financial Statistics.




2
     Avdjiev et al (2016) term the fallacy that all firms and currencies are contained by national borders
     the “triple coincidence” of international finance.



4
place official foreign exchange reserve holdings in dollar deposits outside the United
States as well as in instruments in the United States (which were captured by the US
Bureau of Economic Analysis as a US liability).
     Taking on board the insight that official dollar foreign exchange reserves can be
held outside the United States, the two series cross earlier (Graph 2). In particular, the
sum of offshore and onshore official dollar holdings surpassed the value of US gold
not in 1964 but rather in 1962.
     If Triffin is remembered for rightly predicting the breakdown of the gold/dollar
link well in advance, what Triffin got wrong is not much remembered. He worried
about deflation but the world suffered inflation. Triffin (1978, pp 3-4) recognised this:
    Let me also admit, however that I did change my mind about the main danger
    confronting the future of the international monetary system. While my initial
    diagnosis was seen by central bankers 3 as placing excessive stress on the first
    horn of the Triffin Dilemma, the danger of world deflation, my later writings
    placed increasing stress on the second, the inflationary potential of continuing
    U.S. deficits…Even so, I was totally wrong in underestimating the duration and
    the size of the U.S. deficits that foreign central bankers would be willing to
    absorb, at the cost of an inflationary explosion of world monetary reserves and
    of a multiple expansion of the money supply in their countries under the
    traditional system of fractional reserve requirements.



US liabilities to foreign officials, their eurodollar deposits and
US monetary gold 1955–1970
Billions of US dollars                                                                                   Graph 2




Note: Central bank holdings of Eurodollar deposits estimated as half of cross-border dollar liabilities of European
banks; dollar liabilities of UK banks are used to estimate these for 1958-1962.

Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics; Bank of England (1964); US Bureau of Economic Analysis; BIS
(1964–1971); authors’ estimates.




3
      “Notably Dr. Otmar Emminger. See, for instance, his (1973, p 35) Per Jacobsson lecture” [Triffin
      footnote]. Triffin ascribed the surprising willingness to absorb dollars to “the reluctance to accept the
      appreciation of its exchange rate that would flow from a country's refusal to accumulate dollars” (p
      5).



                                                                                                                  5
    And what he got right he may have gotten right for the wrong reasons. He
posited an inevitable run on the US gold but, as we argue below, different US policies
could have left the system to enjoy another equilibrium.
    In essence, the Triffin story combined two elements. It extended the mechanical
money supply multiplier (Phillips (1920)) to the international sphere. Growing stocks
of domestic money and bank credit needed backing with gold or foreign exchange
reserves. And it ascribed the limited production of gold to the operation of the
commodity theory of money and the gold market (Barro (1979)). In particular, the
gold price had been set too low in relation to other prices, discouraging mining.
    The mechanical aspect of the Triffin story was carried forward in the first
generation speculative attack models of Salant and Henderson (1978) and Krugman
(1979). Garber (1993) applied these directly to the collapse of Bretton Woods. 4
      Triffin’s story and its prognosis of a run on the US monetary gold stock and a
return to the Great Depression was taken to heart by the US government. 5 After the
October 1960 spike in the London gold price to $40 on the fear that, if John F Kennedy
were elected President, he would implement inflationary policies, a number of policies
sought to stanch the gold losses that had begun in the 1950s. Indeed, Vice President
Coombs of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York joined the December 1960 BIS
meetings for the first time (Coombs (1976)) and his boss President Hayes made his
first visit to Basel in January 1961. They sought to reassure the European central banks
and discussed several of the policies (Toniolo (2005, pp 364 and 372)). Roosa recalled,
“in my first conversation with President-elect Kennedy after the announcement of my
appointment as his Under Secretary [of the Treasury] for Monetary Affairs in
December 1960, he pointed to the relevance of ‘Bob Triffin's thinking’ for the effort
we were then initiating to buttress the dollar's defences” (Triffin (1978, p vi).
     These buttresses ultimately reached no fewer than seven. (1) The Gold Pool
(1961) saw eight countries jointly intervene to maintain the London gold price close
to the $35 parity price. (2) The General Arrangements to Borrow (GAB, 1961) created
an IMF lending facility large enough to offer substantial credit to the United States. 6
(3) Roosa bonds (1961), US Treasury bonds denominated in deutsche mark and other
currencies, were exchanged for dollars to discourage US allies from converting dollars
into gold. (4) The Interest Equalization Tax (1963) imposed a tax on capital outflows.
(5) Moral suasion sought to limit outflows of bank credit and direct investment. (6)
Joint exchange market intervention was undertaken, supported by (7) the creation of
the swap lines by the Federal Reserve in 1962 (Bordo et al (2015a)). 7 Each of these
policies had some impact in the short run. Triffin (1978) judged that “these palliatives
postponed the day of reckoning much longer than I would have expected but did not




4
    By contrast Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Marion (1999) suggest multiple equilibria.
5
    But not the IMF, or at least not Altman (1961), who contests Triffin’s diagnosis and especially his
    prescription.
6
    Strange (1976) quipped that the GAB would have been better labelled the Selective Agreement to
    Lend.
7
    Martin Gilbert (1968) of the BIS, Jacques Rueff (1972) in French official circles and others (Meltzer
    (1991)) argued that the problem could have been solved by the United States, unilaterally or in
    concert with others, doubling the nominal price of gold from $35 to $70 per ounce. US officials
    opposed this move because it would have given a large capital gain to pariah nations South Africa
    and the USSR. It would also have been a time inconsistent policy and would have induced moral
    hazard (Bordo (1993)).



6
prevent it”. None could prevent the ultimate collapse of Bretton Woods once the US
began following inflationary policies in the mid-1960s (Bordo (1993)).
     Triffin was also influential in Europe because his thesis of the technical
unsustainability of the gold-dollar link dovetailed nicely with Charles De Gaulle’s
objection to the US exorbitant privilege. This view took umbrage that the United
States did not have to adjust to its balance of payments deficit whereas other
countries did (Bordo et al (1995); Eichengreen (2011); McCauley (2015)). Triffin was
also influential because his thesis served to bolster the views of Bundesbank head
Otmar Emminger (1967, 1973) that US balance of payments deficits were forcing the
Europeans to inflate as purchases of dollars to prevent appreciation boosted base
money (Bordo (1993)).
     Triffin’s prognosis also led to efforts by the IMF, G10 and OECD (Working Party
3) to reform the international monetary system by developing a substitute for the US
dollar as international reserve asset. Various plans worked to realise the Triffin/Keynes
ambition of centralised control over the amount or composition of official reserve
assets. These included the Bernstein plan for centralising dollar and sterling reserves
with the IMF, which could lend them out. Also proposed was a substitution account
to transform dollar reserves into SDRs (McCauley and Schenk (2015)). Finally the SDR
(often called paper gold) was agreed in 1969. However, by the time the SDR arrived
in 1970, events had falsified Triffin’s prediction of deficient global liquidity and
deflation. Instead the world suffered from excessive global liquidity and inflation.
      Triffin’s thesis that the gold dollar standard would inevitably collapse into a 1930s
style depression commanded wide but not universal acceptance. Building on
Kindleberger (1965), a widely cited article in the Economist magazine by Despres et al
(1966) posited that the Bretton Woods system did not inevitably have to collapse.
They viewed the United States as acting as a global financial intermediary that
transformed short-term liabilities (dollar reserve holdings) into long-term assets (eg,
direct foreign investments). Halm (1968) criticised the dissenting view for neglecting
liquidity risk inherent in the transformation of long-term assets into short-term
liabilities. 8 On the Diamond and Dybvig (1983) view, such a maturity mismatch in
domestic banking requires a lender of last resort to counter bank runs. In the
international context, Kindleberger (1978) looked to central bank cooperation to
provide the international lender of last resort. 9
      This dissenting view in effect conceived a stable equilibrium, an alternative to
Triffin’s run, that appropriate US policy could have sustained. Because of its long-run
track record of stability and growth of the US economy and financial system by the
1960s, the rest of the world valued the dollar as a vehicle currency, an invoicing
currency and as a store of value (Eichengreen (2011)). As long as the US monetary



8
    “As far as the ‘international banker’ is concerned, it is obvious that he cannot count on a one-sided,
    permanent, and ever-increasing flow of short-term funds from abroad. The flow of short-term capital
    can reverse itself suddenly for a number of reasons, making the deficit which the minority view
    considers entirely normal rather problematic. The world banker can suddenly be faced with a liquidity
    problem or even a liquidity crisis. Then he will have to be able to fall back on very large international
    reserves” (Halm (1968, p 7)). Or swap lines. For a revival of the international banker interpretation,
    see Gourinchas and Rey (2007 and 2014)).
9
    Kindleberger saw the outline of an international lender of last resort in the swap network that the
    Fed developed during the Bretton Woods period but that outlasted it. Despite the swaps’ short-term
    success, Bretton Woods collapsed between 1971 and 1973 amid US inflation and current account
    deficits (Bordo et al (2015a and 2015b, chapter 4)).




                                                                                                           7
authorities provided the price stability needed to maintain the nominal anchor, this
process could have continued indefinitely. 10 The gold dollar standard could eventually
have evolved into a pure dollar standard (McKinnon (1969)).
     The Triffin thesis very much reflected the environment of the Bretton Woods era
– of a pegged exchange rate regime based on the dollar and ultimately gold. Triffin
believed that its main defect repeated that of the gold exchange standard of the
1920s and 1930s: the gold shortage from the maladjustment of parities. The weakness
of sterling as a reserve asset would return after World War II to haunt the dollar and
deflation would return to haunt the world.
     In any case, Triffin’s legacy remains an important point of reference in the very
different environment of a fiat money non-system. In what follows, Section 2 goes
back to the gold standard before WWI to question the inevitability of a run on (then
the Bank of England’s) gold when Triffin’s lines cross. Then Section 3 jumps forward
to the popular, if often misstated, current account version of the Triffin dilemma that
became popular after the US current account deficits set in during the 1980s. Then
Section 4 considers the more recently proposed analogy between a global safe assets
shortage and the Triffin dilemma. These resuscitated Triffin dilemmas are at best
distant relatives of the original and at worst fatally flawed. We conclude in Section 5
with reflections on Triffin’s legacy.



2. Bretton Woods and the pre-WWI gold standard facts?

Triffin’s view has generally been considered a major success because the Bretton
Woods par value system did unravel seven years after US dollar liabilities to foreign
officials reached the US monetary gold stock in 1964. The fact that Bretton Woods
fell apart seven years after Triffin posited that it would, however, does not explain why
it happened. Nor does it answer whether, if the US monetary authorities had not
behaved as they did, it would have happened sooner or not at all. Moreover, contrary
to Triffin’s prediction, the collapse of the Bretton Woods system did not result in
another Great Depression and deflation but rather in the Great Inflation. And it is far
from obvious that the Bretton Woods system had to end in 1971-73. 11
     Triffin’s prediction that the Bretton Woods system would collapse into
depression and deflation was based on his interpretation of the interwar experience
with the gold exchange standard. The gold exchange standard, established slowly
and painfully in the 1920s, following the 1922 Genoa Conference, collapsed after the
stock market crash of October 1929 and then sterling going off of gold in September
1931 when central banks around the world, in a scramble for liquidity, converted their
foreign exchange holdings into gold. Bernanke (2000) beautifully documents how the
global money multiplier based on the ratios of total international reserves (including
foreign exchange) to monetary gold, the ratio of the monetary base to international
reserves and the ratio of money (M1) to the monetary base, imploded between 1928
and 1932.




10
     See Genberg and Swoboda (1981) for an emphasis on policies rather than quantities.
11
     As argued by Bordo and Eichengreen (1998) with their simulations of a model of the gold exchange
     standard for the interwar period, had the United States maintained a stable monetary policy and low
     inflation after 1965, the Bretton Woods system may well have lasted another decade or so longer.



8
Determinants of the “world” money stocks 1928–19321                                                                       Graph 3




1
  World aggregate includes Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States. Authors’ decomposition
of gold quantity and distribution is suppressed (ie SHARE (maldistribution of gold) and TOTGOLD (total monetary gold) are summed).

Source: Bernanke with Mihov in Bernanke (2000).




                               The events that punctuate this implosion include the speculative attack on the
                          Austrian schilling in May 1931, the attack on the Deutsche mark in June 1931, and the
                          attack on sterling in the summer of 1931. Britain departed from gold in September of
                          that year, followed by many countries. Then followed the attack on the dollar in
                          October 1931 and again in the winter of 1933. Finally came the attacks on the Gold
                          Bloc countries in 1935 and 1936, culminating in France’s departure from the gold
                          standard in October 1936.
                               What is remarkable about Graph 2’s decomposition is how scant the effect was
                          of the variable emphasised by Triffin, namely the ratio of reserves to gold. This ratio
                          (the inverse of the backing ratio, plotted in purple) was quite stable from mid-1928
                          until the floating of the pound sterling in September 1931. To be fair to Triffin, Graph
                          2 includes the United States and the United Kingdom, whereas Triffin (1960, p 55)
                          excluded them. Thus, he reports that the reserve to gold ratio fell by 34% between
                          1928 and 1932 for a presumably larger sample that excludes the two key currency
                          countries, whereas Bernanke and Mihov’s data show only a 5% fall.
                               In any case, Graph 3 locates the drivers of the monetary contraction elsewhere.
                          For the seven industrial countries, sterilisation tended to hold down M1 growth in
                          1928-30 as the ratio of base to reserves (green line) fell. In particular, France and the
                          United States did not allow interest rates to fall as they gained gold. Then the money-
                          multiplier (M1/base in red) kicked in after the stock market crash and the onset of
                          financial instability. The reserves to gold ratio and the gold held by these seven
                          countries only fell after sterling’s departure from gold in 1931.
                               The four year collapse of the gold exchange standard was accompanied by
                          deflation of over 30%. Bernanke and James (1991) argued that the deflation
                          interacted with banking panics and sticky wages to propagate the global depression.
                          International financial contagion played an important role (Kindleberger (1973)).
                               The Triffin view was based on the interwar experience but a puzzle that Triffin
                          was aware of (Triffin (1964, p 6)) was the experience of the classical gold standard
                          1880-1914 which did not collapse in the way that the interwar regime would (Graph
                          1, left-hand panel). In many ways the gold standard was a precursor to the gold
                          exchange standard and Bretton Woods because sterling was increasingly substituting


                                                                                                                                 9
for gold in many countries’ international reserves. In other words, sterling was acting
in many ways as the dollar would in the post WWII period as the dominant
international currency serving as a vehicle currency, invoicing currency etc. Lindert
(1969) document how many emerging countries began substituting sterling, francs,
marks and dollars (US dependencies like the Philippines and Cuba) for gold. More so
than the Federal Reserve in 1960, the Bank of England held very low gold reserves
(less than 5% of its liabilities), what Clapham termed “a thin film of gold” (Sayers
(1976, p 9)). 12
     Given these facts why didn’t the gold standard dissolve into a
deflation/depression as Triffin predicted? Of course the gold standard did collapse in
1914 at the outbreak of WWI as all of the belligerents, in a scramble for gold, quickly
staged a fire sale of their foreign assets and almost all of them suspended gold
convertibility. 13
     There are a number of possible explanations:
1.   Because of luck. Perhaps the collapse of the gold standard was just an accident
     waiting to happen and WWI was the accident (Eichengreen (1985, p 16).
2.   Because of ignorance. Lindert (1969) half seriously suggested that the dearth of
     statistics and the absence of a renowned economist claiming systemic instability
     obscured any fragility in the gold standard before WWI. 14 Still, the inadequacy
     of the Bank of England’s gold reserve was a theme in public discussion for 30
     years before 1914, 15 A variant stresses persuasive definition and even false belief:
     if statisticians had not carved an ill-conceived “official settlement balance” out of
     the US capital account, perhaps there would not have been talk of “deficits”
     (Kindleberger (1965) and Despres et al (1966)).
3.   Because of central bank cooperation. Eichengreen (1992) argued that
     cooperation between the Bank of England, Bank of France and other European
     central banks during the big global financial crises of 1890 and 1907 preserved
     the system. On both occasions the Bank of France, which unlike the Bank of
     England had massive gold reserves, 16 and aided by other central banks, provided
     generous loans to the Bank of England, which may have allowed it to avoid
     depleting its gold reserves. However, Flandreau (1997) and Bordo and Schwartz
     (1999) argued that the rescue loans extended by the Bank of France to the Bank
     of England were only episodic, made on commercial terms and intermediated by
     the Rothschilds.


12
     Hardy (1936) reports that the Bank of England held just 3.4% of official gold in 1913. Triffin (1960)
     reports that the share of the US share of global gold reserves (outside international institutions) was
     51% in June 1959.
13
     With the principal exception of the United States. Britain and France suspended de facto but not de
     jure. And notably bank panics were avoided. See Silber (2007) and Roberts (2013) for the US and UK
     cases, respectively.
14
     “’There were no balance-of-payments problems fifty years ago because there were no balance-of-
     payments statistics’, Chancellor of the Exchequer’s news conference, Washington, D.C., October 3,
     1965” (Lindert (1969, p 36).
15
     “It was a commonplace of economists, financial journalists, politicians (notably just about every
     Chancellor of the Exchequer) Tory or Liberal, bankers themselves…Everybody wrote articles on the
     subject: the journals of the period are filled with papers on the inadequacy of our reserves” (Goodhart
     (1972, p 101)).
16
     See Bazot et al (2016).




10
4.   Because the Bank of England managed the gold standard and by raising its policy
     “Bank rate” 17 could command whatever gold reserves it needed. Since the City
     of London was the world’s premier money market and commodity market and
     because many international banks and other financial institutions were based in
     or had branches in London, the Bank of England could influence policy interest
     rates across the globe. Lindert (1967, 1969) documents how the Bank of England
     had stronger pulling power when it raised Bank rate than did the other core
     country central banks (ie the Bank of France and the Reichsbank). 18 Eichengreen
     (1992) made a key addition to this story by suggesting that the Bank of England
     could get away with assigning a higher priority to stopping an external drain of
     gold than to domestic activity and employment because of the limited suffrage
     at the time in Britain (and elsewhere). In other word, the Bank of England could
     credibly maintain gold convertibility at the expense of non-voters before WWI
     but not for long after.
     While each of these four explanations has something to it, one that deserves
weight centres on credibility. The classical gold standard may have been more
successful because of the credibility of the commitment by the Bank of England and
other central banks to the gold standard convertibility rule. The rule required that
gold standard adherents maintain the fixed prices of their currencies in terms of gold
as their primary policy goal. This meant that, except in case of dire emergency such
as a major war or financial crisis not of their own making, they would not suspend
convertibility and follow expansionary monetary or fiscal policy. In case of a major
war or serious financial crisis, the central bank could suspend convertibility
temporarily and issue paper money or run fiscal deficits on the understanding that
when the emergency passed that convertibility would be restored at the original
parity even if this meant running a recession.
     There is considerable empirical support for this view. Bordo and Kydland (1995)
find evidence for such credibility in the scant rise in the yields of sovereign debt and
the scant decline in real cash balances (the inflation tax base) during the British
Suspension of 1797 to 1821 19 and during the WWI suspension of 1914 to 1925.
US bond yields and real cash balances behaved similarly during the Greenback
suspension during and after the US Civil War from 1862 to 1879. Bordo and
MacDonald (2005) find other evidence for the credibility of the gold standard based
on the gold points as a target zone. Eichengreen (1985) documents how short-term
capital inflows into Great Britain served as a stabilising mechanism during financial
crises, in sharp contrast to what happened in the interwar period.
     Perhaps the success of the pre-1914 gold standard could have been replicated
during the Bretton Woods period had the United States followed sound monetary
policies after 1965 (Bordo (1993)). Politically feasible policies like those of the
Eisenhower and early Kennedy administrations rather than the guns, butter and easy
money policies of the Johnson administration could have made the difference.
Moreover, before 1965 the Fed did pay attention to international considerations in
setting its policy rates (Bordo and Eichengreen (2013)). Indeed the world may have




17
     The Bank of England took years to learn how to control the money market, ie to make the Bank rate
     effective. See Sayers (1970). See Eichengreen (1987) for the Bank of England as Stackelberg leader.
18
     See Tullio and Walters (1996) for a possibly contradictory view. See also Bazot et al (2016).
19
     See also Bordo and White (1990).



                                                                                                     11
evolved uneventfully into the pure dollar standard as advocated by McKinnon (1969,
2013).
    Thus, although Triffin’s prediction proved correct for the gold dollar standard
under the Bretton Woods system, he neglected the possibility of credible policy as
had been followed in the pre-1914 gold standard.



3. The current account version of Triffin

The shift from fixed to floating exchange rates, from capital account restrictions to
capital account openness, from the dominance of official flows to the dominance of
private flows, from fear of deflation to fear of inflation and back to fear of deflation
has not dimmed the appeal of Triffin-style arguments. With the changes in the
international monetary and financial system, a wide range of arguments have claimed
the Triffin rubric. To us, key themes in what can be called a Triffin scenario include:
unsustainability; national interest vs global interest; liquidity vs confidence and
adjustment; and an emphasis on aggregates (not prices).
     The most common version of Triffin shifts his thesis from the capital account to
the current account. 20 It posits that the reserve currency country must run, or at least
does run, persistent current account deficits to provide the rest of the world with
reserves denominated in its currency (Zhou (2009), Camdessus and Icard (2011), Paul
Volcker in Feldstein (2013), Prasad (2013)). “In doing so, it becomes more indebted to
foreigners until the risk-free asset ceases to be risk-free” (Financial Times Lexicon (no
date)).
    In 1997, this thesis was stated as a risk for European Monetary Union. Official
reserve mangers would shift their investments from the dollar to the new euro, forcing
the new currency to appreciate and the euro area current account to deteriorate
(Bergsten (1997), Alogoskoufis and Portes (1997)). To Paul De Grauwe, this concern
evoked Triffin (McCauley (1997, p 41)).
     This section first underscores how different this thesis is from the original Triffin
thesis. Then follows a review of the evidence that shows that the US current account
has been smaller (ie a narrower surplus or a wider deficit) than might be predicted by
US fundamentals. However, whether this is owing to the role of the dollar or the size
of the US economy or some other factor is not clear. Finally, it discusses the
breakdown scenario in this would-be dilemma.


3.1 Current account Triffin versus Triffin

As applied to the United States, the current account version of Triffin runs as follows.
The global accumulation of dollar reserves requires the United States to run a current
account deficit. Since desired reserves rise with world nominal GDP, which is growing
faster than US nominal GDP, the growth of dollar reserves will raise US external
indebtedness unsustainably. Either the United States will not run the current account
deficits, leading to an insufficiency of global reserves. Or US indebtedness will rise
without limit, undermining the value of the dollar and the reserves denominated in it.



20
     This shift is not altogether surprising given what Borio (2016) calls “the centrality of the current
     account in international economics”. See also Borio and Disyatat (2015).



12
      As stated, the current account Triffin differs substantially from the original Triffin.
The original Triffin was about an accumulation of capital account flows into a stock of
liabilities that would eventually surpass the value of the US monetary gold stock; it
had nothing to do with the current account.
      Empirically, it is worth noting at the outset that this current account version of
Triffin is completely ahistorical. The United States was running current account
surpluses when Triffin wrote. Swoboda (2012) reminded participants in a conference
on Triffin: “In fact the United States had a positive current as well as trade account in
the post-war period until 1970; these accounts turned negative in 1971 and 1972, but
the current account then became positive again until 1980. The issue then was not
that the United States could run current account deficits ‘without tears’ but that its
‘exorbitant privilege’ allowed it to borrow short at low cost in order to acquire long-
term claims on the rest of the world”. 21
     The fact that dollar reserves could grow in the 1960s in the absence of US current
account deficits underscores an important distinction between nets and grosses in
international finance (Borio (2016)). Countries can and do borrow from or sell equity
to the world to accumulate foreign exchange reserves. India is a case in point with
substantial reserves, notwithstanding substantial current account deficits.
     Taking it on its own terms, the current account version of Triffin raises two related
questions. It requires that countries accumulate foreign exchange reserves as a
purposive activity. For instance, authorities may observe sudden reversals of capital
flows and seek to build up a cushion of reserves. This raises the question, first, do
countries really accumulate dollar reserves as a purposeful, precautionary activity? Or
rather do they do so as a by-product of desired current account surpluses? 22 A
second, is whether the parallel is well taken in the sense that the horns of the dilemma
are sharp and systemic breakdown threatens?
     US current accounts are clearly linked to those in the rest of the world thanks to
the N-1 problem. Aliber (2016, p 126) argues that, just as there are only N-1 exchange
rates, there can be only N-1 independently determined current accounts. If the rest
of the world runs current account surpluses, then the United States must run deficits.
In Aliber’s phrase, the US economy supplies consistency to the rest of the world. One
could cite, for instance, the widening of the US current account deficit in the wake of
the Asian financial crisis, when a sudden reversal of capital flows forced current
account deficits in East Asia to swing sharply into surpluses. Triffin’s system-wide
perspective is conveyed by the N-1 and his theme of unsustainability by sufficiently
large current account deficits.
    However, the Triffin version of the current account requires that the rest of the
world runs current account surpluses for a particular reason, namely to acquire dollar
reserves as international liquidity. There is an alternative interpretation of dollar
reserve growth as a consequence of a growth strategy that implies US deficits not
because of the role of the dollar, but rather the size of the United States.




21
     Although Garber (1996) judged that “Triffin had the better of the argument”, Kindleberger (1985, p
     295) wrote that the “cogency of that position [of Kindelberger, Despres and Salant] has been
     thoroughly undermined by the fact that the United States has now developed a real [that is, current
     account] deficit”. This implied for Kindleberger that the world’s banker is eating its capital. On the
     theme of the US economy as world banker, see Gourinchas and Rey (2007, 2014).
22
     This was Triffin’s interpretation of the explosion of reserves in the 1970s; see footnote 4 above.




                                                                                                          13
     In the Bretton Woods II argument of Dooley et al (2004), emerging market
economies seek to run current account surpluses to create jobs out of an unlimited
supply of labour (the Lewis (1954) model). Current accounts may feed official
international reserves as a by-product, but these are not desired in themselves. On
this view, a succession of economies, China today, others tomorrow, make for
persistence in the US current account deficit. The US economy is the counterpart
owing to its size. 23 Because the accumulation of dollar reserves is the means to the
current account surplus (“vendor financing”), Dooley et al (2004) suggest the system
is sustainable.
    Even if the precautionary interpretation of dollar reserve accumulation is
accepted, there is the question of the power of the analogy. Both horns of the would-
be dilemma of the US current account are less pointed than the original. 24
     One horn of Triffin’s dilemma was the threat to the cornerstone of the Bretton
Woods system; by comparison, the threat of US indebtedness is more amorphous.
The link of the US dollar to gold defined the system and Triffin drew attention to the
clear cross-over point between global official claims on the United States and the
value of the US monetary gold stock. Once these lines cross, the breakdown of the
system is possible or even, on some interpretations, inevitable – an accident waiting
to happen. By contrast, US policy does not assign any particular role to the net
external indebtedness of the US economy. Moreover, as argued below, it is not clear
at what point US external indebtedness might be seen as a problem.
     The other horn of Triffin’s dilemma was the threat of global deflation; by
comparison, the risk posed by, in some sense insufficient dollar reserves, is much less
obvious. For Triffin, absent sufficiently rapidly growing US external liabilities, the world
would plunge into deflation and depression. But central banks do not depend on
growing foreign exchange reserves to keep their money supplies growing. This was
powerfully demonstrated in 2015-16 by China, which saw its foreign exchange
reserves fall from $4 trillion to $3 trillion, but where M2 and credit growth continued
to grow smartly at double-digit rates.
     Thus the analogy between the current account variant of Triffin’s dilemma and
the original one suffers from severe limitations. Still, the widespread embrace of the
proposition that the reserve role of the dollar has forced the United States to run
current account deficits makes it a hypothesis worth considering. Moreover, it bears
on the prospects for the renminbi as a reserve currency: must China’s current account
surpluses turn to deficits for the renminbi to play a major role as reserve currency?




23
     Large size implies that a given dollar shift in the US current account is smaller than the same shift
     would be relative to any other economy. See Cooper (2009) for the view that the size of the US
     economy (in particular its financial markets), rather than the dollar’s international role, is critical.
24
     Jeanne (2012) has a general equilibrium model for the current account variant of Triffin that points
     to low returns on foreign exchange reserves, but no dilemma and no sense of unsustainability. He
     assumes that the rest of the world seeks to accumulate reserves and, implausibly, must run current
     account surpluses to gain them. In his two-period model, desired current account surpluses in period
     one lead to dollar appreciation and US deficits. In the second period, with the intertemporal budget
     constraint respected, dollar depreciation leads to US surpluses. Returns on reserves, as measured in
     domestic consumption, are lower, the larger the reserve accumulation. Apart from posing no
     dilemma, the model has a problematic relationship to the facts. In practice, a run-down of reserves
     by emerging market economies in 2008 and 2015 accompanied domestic currency depreciation and
     thus exchange rate gains.



14
                             3.2 The dollar’s reserve role and US current account deficits

                             The hypothesis that the dollar’s role has led to wider US current account deficits is
                             not easily tested. The finding that the US current account deficit is larger than one
                             would expect from underlying variables like income level, demographics, and so on,
                             leaves open the question of why this is so.
                                  Economists have recently taken various empirical approaches to the link between
                             the reserve role of the dollar and US current accounts. Fratianni (2012) and Steiner
                             (2014) have approached the question by examining the link between the growth of
                             foreign exchange reserves and current account balances, the first focusing on the US
                             balance of payments, the second at the country level and then aggregating. Building
                             on Chinn and Ito (2007), Chinn et al (2014) take a more indirect approach. They report
                             a panel analysis of current accounts and interpret the pattern of wider-than-predicted
                             observed US current account deficits as reflecting the US dollar’s reserve role. In what
                             follows, we summarise our literature review (Bordo and McCauley (2016))) and
                             contribute by analysing the relationship between US current account errors in Chinn
                             et al (2014) and Gruber and Kamin (2007), on the one hand, and dollar reserve
                             increases, on the other.
                                   Fratianni (2012) argues that US current account deficits have increased US
                             liabilities to foreign officials (Table 1). Conceding the point of Cohen (2012) only in
                             theory, he claims: “In theory …the increase in the supply of reserve assets need not
                             be associated with a current account deficit. However, it has happened for the United
                             States since the 1980s”. In columns 1 and 2, a negative association is evident in 1973-
                             1980: US external liabilities to foreign officials grew substantially notwithstanding the
                             US current account surpluses. In 1960 Triffin questioned the sustainability of precisely
                             this combination! Fratianni notes that “For the other periods, the association has been



US current accounts and US official foreign exchange reserves
In billions of US dollars, cumulated over periods                                                                            Table 1

      Period               (1) Cumulative          Memo: % GDP              (2) BEA US     Memo: COFER           Memo: reserve
                          current account                                      official    change in US      financing % = -(1)/(2)
                                                                             liabilities   dollar reserves
1973-1980                           4                    0.1                    116              148
1981-1985                       -252                    -1.3                     17               11                  7%
1986-1990                       -607                    -2.4                    163              230                 27%
1991-1995                       -367                    -1.1                    279              364                 76%
1996-2000                     -1,200                    -2.7                    212              558                 18%
2001-2007                     -4,279                    -4.9                  2,048            2,905                 48%
2008-2010                     -1,517                    -3.4                  1,432            1,475                 94%
2011-2014                     -1,676                    -2.6                  1,050            1,582                 63%
Sum: 1973-2014                -9,894                    -2.1                  5,317            7,274                 54%
Source: Adapted and extended by authors on the basis of Fratianni (2012).




                                                                                                                                      15
positive, often strongly so”. However, in 1981-85, when the dollar was strong, dollar
reserves grew slightly as US current account deficits widened massively. 25
       In any case, Fratianni summarises [our updates in brackets]: “From the end of the
Bretton Woods regime to 2010 [2014], the United States has supplied $4.2 [$5.3]
trillion of reserve assets to the ROW, with an average yearly financing ratio …of 51%
[54%]. “in sum, a large fraction of US current-account deficits has been financed with
dollar liquidity creation, thus establishing an empirical association between excessive
US spending and world liquidity”. 26
    There are two major problems with this argument. First, a sceptic will not be
convinced by a juxtaposition of two lines in the balance of payments; the analysis
reported below may be more robust. Second, it assumes that only US liabilities can
provide US dollar reserves. 27 In fact, as noted above, borrowers resident outside the
United States widely use the dollar to denominate debts that are in turn largely held
by non-resident creditors (McCauley et al (2015a,b)). For example, the Chinese central
bank can hold a dollar bond of a German agency that in turn has a dollar claim on an
emerging market government.
     The memorandum column labelled Cofer in Table 1 suggests that this latter
problem is not only one in principle, but also in practice. 28 This column reports an
estimate of the change in dollar reserves derived from the IMF data on the currency
composition of reserves. 29 Additions to dollar reserves in the period 1973-2015 well
exceeded the increase in BEA-reported liabilities to officials. In particular, estimates
based on the IMF data suggest that dollar reserves grew by about $2 trillion more
than the BEA data. This cannot reflect just undercounting of official assets in the
United States by the BEA – instead global dollar reserves can be and have been built
up through claims on non-US residents.
     Steiner (2014) “empirically tests the Triffin dilemma [“in its modern version”],
according to which reserve currency status systematically lowers the [US] current
account balance”. Like Gagnon (2012, 2013) he finds a positive relationship between
reserve accumulation and current accounts for emerging market economies. He also
finds that after 1970 global reserve accumulation contributes significantly to US
deficits, even instrumenting reserve increases (to address endogeneity), finding that
official dollar demand adds at least dollar for dollar to US deficits. Conceptually, the
study is flawed by its implicit assumption that only the United States can borrow
dollars, whereas a significant proportion of dollar reserves are invested in dollar
obligations of non-US residents, as just discussed.



25
     This is reflected in the last column, dubbed the “percentage of reserve financing”, which comes in at
     7%. If the dollar was strong in the early 1980s and the US current account went into substantial deficit
     for the first time in the century, it is hard to pin either on weakly growing dollar reserves.
26
     As stated, Fratianni seems to lean away from the Triffinesque idea that demand for dollar reserves
     drove the US current account deficit towards the Rueffian idea that lax policy in the United States
     drove the current account deficit and imposed the dollar reserves on the rest of the world. See
     Balakrishnan et al (2009).
27
     Avdjiev et al (2016) characterises this as part of a fallacious “triple coincidence” in much international
     finance that assumes that the use of even the US dollar is neatly confined within national borders.
28
     See McCauley (2005) and McCauley and Rigaudy (2011) on offshore holding of US dollar reserves.
29
     The estimate makes the not-necessarily correct, but hard-to-avoid, assumption that the currency
     composition of allocated reserves is the same as the currency composition of unallocated reserves.
     The distinction arises mostly as a result of the mainland Chinese authorities not reporting the
     currency composition of their reserves to the IMF until very recently (and still partially).



16
     A very different empirical approach is to estimate the determinants of current
account surpluses and deficits in a panel of economies and then to draw inferences
from the pattern of estimation errors for the US current accounts. In what they call a
forensic investigation of global imbalances, Chinn et al (2014) find that the US current
account is always less than predicted. The analysis eschews the proximate
determinants in standard export and import equations, namely domestic and external
demand and the exchange rate, in favour of factors considered to more deeply
determine saving and investment. Thus, US fiscal policy, demographics (as captured
with young and old dependency ratios), US net external liabilities, GDP per capita, US
financial development (as captured by the ratio of domestic credit to GDP), US capital
account openness (as measured by the Chinn-Ito index) and US legal development
jointly and consistently over-predict the US current account.
     The misses are substantial and are larger from the mid-1990s through 2008. In
Graph 3, upper left-hand panel, their gap between predicted and observed ranges
from about 1% of US GDP in the 1970s, to over 2% in the first half of the 1980s and
about 3% in the second half of the 1980s. Official transfers to the United States in
connection with the First Gulf War helped to narrow the gap to about 2% in 1991-95.
Then, the gap widens again to 3% in 1996-2005, only to contract again in the Great
Financial Crisis in 2006-08. Strikingly, a regression that in general performs pretty well,
with an R-squared of about one-half for 101 sample countries and of about two-
thirds for 23 industrial countries, predicts US current account surpluses until the early
2000s, while the actual current account went into substantial deficit in the early 1980s.
The authors ascribe this to the international role of the dollar, or in their term, the
exorbitant privilege.
     Do the variations in their estimation error track measured dollar reserve growth?
Such tracking would suggest that the fitted relationships are over-predicting US
current accounts, dollar reserves are growing. In Graph 4, upper right-hand panel, we
plot the Chinn et al (2014) US current account misses against the estimated increase
in dollar reserves, both as a share of US GDP. The relationship is not very telling.
     In Graph 4, lower-left-hand panel, we plot the US current account estimation
errors for a shorter time span from Gruber and Kamin (2007). Again, there is not much
relationship to the change in estimated US dollar reserves as a fraction of US GDP.
     A related approach is that of Bayoumi and Saborowski (2014) and Bayoumi et al
(2015). The former find that the counterpart of a diminishing portion of reserve
accumulation in countries with capital controls is the US current account deficit.
Building on Gagnon (2012, 2013), the latter use instruments for official reserve
accumulation and find significant and substantial effects on current accounts. Though
the United States and euro area are left out of the estimation, application of the fitted
parameters suggests that 2.6 percentage points of GDP of the US current account
deficit in 2007 (about a third of the overall deficit that year) owed to reserve
accumulation elsewhere (Bayoumi et al (2015, Table 8)). Bergsten and Gagnon (2017)
report similar results and propose US retaliation in kind through US reserve
accumulation.




                                                                                         17
US current account and dollar reserve growth
In percent of US GDP                                                                                                            Graph 4

Actual and predicted current account                                  Current account errors and dollar reserve growth
Chinn, Eichengreen and Ito                                            Chinn, Eichengreen and Ito




Gruber and Kamin                                                      Gruber and Kamin




Source: Chinn et al (2014); Gruber and Kamin 2007; IMF, Composition of foreign exchange reserves (Cofer) database; national data; authors’
calculations.




3.3 What is the systemic breakdown?

If one does accept the current account version of Triffin, is one led to a Triffinesque
conclusion that the international monetary and financial system is unstable? The more
instability, the greater the likeness to the Triffin original.
     Above we cast doubt on the monetary instability that might arise from
insufficient growth of dollar foreign exchange reserves. Nowadays, central banks can
expand money supplies without them. As for financial instability, markets shook in
early 2016 on the impression that China’s reserves were running down fast. While it
is often assumed that foreign exchange reserves need to grow with domestic money
stocks to assure financial stability, the idea that financial instability would result from
stable reserves in Mainland China, Japan, the euro area and Switzerland (which hold
half of world reserves), seems most unlikely. So in this section, we concentrate on the
consequences of the United States running current account deficits and accumulating
net external liabilities.




18
      Evidence can be cited on both sides. On the one hand, the US current account
deficits over the last 35 years have led to a deterioration of the US external asset
position. A small net positive claim on the rest of the world has turned into a net
international liability position of $7.3 trillion at the end of 2015. This is equivalent to
-41% of US GDP. 30 Clearly, it would seem, the United States cannot increase its net
liability to the rest of the world by 1% of GDP per annum indefinitely.
     On the other hand, there is cross-sectional evidence that economies can take on
much larger net international liabilities than the United States has done, without
necessarily lowering their credit standing. In particular, Australia carries a substantially
larger burden of net external liabilities than the US economy while retaining a top
country and sovereign rating (IMF (2015a)). 31
      Moreover, there is the puzzling observation that the US economy is still earning
net investment income from the rest of the world despite its net international
liabilities. The BEA estimates US net international investment income in 2015 was
$193 billion, a credit. In other words, the official data show the US economy earning
a net 1.1% of GDP based on a -41% of GDP position! However one interprets this
(Heath (2007), Gourinchas and Rey (2014), McCauley (2015)), the US negative net
position does not seem to be spiralling in the manner that one might expect from the
size of the current account deficits shown in Table 1.
     Thus, the US external position may be on an unsustainable path, but any
instability does not seem imminent. We say “may” because unpublished work at the
Federal Reserve Board suggests that the US current account deficit is no longer
unsustainable. 32 In any case, Australia suggests that any instability arising from the
accumulation of US current account deficits could be some distance away, and the
low yields on foreign direct investment in the United States serves to push out the
day of reckoning.
     Nevertheless, the question remains: what is the breakdown scenario? What is the
nature of the instability, implied by an international monetary and financial system
that may require or permit unsustainable US current account deficits?
    A host of papers in the mid-2000s assessed the implications of an unsustainable
US current account deficit and envisioned a dollar crisis or at least a hard landing for
the US economy. In particular, a sudden stop of financing was analysed in papers by
Setser and Roubini (2005), Summers (2004), Obstfeld and Rogoff (2005) and Krugman
(2007). The result would be depreciation of the dollar, higher long-term bond yields
and unemployment in the United States as resources only slowly flowed from
nontraded to the traded goods sectors. 33




30
     The dollar’s trend depreciation between 2002 and 2011 (brutally interrupted in late 2008) served to
     obscure the trend. As noted by Tille (2003), the US net international investment position improves
     with dollar depreciation owing to US investors’ borrowing of dollars from the rest of the world to
     invest in foreign currency assets. However, dollar appreciation exposes the trend: it lifted the value
     of US net external liabilities by $1.5 trillion or 8% of US GDP in 2014 (BIS (2015, Chapter V, p 96).
31
     Bertaut et al (2008) identified five industrial economies with net international liabilities in excess of
     60%: Australia and New Zealand, still highly rated, and Greece, Portugal and Spain, which have since
     suffered crises.
32
     This work updates Bertaut et al (2008), who projected that the US net external liabilities would rise
     from 20% of GDP to 60% of GDP by 2020
33
     Dissents included Debelle and Galati (2005), Croke et al (2006) and Bertaut et al (2008).



                                                                                                           19
     Less attention was given to the global implications. Tille (2003) and Gourinchas
and Rey (2014) would highlight the loss of wealth in the rest of the world from dollar
depreciation. In effect, the dollar’s decline not only works through expenditure-
switching effects but also by redistributing wealth from the rest of the world to US
residents. While this might dampen the expenditure-reducing effects of the dollar’s
depreciation to some extent, it would bring the ratio of US net international liabilities
to GDP down quickly (the opposite of the 2014 change described in the footnote
above).
     In addition to such redistribution of wealth between the US residents and the
rest of the world, there would be redistribution within the rest of the world to the
non-bank borrowers outside the United States that owe $10 trillion to their creditors,
mostly outside the United States. Firms with dollar debts would have reduced
leverage and greater ability to borrow and to invest. The net effect of redistribution
from dollar weakness across the rest of the world might be to offset some of the
wealth loss involved in the redistribution from the rest of the world to US residents.
     These cross-cutting effects do not obviously add up to a point of instability in
the international monetary and financial system akin to the break of the dollar/gold
link in 1971. To get to that point one needs a standstill in US debt payments to the
rest of the world, or some such sudden materialisation of US country risk.
     In summary, even if one accepts that the US dollar’s role has forced the United
States to run current account deficits, and that these have put US international
indebtedness on an unsustainable path, it is far from obvious that this imparts an
instability to the international monetary and financial system that deserves an
association with Triffin. The debt dynamics are themselves less vicious than they
might be owing to the low returns that the rest of the world earns on its direct
investment in US-based businesses. Moreover, were US indebtedness to rise to too
high a level, market prices, especially US long-term interest rates and the dollar’s
exchange rate, would adjust. This might be a hard landing, as widely feared in the
mid-2000s, but this would not necessarily rise to the level of systemic breakdown.


3.4 The current account version of Triffin: conclusions

The dollar standard under floating exchange rates does not obviously have a problem
that is all that Triffinesque. In principle, the rest of the world does not require US
current account deficits to accumulate dollar reserves, and in practice dollar claims
on non-US residents appear to have played a substantial role. While the US current
account deficits have been larger than one might expect from US characteristics, it is
not at all clear that these are to be explained by the international role of the dollar
rather than the US economy’s size or the liquidity of its financial markets.
     Moreover, there is nothing like a clear cross-over point when the system breaks
down. If at some stage the financing of the US net external liabilities stops being easy,
prices might move in uncomfortable fashion. But instability of the system of the kind
that Triffin predicted for Bretton Woods would not obviously be involved. Only a US
Treasury default that impaired the major global reserve asset would rise to the level
of the end of the gold/dollar link under Bretton Woods.
     The implication often drawn – that the renminbi cannot be a reserve currency
unless China runs a current account deficit – does not follow. Even if the empirical
work reviewed is taken to have demonstrated that the international role of the dollar
has indeed led to wider US current deficits, this linkage of China’s current account to



20
the future of the renminbi as an international currency is not only conceptually but
also factually flawed (He (2012)). Before 1980, gross flows allowed dollar reserves to
grow, without any US current account deficit including through the financing of non-
US current account deficits in the dollar. And renminbi reserves holdings reached one
percent of global reserves by the end of 2014 (IMF (2015b)), notwithstanding ongoing
Chinese current account surpluses.



4. Fiscal or “safe assets” version of Triffin

Compared to the current account version of the Triffin dilemma, the fiscal version is
of more recent vintage. Moreover, it is always understood as an analogy rather than
stated as a misinterpretation. As with the current account version, the unsustainability
is about how a stock of debt cannot rise indefinitely in relation to the flow with which
to service it. Unlike the original Triffin dilemma with its hard-edged cross-over point
between stocks of assets and liabilities, the fiscal version of Triffin has a fuzzier point
of instability and ambiguity of what happens when the fiscal debt reaches too high a
level.
     Jeanne (2012) summarises Farhi et al (2011) and Obstfeld (2011) 34: “As
international reserves are primarily composed of US government debt, and the share
of the US in the economy is shrinking, the US progressively loses its fiscal capacity to
satisfy the rest of the world’s demand for international liquidity [ie demand for US
Treasury securities]. Thus, there is a dilemma between the objective of satisfying the
global demand for international liquidity, which requires a secular increase in the ratio
of US government debt to US GDP, and the objective of maintaining US government
debt safe, which requires stabilizing this ratio”.
      Just what is the downside if there is under-production of safe assets? Recall that
for Triffin, deflation and depression loomed if the United States did not allow dollar
liabilities to pile up or if US policy tightened in the face of a speculative attack on its
gold stock. Farhi et al (2011) offer a cocktail. Private agents may attempt to fabricate
their own safe assets and fail, as with the subprime crisis, leading to financial
instability (see also Gorton et al (2012), Gorton (2017) and Caballero et al (2017b)).
Firms may issue short-term debt as a substitute for safe debt, with resulting financial
fragility. Caballero and Farhi (2013) emphasise that, with an increasing imbalance
between the supply of and demand for safe assets, the spread between safe asset
yields and risky asset yields would widen, and at the zero lower bound, the economy
would fall into a safety trap. There, monetary policy could become ineffective in
setting risky asset yields at the appropriate level and output would fall to reduce the
demand for safe assets. 35 Caballero et al (2016) suggest that currency wars can be
understood as attempts to redistribute the output decline in a world of safe asset
yields stuck at zero.
     Producing safe assets through fiscal deficits results in higher government debt,
and ultimately deprives the government of the fiscal capacity to respond to shocks
with conventional fiscal policy or with other means to add to the stock of safe assets.
At the limit would be the Hobson’s choice between default and a surprise inflation to
reduce government debt to a level consistent with the tax base. Leeper and Walker


34
     See also Caballero et al (2017b, p 38).
35
     Recent observations of negative government bond yields may make the safety trap less likely.



                                                                                                    21
(2011) describe the fiscal theory of the price level, which foresees the inflation
outcome.
    This fiscal Triffin raises questions both on the demand and supply sides. Portes
(2012) is an early and rare dissenting view. The following subsections take the
questions up, first demand, then supply. Then follows an historical analogy that
extends Bordo and McCauley (2017).


4.1 Demand for safe assets

Farhi et al (2011) anchor the demand for safe assets in reserve accumulation by
emerging market economies. The idea is that reserves need to grow with the relatively
fast nominal GDP growth of emerging markets. Some have modelled the demand as
if some portion of M2 is by behaviour, if not by law, backed by foreign reserves, that
is, safe assets. This argumentation is quite Triffinesque, but is it realistic?
     To recap, there has been a long-running argument over how to interpret the
build-up of reserves by emerging market economies. One side sees it as purposive
behaviour, hoarding for precautionary purposes. If the precautionary demand
depends on some combination of imports, short-term debt or M2, then it is plausible
that desired reserves, and thus safe asset demand, grows with nominal GDP. Obstfeld
et al (2009, 2010) find M2/GDP a powerful determinant of foreign exchange reserves
as a proportion of GDP and interpret the relationship as insurance against financial
instability arising from a domestic run (“drain”) from M2 into foreign exchange.
     Another side, however, sees the build-up as a side-effect of currency
management. 36 On this view, the safe asset story gained adherents during the dollar’s
depreciation from 2002 to 2011. It might be expected to lose adherents when the
dollar appreciates, and reserves are drawn down in the absence of a flight from M2.
     Into 2013, a shortage of safe assets could be seen as looming as the stock of
dollar reserves might approach the stock of US Treasury securities outstanding (Graph
5). Through that year, the US Treasury was running up its debt fast enough to
accommodate the growth of US dollar foreign exchange reserves. But Treasury debt
growing at double-digit rates and US (nominal) growth at single-digit rates pushed
consolidated US government debt from 57.8% of GDP to 96.9% of GDP in 2007-13. 37
     So it was easy to imagine the lines in Graph 5 converging. One had to anticipate
that the red line would flatten out to a growth rate no higher than the 4% or so US
growth rate. If emerging market economies were to grow at 6% per annum, and their
acquisition of safe dollar assets kept pace, then safe assets could suffer a shortage.
Indeed, the IMF (2012) projected the demand for safe assets to rise on the back of a
projected 61% rise in global foreign exchange reserves by the end of 2016. Such
double-digit growth would have exceeded global growth, and even more US growth.
Official foreign exchange reserves would have reached $18 trillion and dollar reserves
about $12 trillion. In this case, a sharp rise in the blue line on Graph 5 would have
approached the slowly rising red line. They could have crossed within a decade.
Shades of Graphs 1 and 2 above!




36
     This was Triffin’s interpretation of the explosion of reserves in the 1970s; see footnote 4 above.
37
     However, the Federal Reserve absorbed much Treasury debt in this period. Federal Reserve selling of
     its Treasuries would leave a larger supply of Treasury debt available to reserve managers.



22
US Treasury debt and US dollar official FX reserves, 20131
Outstanding amounts, in trillions of US dollars                                                       Graph 5




1
    Dashed lines represent projections.

Sources: IMF, Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves and International Financial Statistics;
US Department of the Treasury; BIS calculations.



     In the event, China’s economy grew without additional foreign exchange
reserves. As noted, Chinese reserves shrank from near $4 trillion to $3 trillion before
stabilising in 2017. A significant share of China’s reserve drawdown reflects the
reversal of various forms of carry trades after the renminbi peaked against the dollar
in early 2014. McCauley and Shu (2016) highlighted both the repayment of foreign
currency debt by the Chinese corporate sector and the liquidation of renminbi
deposits held outside the mainland in Hong Kong SAR, Macao SAR, Chinese Taipei,
Korea and Singapore. China’s money supply and bank credit continued to rise at
double-digit rates through the reserve drawdown.
     The demand for safe assets that was interpreted as the secular result of
precautionary demands from economies with underdeveloped financial markets and
risk of a domestic run on the currency now looks more cyclical. The “demand” could
prove the temporary result of carry trades amid a long cycle of dollar depreciation
that lasted, with an interruption in 2008, from 2002 to 2011.


Global foreign exchange reserves1: “peak reserves”?                                                   Graph 6




1
    The vertical line represents the maximum level of FX reserves in the last 18 years.

Sources: IMF, Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves, International Financial Statistics and
World Economic Outlook.




                                                                                                              23
US Treasury debt and US dollar global official FX reserves1
Outstanding amount, in trillions of US dollars                                                        Graph 7




1
    Reserves information up to 2017Q2 and US Treasury data up to October 2017.

Sources: IMF, Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves, International Financial Statistics; US
Department of the Treasury; BIS calculations




    Revisiting the simplest rendering of the global safe-asset shortage (Graph 7),
holdings of dollar reserves has fallen while US Treasury securities outstanding have
continued to grow. Rather than the red line flattening and the blue line rising, the
reverse has occurred.
    Moreover, price developments have falsified one of the predictions of the safe-
asset shortage story. As noted, one of the manifestations of the shortage is a wide
gap between the yields on safe assets, on the one hand, and those on less safe assets,
on the other. Graph 8 shows the reverse: in the US dollar market, the yield on the
generic private yield, on the fixed leg of interest rate swaps, fell below that on the US
Treasury of the same maturity in 2015. To give them their due, Caballero et al (2017a)
recognise that such spreads do not support their story.
      As it happens, a demand-side story, the sale by emerging market official reserve
managers of US Treasury securities was one of the most frequently given explanations
of this oddity in the US dollar bond market (Clark and Mann (2016)). As official
investors turned sellers of US Treasury bonds (red bars below the zero line in Graph
8), the difference between the generic private rate in 10-year interest rate swaps, on
the one hand, and the 10-year Treasury bond, on the other, became negative. Again,
this is the opposite of the prediction of Caballero and Farhi (2013) for a secular
widening of the spread between safe securities and risky ones (Summers (2016)). (At
writing, the swap spread has approached zero, even as global foreign exchange
reserves have resumed growing in 2017.) Is there a glut of safe assets?
    In sum, facts have not been kind to the idea that the growth of emerging market
economies requires an accumulation of safe assets that must come up short against
a supply that ultimately can only grow with advanced economies. With the dollar’s
appreciation in 2014, global foreign exchange reserves were drawn down.
Accordingly, the lines representing safe-asset demand and supply are not going to
cross any time soon.




24
Foreign official Treasury purchases and 10-year interest rate swap spreads                                     Graph 8
USD bn                                                                                                      Basis points




1
    Monthly average of daily observations.

Sources: Bloomberg, Datastream; BIS calculations.




                             4.2 Supply of safe assets

                             On the supply side, the assumption that only fiscal deficits can add to the supply of
                             safe assets is too limiting. It is not just the private sector that can try and repeatedly
                             fail to fabricate safe assets. Governments can and do try, and while success depends
                             on institutional strength, they are not fated to fail. Governments can create safe assets
                             out of domestic cash streams or out of foreign cash streams. The argumentation
                             below focuses on the US dollar, but the points have broader application.
                                  Operational definitions of safe assets tend to overlook the sources of supply
                             discussed below. Gorton et al (2012) and Carlson et al (2016) identify only (dollar) safe
                             assets of US obligors. Andolfatto and Williamson (2015) add only US agency and
                             private asset-backed securities to prime government bonds (recently restricted to the
                             US, German and French governments), and claim that US agency bonds lost their
                             safety after the US government explicitly backed them in conservatorship—when the
                             government backing became explicit! Eichengreen (2016) adds the debt of
                             supranational organisations to that of top-rated OECD governments, but not
                             agencies, including ones guaranteed by top-rated governments (eg KfW).
                                 Our operational definition of a safe asset is a fixed income claim that a central
                             bank holds in its official foreign exchange reserves. It is helpful to obtain a top-down
                             view on the importance of such claims that are not produced by a government
                             running fiscal deficits. For the US dollar, are official reserves held in the dollar all
                             invested in US Treasury securities?
                                  The answer is a resounding no. This answer can be confidently given, even given
                             the uncertainties regarding the total official foreign exchange reserves held in the
                             dollar, on the one hand, and the amount of such invested in US Treasury securities,
                             on the other. Graph 9 adds to Graph 7 the holdings of US Treasuries reported by the
                             Bureau of Economic Analysis based on the annual survey by the US Treasury, Federal
                             Reserve Bank of New York and the Board of Governors (2017). This survey drills down
                             with custodians to identify ultimate owners, but still might miss some holders.
                             Nevertheless, the gap between (estimate) official foreign exchange holdings in the
                             dollar and official holdings of US Treasuries is very substantial. It narrowed after the



                                                                                                                      25
US Treasury debt outstanding, US dollar reserves and official
Treasury holdings1
In trillions of US dollars                                                                            Graph 9




1
     Reserves information up to 2017Q2 and US Treasury data up to October 2017.

Sources: IMF, Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves, International Financial Statistics; US
Bureau of Economic Analysis; US Department of the Treasury; BIS calculations.




Great Financial Crisis, as official reserve managers reassessed the risk of US agency
securities and bank deposits. But out of an estimated $7 trillion of dollar reserves,
more than $2 trillion appears to be invested in something other than US Treasury
securities.
     If official foreign exchange reserve holdings in the US dollar not invested in US
Treasury securities are important, what are they invested in? 38 Domestically,
governments can put their support, and ultimately their taxing power, behind
securities backed by private cash flows. Mortgage backed securities, the underlying
mortgages of which are guaranteed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are prominent
examples (recognised by Gorton et al (2012)). Before 2008, such securities were widely
held by central banks (McCauley and Rigaudy (2011)). In the event, the institutional
arrangements for these two agencies proved to be not robust, and the implicit
Treasury backing had to become explicit. Central banks continue to hold agency
paper, more the mortgage-backed securities than the debentures. (Under Treasury
conservatorship, however, these agencies are producing such profits that it is hard
for the government to forego the revenues entailed by any privatisation scheme.)
     Outside the United States, supranationals and state agencies can and do create
safe assets, even ones denominated in the US dollar. While supranationals like the
World Bank, IFC, Asian Development Bank, and the Inter-American Development
Bank enjoy some backing from the US government, among other creditworthy
governments, governments outside the United States can also back issuers of dollar
securities. A state agency KfW enjoys the guarantee of the German government and
has over a $100 billion of dollar bonds outstanding. These are widely held by official
reserve managers, who look to pick up yield vis-à-vis US Treasury bonds by accepting


38
        Historically, dollar reserves were invested in bankers’ acceptances, which the original Federal Reserve
        Act exempted from reserve requirements in order to make it as competitive instrument as possible
        (LaRoche (1993)). The Federal Reserve Bank of New York added its signature to this two-(private)-
        signature paper to provide a short-term investment for foreign central banks in the 1920s, when
        there were few Treasury bills. Thus, trade bills were turned into safe assets.



26
lower liquidity. On the basis of “callable capital” (World Bank), government
guarantees (KFW), and subnational taxing power (Canadian provinces), AAA-rated
dollar assets are produced by non-US residents. As recognised by Fahri and Maggiori
(2017) the reserve-issuing country does not enjoy a monopoly on the production of
safe assets.
     Banks in general, and non-US banks in particular, also produce safe assets,
judging from the investment behaviour of official reserve managers. 39 Before the
Great Financial Crisis, reserve managers had about a seventh of their identified dollar
reserves in bank deposits, mostly in non-US banks (McCauley and Rigaudy (2011)).
By the early 1980s, such deposits were larger than official holdings of Treasury bills.
Doubtless there was some too-big-to-fail thinking at work, and doubtless the fears,
if not the outcomes, of 2007-08 disturbed that thinking. The result was a flight away
from banks to inter alia, US Treasury bills (McCauley and McGuire (2009)), that has
since partially reversed. 40
     Production of safe assets, particularly in a foreign currency, needs to be done
with care. Government guarantees that are not supervised produce moral hazard and
turn a possibly self-financing business into a call on the government’s taxing power.
Ironically, official reserve managers reduced their holding of Fannie and Freddie
obligations when the bazooka was fired, that is, when the US Treasury in effect took
over the agencies. Official reserve managers appear to be awaiting new legislation for
the agencies before fully rebuilding their position.
     And it is possible to spread the net too wide. Thus when Jeanne (2012) suggests
that all US nonfinancial debt, 41 including corporate bonds, could serve as safe assets,
he has gone too far – although one could imagine a carefully constructed
securitisation to create some safe assets out of corporate bonds.
    The key point is that none of these safe assets, US agency bonds, supranational
and non-US agency dollar bonds, or bank deposits, strictly depends on the financing
of government deficits. To be sure, all give rise to contingent liabilities for the US or
other governments and so a fiscal element remains in the background. But clearly
contrary to this fiscal version of Triffin, it can be argued that safe assets production
does not depend on US fiscal deficits.


4.3 Historical analogy: safe assets and Empire

An important historical parallel is practice and law in Britain under the classical gold
standard that created safe assets out of colonial and Commonwealth securities. Let
us be clear at the outset that there are plenty of historical parallels that have nothing
to do with empire. Domestic government-related financial institutions that issue safe
assets are not an invention of the last century. Nor are government guarantees of
infrastructure finance: the State of Maryland guaranteed a 5% return on Baltimore


39
     See Bertaut et al (2014) for the role of foreign banks as providers of safe assets in the private US fixed
     income portfolio.
40
     According to the BIS locational international banking statistics, cross-border liabilities denominated
     in the dollar to central banks peaked before the Great Financial Crisis at about $800 billion, then
     declined to about $400 billion and have since recovered to about $600 billion. See
     http://stats.bis.org/statx/srs/tseries/LBS_D_PUB/Q.S.L.A.USD.A.5J.A.5A.M.5J.N?t=a8&c=&m=F&p=2
     0172&i=3.6 .
41
     Jeanne (2012) notes that these have grown as rapidly as the rest of the world GDP.




                                                                                                            27
and Susquehanna securities as early as 1833 and the practice quickly spread to
Europe, first Poland and then France (Irwin (2007, p 14). Indeed it was the “plan so
successfully introduced by the French Government” that was cited in 1844 as a
precedent for Indian railway financing (MacPherson (1955, p 180)). Empire was not
necessary for state-supported safe assets, now or then.
    The finding of a considerable literature 42 is that the spreads on colonial and
Commonwealth bonds were lower than they might have been. Recent research has
established that they were also less responsive to credit fundamentals.
     The institutional devices to transform what might have been risky bonds into safe
assets were as varied as the current practice reviewed above. The return on bonds
that financed the Indian railroads benefitted from a Parliamentary guarantee, an
extraordinary departure from laissez faire in Nineteenth Century Britain. The resulting
“safe securities” found investors among “widows, barristers, clergymen, spinsters,
bankers and retired army officers” (MacPherson (1955, p 181)). The Bank of England’s
discounting policy, which went beyond UK government debt in its definition of gilt-
edged securities and thereby made foreign securities safer, is emphasised by
Flandreau (2013). The definition of appropriate assets for trustees – safe assets for
widows, orphans and parsons – played a role as well. Various institutional
arrangements sought to mitigate the moral hazard.
    The upshot is that there is no hint of a safe asset shortage from Ricardo through
Marshall to Keynes. And the reason is that the Empire found ways of turning cash
flows outside the United Kingdom proper into safe assets.


4.4 The safe assets version of Triffin: conclusions

In sum, the safe assets version of the Triffin dilemma posits an implausibly inflexible
demand for and an equally implausibly inflexible supply of safe assets. On the
demand side, the assumption that emerging markets need safe foreign assets to
support their domestic money and credit growth is an anachronism lifted from
Młynarski and Triffin. Indeed, the world economy may have experienced “peak
reserves” in 2014. The Chinese economy managed to continue to grow with double-
digit increases in money and credit even as it lost a cool $1 trillion of reserves between
2014 and 2016. On the supply side, the US Treasury has plenty of competition among
various government-backed entities in providing safe dollar assets, whether housing
agencies at home, supranational and regional organisations, sovereigns or provincial
borrowers abroad and their agencies or even banks that are not demonstrably not
too big to fail. Nor is the US Treasury in an historically unique position: the UK
Treasury faced the competition of colonial and Commonwealth borrowers as gilt-
edged securities under the gold standard before WWI – competition recognised by
and supported by the Bank of England.




42
     Bordo and Rockoff (1996), Bordo et al (1999), Obstfeld and Taylor (2003), Ferguson and Schularick
     (2006), Accominotti et al (2010, 2011), Flandreau (2013), and Chavez and Flandreau (2015). DeCecco
     (1984), however, observes a wide margin between India’s long-term borrowing cost and its short-
     term investment return.



28
5. Legacy of Triffin

Issues arising from one country’s supplying most of the world’s reserve currency have
not gone away. Most recently, non-US banks suffered a dollar shortage in 2008-09
(McGuire and von Peter (2009)) and the Federal Reserve supplied dollars to other
central banks with selective open-handedness, breaking with history (Bordo et al
(2015a)). Zhou’s (2009) call for more pluralism in the international monetary and
financial system and renewed efforts for collective control over the supply of reserve
assets inevitably invoked Triffin. The Triffin dilemma as stated by Padoa-Schioppa
(2011) is certainly correct – and perhaps a truism: “there is an irremediable
contradiction between the issuing country’s internal domestic requirements and the
external requirements of the world using it”. 43
     Triffin’s visceral aversion to what Kindleberger called US leadership and political
scientists call US hegemony may have led him to overstate its instability. He well knew
that the Bank of England operated with a “thin film of gold”. In our view, it took not
the crossing of Triffin’s lines but rather bad US policy – a war fought on cheap money
– to undo Bretton Woods and to derail a gradual shift to a dollar standard.
     The shift from fixed to floating currencies, from capital controls to free capital
flows, from the dominance of official flows to the dominance of private flows, from
fear of deflation to fear of inflation and back to fear of deflation has not dimmed the
appeal of Triffin-style arguments. If we remember Triffin’s prediction regarding the
dollar/gold link, we must equally remember his prediction of deflation, not inflation.
     Does the dollar standard in which the Federal Reserve interprets its mandate as
assuring the dollar’s “convertibility” only in the sense of its bearing a stable
relationship to a basket of US goods and services have a Triffin style problem? We
are not persuaded.
     If the US external accounts are on an unsustainable trajectory, it is not clear
whether the dollar’s role, the size of the US economy or the breadth, depth and
liquidity of its financial markets are to be blamed. What we know for sure is that the
US current account is wider than panel regressions would predict. In any case, it is
hard to get excited about the US net liability position if it is still generating net
investment income. US trade deficits might make political mischief, might be
economically harmful, but they are not (yet) turning into a vicious cycle with debt
service adding to debt.
     Similarly, if the US Treasury’s debt is on an unsustainable trajectory, it is hard to
blame the demand for safe assets from foreign exchange reserve managers. The
assumption that emerging markets need safe foreign assets to support their domestic
money and credit growth is anachronistic. Indeed, the world economy may have
experienced “peak reserves” in 2014. In any case, on the supply side, the US Treasury
has plenty of competition among various government-backed entities in providing
safe assets, whether housing agencies at home, or supranational and regional
organisations, sovereigns and provincial borrowers and their agencies abroad. We
draw the parallel to the competition of colonial and Commonwealth borrowers as
gilt-edged securities under the gold standard before WWI.




43
     See also Mateos y Lago et al (2009); IMF (2010); Bini Smaghi (2011). Padoa-Schioppa goes against
     the grain of studies that claim that each country keeping its house in order leads to a global optimum:
     Oudiz and Sachs (1984); Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002).



                                                                                                         29
     While there is much to argue with Triffin and those who invoke his dilemma,
there is no arguing the dilemmas posed by a national currency that is used globally
as store of value, unit of account and means of payment. “The reserve currency is a
global public good, provided by a single country, the US on the basis of domestic
needs” (Campanella (2010)). Padoa-Schioppa emphasises the awkwardness of
national control from a global perspective. But the global use of the dollar can pose
dilemmas to the United States. How should the Federal Reserve respond to instability
in the markets for $10.7 trillion in dollar debt of nonbanks outside the United States
or in a like amount of forward contracts requiring dollar payments? 44 The central bank
ignores such instability at the peril of possible turmoil in US dollar markets that does
not stop at the border – even if the floating rate index for dollar debts is brought back
from London to New York. 45 Yet the Federal Reserve responds to such instability at
the peril of seeming to overreach its mandate. 46
     Issues arising from one country’s supplying most of the world’s reserve currency
are not going away.




44
     See     McCauley     et      al     (2015a, b),   the    BIS      global      liquidity    indicators:
     https://www.bis.org/statistics/gli.htm?m=6%7C333; and Borio et al (2017).
45
     Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2017).
46
     Foulis (2015) suggests both technical and political constraints on the Fed’s backstop of eurodollars.
     “Could the Fed save the day again? It would be a lot harder than last time. The offshore archipelago
     is almost twice as large as it was in 2007 and is growing fast, so any rescue would have to be on a
     much larger scale. The mix of countries involved is tilting away from America’s allies. The banks in
     question are less likely to have subsidiaries in New York that can borrow directly from the Fed or are
     viewed as palatable by the American legal system. The consequences could be dire…”



30
References

Accominotti, O, M Flandreau and R Rezzik (2011): “The spread of empire: Clio and the
measurement of colonial borrowing costs”, The Economic History Review, vol 64, issue
2, May, pp 385–407.
Accominotti, O, M Flandreau, R Rezzik, and F Zumer (2010): “Black man's burden,
white man's welfare: control, devolution and development in the British Empire 1880-
1914”, European Review of Economic History, vol 14, pp. 47-70.
Andolfatto, D and S Williamson (2015): “Scarcity of safe assets, inflation, and the policy
trap”, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol 73, pp 70-92.
Aliber, R (2016): The new international money game, 7th edition.
Alogoskoufis, G and R Portes (1997): “The euro, the dollar and the international
monetary system”, in P Masson, T Krueger and B Turtelboom, eds, EMU and the
international monetary system, Washington, DC: IMF, pp 58-89.
Altman, O (1961): “Professor Triffin on international liquidity and the role of the Fund”,
IMF Staff Papers, vol 8, no 2, pp 151-191.
Avdjiev S, R McCauley and H S Shin (2016): “Breaking free of the triple coincidence in
international finance”, Economic Policy, vol 31, issue 87, pp 409-45.
Balakrishnan, R, T Bayoumi, V Tulin (2009): “Rhyme or reason: what explains the easy
financing of the U.S. current account deficit? IMF Staff Papers, vol 56, no 2, pp 410–
445.
Bank of England (1964): “U.K. banks’ external liabilities and claimsin foreing
currencies”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, vol IV, no 2, June, pp 100-108.
Bank for International Settlements (1964-1971, 2015): Annual Report, Basel.
Barro, R (1979): “Money and the price level under the gold standard”, Economic
Journal, vol. 89, issue 353, pp 13-33.
Bayoumi, T, J Gagnon and C Saborowski (2015): “Official financial flows, capital
mobility, and global imbalances”, Journal of International Money and Finance, vol 52,
pp 146-174.
Bayoumi, T, and C Saborowski (2014): “Accounting for reserves”, Journal of
International Money and Finance, vol 41, pp 1-29.
Bazot, G, M Bordo and E Monnet (2016): “International shocks and the balance sheet
policy of the Banque de France under the classical gold standard”, Explorations in
Economic History, vol 62, pp 87-107.
Bergsten, F (1997): “The impact of the euro on exchange rates and international policy
cooperation”, in P Masson, T Krueger and B Turtelboom, eds, EMU and the
international monetary system, Washington, DC: IMF, pp 17-48.
Bergsten, F and J Gagnon (2017): Currency conflict and trade policy, Washington:
Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Bernanke, B (2000): Essays on the Great Depression, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
_____ and H James (1991): "The gold standard, deflation, and financial crisis in the
Great Depression: an international comparison", in R G Hubbard, ed, Financial markets
and financial crises, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


                                                                                        31
Bertaut, C, S Kamin and C Thomas (2008): “How long can the unsustainable U.S.
current account deficit be sustained?” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, International Finance Discussion Papers no 935, July.
Bertaut, C, A Tabova and V Wong (2014): “The replacement of safe assets: evidence
from the U.S. bond portfolio”, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
International Finance Discussion Paper no 1123, October.
Bini-Smaghi, L (2011): “The Triffin dilemma revisited”, in J-C Koeune and A Lamfalussy,
eds, In search of a new world monetary order, Proceedings of a conference to celebrate
the 100th anniversary of Robert Triffin (1911-1993). no 5 in the Relations financières
internationals, Brussels: P.I.E. Peter Lang for the Fondation Internationale Triffin, pp
101-111.
Bordo, M D (1993): “The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: a historical
overview”, in M D Bordo and B Eichengreen, eds., A Retrospective on the Bretton
Woods System: Lessons for International Monetary Reform, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press for the NBER, pp 3-108.
_____, M Edelstein and H Rockoff (1999): “Was adherence to the gold standard a ‘Good
House Keeping Seal of Approval’ during the inter-war period?” NBER Working Paper
no 7195, June.
_____ and B Eichengreen (1998): “Implications of the Great Depression for the
development of the international monetary system”, in M Bordo, C Goldin and E
White, eds, The defining moment: the Great Depression and the American economy in
the twentieth century, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, pp. 403-453.
_____ (1998): “The rise and fall of a barbarous relic: the role of gold in the international
monetary system”, NBER Working Paper no 6436, March.
_____ (2013): “Bretton Woods and the Great Inflation”, in M Bordo and A Orphanides,
eds, The Great Inflation: the rebirth of modern central banking, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, pp 449 – 489.
_____, O Humpage and A J Schwartz (2015a): "The Evolution of the Federal Reserve
swap lines since 1962," IMF Economic Review, vol 63, no 2, September, pp 353-372.
_____ (2015b): Strained relations: US foreign–exchange operations and monetary policy
in the Twentieth Century, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
_____ and F Kydland (1995): “The gold standard as a rule: an essay in exploration”,
Explorations in Economic History, vol 32, issue 4, October, pp 423-464.
_____ and R MacDonald (2005): “Interest rate interactions in the classical god standard,
1880-1914: was there any monetary independence?” Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol 52, no 2, pp 307-327.
_____ and R McCauley (2016): “The current account version of the Triffin Dilemma",
Atlantic Economic Journal, vol 44, issue 2, June, pp 171-82.
_____ and R McCauley (2017): “A global shortage of safe assets: a new Triffin
dilemma?", Atlantic Economic Journal, vol 45, issue 2, June, pp 443-51.
_____ and H Rockoff (1996): “The gold standard as a ‘Good Housekeeping Seal of
Approval’”, The Journal of Economic History, vol 56, no 2, pp. 389-428.




32
_____ and A Schwartz (1999): "Under what circumstances, past And present, have
international rescues of countries in financial distress been successful?," Journal of
International Money and Finance, vol 18, no 4,August, pp 683-708.
_____, D Simard and E White (1995): "France and the Bretton Woods international
monetary system, 1960 to 1968", in J Reis, ed, The history of international monetary
arrangements, London: Macmillan.
_____ and E White (1990): “British and French finance during the Napoleonic Wars”,
NBER Working Paper no 3517, November.
Borio, C (2016): “On the centrality of the current account in international economics”,
Journal of International Money and Finance, vol 68, November, pp 266-274.
_____ and P Disyatat (2015): “Capital flows and the current account: Taking financing
(more) seriously”, BIS Working Papers no 525, October.
_____, R McCauley and P McGuire (2017): ”FX swaps and forwards: missing global
debt?” BIS Quarterly Review, September, pp 37-54.
Caballero, R and E Farhi (2013): “A model of the safe asset mechanism (SAM): safety
traps and economic policy”, NBER Working Paper no 18737, August.
____ (2016): “Safe asset scarcity and aggregate demand”, American Economic Review:
Papers & Proceedings 2016, vol 106 no 5, pp 513–518.
____ (2017a): “Rents, technical change, and risk premia accounting for secular trends
in interest rates, returns on capital, earning yields, and factor shares”, American
Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 2017, 107(5): 614-620.
_____ (2017b): “The safe assets shortage conundrum”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol 31, no 3 (Summer), pp 29-46.
Camdessus, M and A Icard (2011): “Toward an orderly supply of reserve currencies”,
in J Boorman and A Icard, eds, Reform of the international monetary system: the Palais
Royal initiative, New Delhi: Sage Press, pp 75-81.
Campanella, E (2010): “The Triffin Dilemma again”, Economics: The Open-Access,
Open-Assessment E-Journal, Vol. 4, 2010-25. http://dx.doi.org/10.5018/economics-
ejournal.ja.2010-25.
Carlson, M, B Duygan-Bump, F Natalucci, W Nelson, M Ochoa, J Stein and S van den
Heuvle (2016): “The demand for short-term, safe assets and financial stability”,
International Journal of Central Banking, vol 12, no 4, December, pp 307-333.
Chavez, M and M Flandreau (2015): “’High and dry’: the liquidity and credit of colonial
and foreign government debt in the London Stock Exchange (1880-1910)”, Bank of
England Staff Working Paper no 555, October.
Chinn, M, Eichengreen, B, and H Ito (2014): “A forensic analysis of global imbalances”,
Oxford Economic Papers, vol 66, no 2, pp 465-490.
Chinn, M and H Ito (2007): “Current account balances, financial development and
institutions: Assaying the world ‘saving glut’’’, Journal of International Money and
Finance, vol 26, pp 546-569.
Clark, J and G Mann, “Examining swap spreads and the implications for funding the
government”, Treasury Notes, 9 June 2016.
Cohen, B (2012): “The benefits and costs of an international currency: getting the
calculus right”, Open Economy Review, vol. 23, issue 1, pp 13-31.



                                                                                     33
Coombs, C (1976): The arena of international finance, New York: Wiley.
Cooper, R (2009): “The future of the dollar”, Peterson Institute for International
Economics, Policy Brief, 09-21.
Croke, H, S Kamin, and S Leduc (2006): “An assessment of the disorderly adjustment
hypothesis for industrial economies”, International Finance, vol 9, no 1, pp. 37-61.
Debelle, G and G Galati (2005): “Current account adjustment and capital flows”, BIS
Working Paper no 169.
DeCecco, M (1984): Money and empire: the international gold standard, 1890-1914,
London: Frances Pinter.
Despres, E, C Kiindleberger and W Salant (1966): "The dollar and world liquidity: a
minority view", The Economist, 5 February.
Diamond, D and P Dybvig (1983): “Bank runs, liquidity, and deposit insurance”, Journal
of Political Economy, vol 91, pp 401-49.
Dooley, M P., D Folkerts-Landau and P Garber (2004): "The revived Bretton Woods
system", International Journal of Finance and Economics, vol 9, no 4, October, pp 307-
313.
Eichengreen, B (1985): “Editor’s introduction’, in B Eichengreen, ed, The gold standard
in theory and history, New York: Methuen, pp 1-35.
_____ (1987): "Conducting the international orchestra: Bank of England leadership
under the classical gold standard, 1880-1913", Journal of International Money and
Finance, vol 6, pp 5-29.
_____ (1992): Golden fetters: the gold standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
_____ (2011): Exorbitant privilege: The rise and fall of the dollar and the future of the
international monetary system, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
_____ (2016): “Global monetary order”, paper prepared for the ECB’s annual research
conference on “The International Financial Architecture,” Sintra, 28-29 June.
Emminger, O (1967): “Practical aspects of the problem of balance of payments
adjustment”, Journal of Political Economy, vol 75, no 4 (August), pp 512-522.
_____(1973): Inflation and the International Monetary System, Per Jacobsson lecture,
Basle, 16 June.
Farhi, E, P-O Gourinchas and H Rey (2011): Reforming the International Monetary
System, London: Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Farhi, E and M Maggiori (2017): “A model of the international monetary system”, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, qjx031, https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjx031.
Feldstein, M (2013): ”An interview with Paul Volcker“, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol 27, no 4 (Fall), pp 105-20.
Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2017): “Federal Reserve Board requests public
comment on proposal to produce three new reference rates based on overnight
repurchase agreement (repo) transactions secured by Treasuries”, 24 August.
Ferguson, N and M Schularick (2006): “The empire effect: the determinants of country
risk in the first age of globalization, 1880-1913”, Journal of Economic History, vol 66,
pp. 283-312.



34
Financial Times Lexicon (no date): “Definition of Triffin dilemma”.
Flandreau, M (1997): “Central bank cooperation in historical perspective: a sceptical
view”, The Economic History Review, vol. 50, issue 4, part 2 (November): pp 735–763.
_____ (2013): “Do good sovereigns default? Lessons of history”, in Sovereign risk: a
world without risk-free assets? BIS Papers No 72, July
Foulis, P (2015): “The sticky superpower”, Special report, the world economy,
Economist, 3 October.
Fratianni, M (2012); “The future international monetary system: dominant currencies
or supranational money? an introduction”, Open Economy Review, vol. 23, pp 1-12.
Gagnon, J (2012): “Global imbalances and foreign asset expansion by developing-
economy central banks”, in Are central bank balance sheets in Asia too large?, BIS
Papers, vol. 66, pp. 168–185.
Gagnon, J (2013): “The elephant hiding in the room: currency intervention and trade
imbalances”, Peterson Institute for International Economics, Working Paper 13–2.
Garber, P (1993): The collapse of the Bretton Woods fixed exchange rate system”, in
M D Bordo and B Eichengreen, eds., A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System:
Lessons for International Monetary Reform, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for
the NBER, pp 461-494.
_____ (1996): “The use of the yen as a reserve currency”, Bank of Japan Institute for
Monetary and Economic Studies, Monetary and Economic Studies, 14 (December, pp
1-21.
Genberg, H and A Swoboda (1981): “Gold and the dollar: asymmetries in world money
stock determination, 1959-1971”, in R Cooper, P Kenen, J de Macedo and J van
Ypersele, eds., The international monetary system under flexible exchange rates: Global
regional and national, essays in hour of Robert Triffin, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
Ballenger, pp 235-57.
_____ (1993): “The provision of liquidity in the Bretton Woods system”, in M D Bordo
and B Eichengreen, eds, Retrospective on the Bretton Woods system: lessons for
international monetary reform, Chicago: University of Chicago for the National Bureau
of Economic Research, pp 269-316.
Gilbert, M (1966): Problems of the international monetary system, Princeton Essays in
International Finance 53. International Finance Section, Department of Economics,
Princeton University. Princeton, N.J., April.
_____ (1968): The gold-dollar system: conditions of equilibrium and the price of gold,
Princeton Essays in International Finance 70. International Finance Section,
Department of Economics, Princeton University. Princeton, N.J., October.
Goodhart, C (1972): The business of banking, 1891-1914, London: Weidenfield and
Nicolson.
Gorton, G (2017): “The history and economics of safe assets”, Annual Review of
Economics, vol 9, pp 547-586.
_____, S Lewllen and A Metrick (2012): “The safe asset share”, American Economic
Review, vol 102, pp 101-106.
Gourinchas, P-O and H Rey (2007): “From world banker to world venture capitalist:
US external adjustment and the exorbitant privilege”, in R Clarida (ed), G-7 current




                                                                                     35
account imbalances: sustainability and adjustment, Chicago, University of Chicago
Press, pp 11–55.
_____ (2014): “External adjustment, global imbalances, valuation effects”, in G
Gopinath, E Helpman, and K Rogoff (eds), Handbook of International Economics, vol
4, North Holland, pp 585–646.
Gruber, J and S Kamin (2007): “Explaining the global pattern of current account
imbalances”, Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 26, issue 4, pp 500-522.
Halm, G (1968): International financial intermediation: deficits benign and malignant,
Princeton Essays in International Finance, 68. International Finance Section,
Department of Economics, Princeton University. Princeton, N.J., June.
He, D (2012); “’The Triffin Dilemma’ and currency internationalisation”, Caixin
Magazine, 3 December.
Hardy, C (1936): Is there enough gold? Washington, Brookings.
Heath, A (2007): “What explains the US net income balance?” BIS Working Papers no
223, January.
International Monetary Fund (2015a): Australia: 2015 Article IV Consultation-Staff
Report.
_____, (2015b): “Review of the method of the valuation of the SDR—initial
considerations, 16 July.
_____ (2010): “Reserve accumulation and international monetary stability”, 13 April.
_____ (2012): “Safe assets: financial system cornerstone?” Global Financial Stability
Report, April.
Irwin, T (2007): Government guarantees: allocating and valuing risk in privately
financed infrastructure projects, Washington: World Bank.
Jeanne, Olivier (2012): “The dollar and its discontents”, Journal of International Money
and Finance, vol 31, pp 1976–1989.
Kindleberger, C P (1965): Balance of payments deficits and the international market for
liquidity, Essays in International Finance, no 46, International Finance Section,
Department of Economics, Princeton University. Princeton, N.J., May.
_____ (1973): The World in Depression, 1929-1939. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
_____ (1978): Manias, Panics and Crashes. New York: Basic Books.
_____ (1985): “The dollar yesterday, today and tomorrow”, Banca Nazionale del Lavoro
Quarterly Review, 155 (December), pp 295-308.
Krugman, P (1979): “A model of balance-of-payments crises”, Journal of Money Credit
and Banking, vol 11, pp 311-325.
_____ (2007): “Will there be a dollar crisis? Economic Policy, vol. 22, no. 51, pp. 435-
467, July.
LaRoche, R K (1993): “Bankers acceptances”, in Instruments of the money market,
Richmond: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, pp 128–38.
Leeper, E and T Walker (2011): “Perceptions and misperceptions of fiscal inflation”,
BIS Working Papers, No 364, November.




36
Lewis, W A (1954): “Economic development with unlimited supply of labour” The
Manchester School, vol 22, issue 2, May, pp 139–191.
Lindert, P (1969): Key currencies and gold, 1900—1913, Essays in International Finance
24. International Finance Section, Department of Economics, Princeton University.
Princeton, N.J.
_____ (1967): Key currencies and the gold exchange standard, 1900-1913, PhD Thesis,
Cornell University, February.
MacPherson, W (1955): “Investment in Indian railways, 1845-1875”, Economic History
Review, New Series, vol 8, no 2, pp. 177-186
Marion, N (1999): “Some parallels between currency and banking crises”, in P Isard, A
Razin and A Rose, eds, International finance and financial crises, Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers and IMF: Washington, D.C., pp    .
Mateos y Lago, I, R Duttagupta, and R Goyal (2009): “The debate on the International
Monetary System”, IMF Staff Position Note, No SPN/09/26, 11 November.
McCauley, R (1997): The euro and the dollar, Princeton University Essays in
International Finance, no 205, November.,
_____ (2005): “Distinguishing global dollar reserves from official holdings in the United
States”, BIS Quarterly Review, September 2005, pp 57-72.
_____ (2015): “Does the dollar confer an exorbitant privilege on the US economy?”,
Journal of International Money and Finance, vol 57, pp 1-14.
_____ and P McGuire (2009): “Dollar appreciation in 2008: safe haven, carry trades,
dollar shortage and overhedging”, BIS Quarterly Review, December, pp 85-93
_____, P McGuire and V Sushko (2015a): “US monetary policy, leverage and offshore
dollar credit”, Economic Policy, vol 30, no 82, April, pp 187-229.
______ P McGuire and V Sushko (2015b): “Dollar credit to emerging market
economies”, BIS Quarterly Review, December, pp 27-41.
_____ and J-F Rigaudy (2011): “Managing foreign exchange reserves in the crisis and
after”, in Portfolio and risk management for central banks and sovereign wealth funds,
BIS Papers no 58, October, pp 19-47
_____ and C Schenk (2015); “Reforming the international monetary system in the 1970s
and 2000s: would a special drawing right substitution account have worked?"
International Finance, vol 18, issue 2, summer, pp 187-206.
_____ and C Shu (2016): “Dollars and renminbi flowed out of China”, BIS Quarterly
Review, March pp 26-27.
McGuire, P and G von Peter (2009): “The US dollar shortage in global banking”, BIS
Quarterly Review, March pp 47-63.
McKinnon, R (1969): Private and official international money: the case for the dollar,
Princeton Essays in International Finance 74. International Finance Section,
Department of Economics, Princeton University. Princeton, N.J., April.
_____ (2013): The unloved dollar standard: from Bretton Woods to the rise of China,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Meltzer, A (1991): “U.S. Policy in the Bretton Woods era”, Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis Review, vol 73, no 3, pp 53-83.
Młynarski, Feliks (1929): Gold and central banks. New York: Macmillan.


                                                                                       37
Mundell, R A (1996): “Jacques Rueff and the international monetary system”, in
Acualité de la pensée de Jacques Rueff, Proceedings of a colloquium held on the
centenary of the birth of acquis Rueff, Paris, 7 November.
Obstfeld, M (2011): “International liquidity: the fiscal dimension,” NBER Working
Paper No. 17379.
_____ and K Rogoff (2002): "Global implications of self-oriented national monetary
rules," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol 117 no 2, May, pp 503-535.
_____ and K Rogoff (2005): “Global current account imbalances and exchange rate
adjustments”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no 1:2005, pp 67–123.
_____, J Shambaugh and A Taylor (2009): “Financial instability, reserves, and central
bank swap lines in the Panic of 2008”, American Economic Review: Papers &
Proceedings, vol 99, no 2, pp 480–486.
_____, J Shambaugh and A Taylor (2010): "Financial stability, the trilemma, and
international reserves", American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol 2 no 2, April,
pp 57-94.
_____ and A Taylor (2003): “Sovereign risk, credibility and the gold standard: 1870-
1913 versus 1925-31”, Economic Journal, vol 113, pp. 241-75.
_____ (2017): “International monetary relations: taking finance seriously”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, vol 31, no 3 (Summer), pp 3-28.
Oudiz, Gilles and Jeffrey Sachs (1984): "Macroeconomic policy coordination among
the industrial economies”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol 15, no 1, pp 1-
76.
Padoa-Schioppa, T (2011): “The ghost of Bancor: the economic crisis and global
monetary disorder”, speech delivered at Louvain-la-Neuve, 25 February 2010, in J
Boorman and A Icard, eds, Reform of the international monetary system: the Palais
Royal initiative, New Delhi: Sage Publications, pp 51-73.
Philips, C (1920): Bank credit, New York, Macmillan.
Portes, R (2012): “A reassessment of the Triffin Dilemma”, in J-C Koeune and A
Lamfalussy, eds, In search of a new world monetary order, Proceedings of a conference
to celebrate the 100th anniversary of Robert Triffin (1911-1993). no 5 in the Relations
financières internationals, Brussels: P.I.E. Peter Lang for the Fondation Internationale
Triffin, pp 195-199.
Prasad, E (2013): The dollar trap: How the US dollar tightened its grip on global finance,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Roberts, R (2013): Saving the City: the Great Financial Crisis of 1914. London: Oxford
University Press.
Rueff, J (1972): The monetary sin of the West, NY: Macmillan.
Salant, S and D Henderson (1978): “Market anticipation of government policy and the
price of gold”, Journal of Political Economy, vol 86, pp 627-648.
Sayers, R S (1970): Bank of England operations, 1890-1919. Reprint. New York:
Greenwood.
Sayers, R L (1976): The Bank of England, 1891-1944, vol 1, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.




38
Schenk, C (2010): The decline of sterling: managing the retreat of an international
currency, 1945-1992, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Setser, B and N Roubini (2005): “Our money, our debt, our problem”, Foreign Affairs,
vol 84, no 4, Jul/Aug, pp 194-198.
Silber, W (2007): When Washington shut down Wall Street: the great financial crisis of
1914 and the origins of America's monetary supremacy, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Steiner, A (2014): “Current account balance and dollar standard: exploring the
linkages”, Journal of International Money and Finance vol 41, pp 65-94.
Strange, S (1976): International monetary relations, Vol 2 of Andrew Shonfield, ed,
International Economic Relations in the Western World 1959–71, London: Oxford
University Press.
Summers, L (2004): “The US current account deficit and the global economy”, Per
Jacobsson Lecture, International Monetary Fund, October.
Summers, L (2016): Mundell-Fleming Lecture, 3 November 2016.
Swoboda, A (2012): “International monetary reform and global imbalances”, in J-C
Koeune and A Lamfalussy, eds, In search of a new world monetary order, Proceedings
of a conference to celebrate the 100th anniversary of Robert Triffin (1911-1993,. no 5
in the Relations financières internationals, Brussels: P.I.E. Peter Lang for the Fondation
Internationale Triffin, pp 201-209.
Tille, C (2003): “The impact of exchange rate movements on US foreign debt”, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol 9, no 1,
January.
Toniolo, G (2005): Central bank cooperation at the Bank for international Settlements,
1930-1973, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Triffin, R (1960): Gold and the dollar crisis: the future of convertibility, New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
_____ (1964): The evolution of the international monetary system: historical reappraisal
and future perspectives, Princeton Studies in International Finance no 12, June.
_____ (1968): Our international monetary system, New York: Random House.
_____ (1978): Gold and the dollar crisis: yesterday and tomorrow, Princeton Essays in
International Finance no 132, December.
Tullio, G, and J Walters (1996): "Was London the conductor of the international
orchestra, the second violinist or the triangle player?” Scottish Journal of Political
Economy, vol 43, pp 419-43.
US Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis (2017). Table 3.1. U.S.
International Investment Position for Liabilities to Foreign Official Agencies at the End
of the Period.
US Department of the Treasury, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017): Foreign portfolio holdings of U.S.
securities as of June 30, 2016, April.
Zhou, Xiaochuan (2009): “Reform of the international monetary system”, Beijing:
People's Bank of China, available at: http://www.pbc.gov.cn/publish/english/.




                                                                                         39
