NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VALUE FOR MONEY? COMMUNITY TARGETING IN VOTE-BUYING AND POLITICIAN
ACCOUNTABILITY
Jessica Leight
Dana Foarta
Rohini Pande
Laura Ralston
Working Paper 24194
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24194

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018

Thanks to the laboratory staff at the Harvard Decision Science Laboratory and the Busara
Laboratory, particularly Nina Cohodes, Chaning Jang, and James Vancel, for their assistance in
data collection. Thanks to Vincenzo di Maro, Johannes Haushofer, Sarah Jacobson, Gautam Rao,
and Tanya Rosenblat for detailed comments and seminar participants at Williams, the Barcelona
Graduate School of Economics Summer Forum, the World Bank, USAID, the NBER Summer
Institute, Berkeley - Haas, Yale, Swarthmore, Dartmouth, and Columbia University for useful
feedback. We would also like to thank the funders that provided support for the project, the
Harvard Weatherhead Center for International Affairs and USAID, through the Democracy
Fellows and Grants Program implemented by IIE. This working paper was previously circulated
under the titles “Value for money in purchasing votes: A lab experiment in the field” and “Value
for money? Vote-buying and politician accountability in the laboratory”. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Corresponding author: Jessica Leight, 4400 Massachusetts Avenue,
Washington, D.C. 20016. leight@american.edu
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jessica Leight, Dana Foarta, Rohini Pande, and Laura Ralston. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Value for Money? Community Targeting in Vote-Buying and Politician Accountability
Jessica Leight, Dana Foarta, Rohini Pande, and Laura Ralston
NBER Working Paper No. 24194
January 2018
JEL No. O1,P16
ABSTRACT
Community targeting of vote payments — defined as the saturation of entire neighborhoods with
cash prior to elections — is widespread in the developing world. In this paper, we utilize
laboratory experiments conducted in the U.S. and Kenya to demonstrate that, relative to
individual targeting, a vote-buying regime that distributes payments widely renders voters more
tolerant of politician rent-seeking, and increases the level of politician rent-seeking observed in
equilibrium. The most parsimonious model of preferences consistent with these patterns is a
model in which both politicians and voters are characterized by multifaceted social preferences,
encompassing reciprocity, altruism, and inequality aversion.
Jessica Leight
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue
Washington, DC 20016
leight@american.edu
Dana Foarta
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
ofoarta@stanford.edu

Rohini Pande
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and CEPR
and also NBER
rohini_pande@harvard.edu
Laura Ralston
World Bank
lralston@worldbank.org

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24194

1

Introduction

Vote-buying is widely characterized as a phenomenon in which party workers or brokers target
specific individuals whose preferences are known to them ex ante (Finan and Schechter, 2012;
Nichter, 2008; Stokes, 2005). However, community-level targeting — rather than individual-level
targeting – is frequently observed in developing countries, as party workers saturate neighborhoods or rallies with cash or gifts prior to elections (Banerjee et al., 2011; Breeding, 2011).
Clientelistic policies by incumbent politicians are often similarly structured, targeting broad existing patron-client networks defined by region, kinship, or ethnicity (Keefer and Vlaicu, 2008;
Robinson and Verdier, 2013).
Politicians who target individual voters benefit from both enhanced information and enhanced capacity for enforcement; the prevalence of community-level targeting is thus somewhat
puzzling. Our objective in this paper is to develop a behavioral model of voters’ preferences
that is consistent with this puzzle, and use laboratory experiments to provide corroborating
evidence. The model assumes that politicians seek to maximize their expropriation of rents
while winning reelection, and voters use their votes to discipline politician’s rent-seeking. In
addition, it builds on two stylized empirical facts. First, social preferences are highly salient in
low-income communities (Cardenas and Carpenter, 2008); while reciprocity has been identified
as relevant for sustaining vote-buying, we also analyze the complementary role of altruism and
inequality aversion (Charness and Haruvy, 2002). Second, both vote-buying and clientelism are
generally public phenomena, encompassing large networks of voters who possess high-quality
information about the available transfers (Anderson et al., 2015; Vicente, 2014; Kramon, 2011).
We demonstrate that the interaction of multifaceted social preferences and widespread information about vote-buying generates an environment in which voters are differentially more
responsive to collectively-targeted payments, rather than individually-targeted payments. Multifaceted social preferences thus have the perverse effect of augmenting voters’ response to votebuying. Accordingly, a politician who seeks to maximize expropriation while holding constant
his probability of reelection will favor community targeting as a means to reduce accountability.
We then utilize a series of laboratory experiments conducted in the U.S. and Kenya to
identify whether the voter response to individual versus community targeting of vote payments
is consistent with our theoretical predictions. We implement a retrospective voting game in
which subjects choose whether to reelect an incumbent who expropriates rents from a common
treasury. The reelection choice serves as a tool to punish politicians for excessive expropriation,
and voting is secret and costless. No other dimension of politician quality influences voters’
earnings, and there is no identified alternative candidate; hence, voters face no selection motive.
We augment this game by introducing vote payments as an external transfer to the voter,
distributed to a certain fraction of voters while maintaining the secret ballot. The politician has
no agency in the targeting of payments, and does not pay transfers out of her own endowment.
Our primary objective is to examine whether the introduction of vote payments alters subjects’ willingness to punish the politician for expropriation by voting against his reelection, and
how this response varies with the proportion of the polity that is targeted for vote payments.
2

Moreover, we generate predictions for purely self-interested subjects, as well as subjects motivated by different combinations of social preferences. We then compare these predictions to the
observed empirical patterns.
First, we analyze voters’ response to the introduction of payments. While theory suggests
that self-interested voters will show no response, all models of preferences that include reciprocity predict that subjects who receive a payment increase their reelection threshold relative
to the baseline game in which no payments are distributed. Predictions about the response of
voters who do not receive payments — but are aware of them — vary. If subjects are motivated purely by self-interest and reciprocity, individuals who do not receive payments do not
shift their reelection thresholds. However, if subjects are motivated in part by altruism, these
individuals respond by punishing the politician, decreasing their threshold.1
Our empirical results suggest that, consistent with reciprocity, subjects who receive a payment increase the maximum threshold of expropriation at which they will reelect the politician –
i.e., they treat the politician more leniently. By contrast, subjects who do not receive payments
treat the politician more harshly. This result is inconsistent with a model where voters are only
motivated by self-interest and reciprocity, and suggests that altruism is relevant. However, this
pattern does not allow us to draw any conclusions as to the importance of inequality aversion.
Second, we seek to analyze whether community targeting is differentially more effective
than individual targeting, utilizing variation in the number of payments distributed within the
experiment. Games in which more payments are distributed, and particularly games in which
all voters receive payments, are analyzed as the experimental analogue to community targeting.
Our model predicts that if reciprocity and altruism are the only relevant dimensions of social
preferences, all voters become more willing to punish the politician as the number of payments
increases. If voters are also motivated in part by inequality aversion, increasing the number
of payments generates divergent responses: voters who receive payments become less willing
to punish the politician (allowing him to expropriate more), while those who do not receive
payments become more willing to punish. Intuitively, a wider distribution of payments narrows
the gap between the politician’s payoff and voters’ payoffs in expectation, reducing the utility
cost for payment recipients of allowing the politician to expropriate more.
Here, empirical evidence suggests that the effect of each payment is larger when more payments are distributed, rendering payments most effective when they are distributed to all subjects. In fact, when all voters receive a payment, the effect per payment on each voter’s threshold
is around 90% larger relative to an identical game in which all but one (four out of five) voters
receive a payment.2 At the same time, as voters become less willing to punish the politician, the
politician chooses to expropriate more, suggesting there is a rent-seeking cost to vote-buying.
1

The intuition underlying this pattern is that if subjects are not motivated at least in part by altruism, they
will uniformly opt for the minimum sustainable reelection threshold in equilibrium, and thus have no scope to
punish the politician further. If subjects are partly motivated by altruism and thus sensitive to the politician’s
payoff, however, they choose a higher threshold in the base equilibrium, and respond to payment non-receipt by
punishing the politician.
2
As evidence of the role of altruism, we observe that voters who do not receive payments always allow a nonzero level of expropriation, but the backlash effect among the excluded voters becomes larger in magnitude as the
number of payments increases. Needless to say, there is no backlash effect when all subjects receive payments.

3

The observed voter response to payments, as well as the increase in the magnitude of this
response when the number of payments increases, suggests that the most parsimonious model
of subject preferences consistent with the observed pattern encompasses self-interest as well as
reciprocity, altruism toward the politician and fellow voters, and aversion to inequality between
the politician and voters. Conditional on this model of preferences, the experimental results
suggest that community targeting of vote payments is differentially more effective than individual targeting of such payments, ultimately allowing the incumbent politician to expropriate
more resources without facing electoral punishment.
Importantly, the effectiveness of large-scale community-targeted vote-buying is evident even
in an environment characterized by full information around vote payments. This highlights
that increasing transparency may not be sufficient in and of itself to reduce the effectiveness
of vote buying. In addition, our findings hold for both the U.S. and Kenya sample, but are
significantly stronger for the Kenya subsample. While there are several potential reasons for
the observed country-level differences, the findings are consistent with the fact that measured
social preferences are stronger in Kenya.
This paper contributes to several related literatures. We add to the growing literature
in behavioral political economy by examining the link between social preferences and voter
responses to vote-buying; DellaVigna (2009) and Schnellenbach and Schubert (2015) provide
useful reviews. In analyzing this nexus, our findings also complement Finan and Schechter
(2012), who find that more reciprocal individuals are targeted for vote-buying in Paraguay.
Here, we suggest that other dimensions of social preferences may be relevant, and if they are,
voters may in fact respond more robustly to community targeted vote payments.
Our analysis also demonstrates how vote-buying can negatively affect governance outcomes.
More specifically, we identify a new channel for this adverse relationship: vote-buying increases
voters’ tolerance of rent-seeking, even in the absence of any effect on selection. A number
of recent papers have indirectly documented that vote-buying can alter voters’ selection of
candidates by presenting evidence that interventions targeting vote-buying not only reduce its
reported prevalence, but yield shifts in voting patterns.3 However, to the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to provide causal evidence on the link between vote-buying and voters’ willingness to punish politicians in the absence of any selection motive. By doing so, we identify a
mechanism that may underlie the common observation that voters who have received payments
no longer exert effective control over policy decisions (Kitschelt, 2000; Stokes, 2007).4
3
Vicente (2014) demonstrates that an anti-vote buying campaign in Sao Tome and Principe reduces the
challenger’s vote share, and argues that this reflects the fact that vote-buying is the challenger’s preferred response
to the incumbent’s use of clientelistic policies. Hicken et al. (2014) report on a campaign in the Philippines that
sought to reduce voters’ temptation to sell their votes, and demonstrate that it significantly reduced vote-switching
from the candidate ex ante preferred by the voter. In another related paper, Cruz et al. (2015) analyze the effect
of providing information about the incumbent’s performance to voters in the Philippines, and find these voters
are subsequently targeted more for vote-buying.
4
In addition, a theoretical literature has analyzed the implications of vote-buying, focusing primarily on the
capture of legislators or committee members (Bo, 2007; Dekel et al., 2008; Groseclose and Snyder, 1996; Snyder,
1991). These papers generally conclude that vote-buying leads to inefficient outcomes, though Dekel et al. (2008)
shows efficient outcomes are possible if parties place valuations on votes that aggregate the values placed by their
supporters.

4

We also contribute to a growing literature in experimental economics that analyzes varied
forms of reciprocity. Similar to Abbink et al. (2002) and Malmendier and Schmidt (2011), we
find that subjects display a reciprocal response when receiving a gift, even if this response is
at the expense of third parties, and even though the gift is transparently provided in order to
influence their behavior. Other recent work consistent with our findings includes Pan and Xiao
(2014), who report that recipients favor a gift giver over a third party even when the third
party has incurred the same cost and signaled the same intention of giving, and Strassmair
(2009), who presents evidence that recipients’ response to a gift does not significantly vary
given experimental variation in the extent to which the gift may arise from selfish motives
by the giver. Our experimental results suggest that subjects respond robustly to a transfer
regardless of whether any quid pro quo is specified, and even though that response is costly
both to the recipient of the transfer and to other subjects.
Finally, our findings increase the common ground shared between the literatures on votebuying and clientelism. Recent papers argue that clientelistic relationships undermine electoral
accountability by enabling the elite to easily win the votes of poor citizens and subsequently
engage in rent-seeking behavior (Baland and Robinson, 2008; Anderson et al., 2015). One
interesting finding in this literature highlights a strong positive correlation between social capital
and elite capture of policy-making (Acemoglu et al., 2014). Our paper suggests that this may
reflect the fact that clientelistic relationships are also in part sustained by social preferences.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 provides empirical context about
social preferences, vote-buying and clientelism in the developing world, while Section 3 presents
the model. Section 4 outlines the experimental methods, and Section 5 summarizes the empirical
analysis. Section 6 concludes.

2

Empirical context

As previously noted, our conceptual framework seeks to build on two stylized facts about political behavior and institutions in the developing world. The first is that multifaceted social
preferences are salient; the second is that vote-buying and clientelism are widespread, and often
conducted in public. We will provide additional evidence on each of these points.

2.1

Social preferences

In recent years, the role of social preferences in shaping economic and governance outcomes in
the developing world has received increasing attention in the literature. Broadly speaking, this
behavioral development literature has focused on two questions: whether social preferences or
propensity to cooperate may be different in developing country contexts or contexts characterized by weaker formal institutions, and whether individual preferences toward risk and time
may be different. Here, we will focus primarily on the first point.
Cardenas and Carpenter (2008) provide a valuable overview of this literature. The authors
highlight that while patterns are not fully uniform, in general cooperation rates in prisoner’s

5

dilemma or public goods games are higher and more sustained among poor participants in
Africa and Southeast Asia. Patterns for trust are more ambiguous. The authors also note that
in developing countries, behavior in the dictator game and ultimatum game (used to capture
altruism and inequality aversion, respectively) are more driven by norms rather than strategic
advantage. They argue that in general, societies in which formal institutions are weak may rely
more heavily on social norms and preferences than societies with stronger institutions.
In additional related work, Cardenas (2003) shows that increased wealth within rural Colombian village populations reduces cooperation in experimental games, suggesting that some prosocial behaviors could be more salient in lower-income contexts. Greig and Bohnet (2008) find
that respondents in a Nairobi slum exhibit balanced reciprocity, in which there are quid-pro-quo
returns for any level of trust, and Carter and Castillo (2009) find that respondents in a South
African slum exhibit high degrees of both trustworthiness and altruism, but the latter shows
more robust correlations with living standards. By contrast, small-scale societies with very low
levels of market integration generally show low levels of experimentally measured cooperation
(Henrich et al., 2001).
We are also able to examine evidence of social preferences among our own experimental
subjects. Between 2013 and 2015, we conducted experiments at the Harvard Decision Science
Lab in Cambridge, MA and the Busara Experimental Laboratory in Nairobi, Kenya. Our
sample in the experimental sessions includes 450 subjects from the U.S. and 355 from Kenya,
characterized by an average age of 33. In the U.S., the subject pool is equally divided by gender,
overwhelmingly unmarried, and highly educated. In Kenya, the subject pool is 65% female and
has an average of eleven years of education; half are married. Levels of political engagement
are high in both subject pools, though higher in Kenya: 72% of U.S. subjects report voting
in the last presidential election, while 86% of Kenyan subjects did so. Table E3 in the on-line
Appendix provides details.
We collected detailed experimental measures of social preferences from our subjects, reported
in Panel A of Table 1. As will be described in more detail in Section 4, the social preference
games were conducted first in each experimental session, prior to the introduction of any voting
games or any language around voting. Each subject was engaged in the dictator, trust, and
ultimatum games, for which detailed protocols are provided in on-line Appendix C.5
We find that 66% of U.S. subjects send a positive amount to a partner in the dictator game,
compared to 81% of Kenyan subjects. U.S. subjects are more likely to send a positive amount in
the trust game, but conditional on receiving a positive amount, Kenyan subjects are more likely
to return a non-zero amount. Kenyan subjects also exhibit greater inequality aversion; at 5.72
out of a maximum of $10, the minimum transfer that Kenyans would accept from a partner in
the ultimatum game is roughly double the reported threshold for U.S. subjects ($2.91). (While
the real endowment assigned to subjects was lower in the sessions conducted in Kenya, subjects’
5

The sample includes 653 subjects (372 in the U.S. and 281 in Kenya); this includes all subjects other than
those included in session type F, unequal endowments, for whom social preferences are not observed. In the
U.S., these choices were not incentivized, and thus subjects were not paired with a partner in order to calculate a
payoff. In Kenya, these choices were incentivized, and subjects were paired with a partner and informed of their
payoff. This payoff was added to their earnings in the voting game.

6

choices are normalized relative to the endowment in the U.S. sessions.) These differences are
all significant at the one percent level. This would suggest that the role of social preferences in
shaping political behavior is likely stronger in Kenya.6
Thus in general, experimentally generated measures suggest that in our sample, multiple
dimensions of social preferences are highly relevant. This evidence is consistent with recent literature suggesting that in gift-exchange games, intentional reciprocity, distributive concerns, and
altruistic considerations are all important in shaping subjects’ choices (Charness and Haruvy,
2002); Fehr and Schmidt (2007) also provide a useful overview. In addition, experimentally
measured rates of altruism, reciprocity, and inequality aversion are all higher in Kenya, consistent with the previous evidence that social preferences may be more salient in developing
countries or contexts with weaker formal institutions.

2.2

Transactional politics in the developing world

Broadly speaking, two forms of vote-buying have been identified in the literature. One important
manifestation, particularly in Latin America, is targeted transfers in which political brokers
interact directly and repeatedly with individuals they know well. This is, for example, the form
of vote-buying analyzed by Finan and Schechter (2012), employing data from Paraguay, and by
Stokes (2005) and Nichter (2008), employing data from Argentina.
A second common form of vote-buying is widespread saturation of a neighborhood or community with cash or gifts, without any particular targeting or enforcement. Gift-giving at election
rallies is a classic example, as described in Kramon (2011), who provides evidence about this
form of vote-buying in Kenya. In his survey of 655 individuals, nearly half reported receipt of
cash prior to the 2007 presidential election. Of those, 57% reported receiving the money at a
rally and 16% at the market, settings where the presumed degree of targeting is low. Nearly
90% of respondents reported they did not believe either the person who provided the payment
or anyone connected to a political party could ascertain their true vote. In Tanzania, takrima
or traditional hospitality for citizens prior to elections was officially allowed until 2006, but
according to surveys still persists (Croke, 2017).
Similarly, observers in India reported significant vote-buying in state elections in Delhi in
2008 and Bihar in 2010. In both cases, gifts including cash, alcohol, and food were distributed
to all households in targeted neighborhoods on the night before the election. The distribution
was managed by youth from the community who, while familiar to the recipients, do not have
strong social ties to them (Banerjee et al., 2011). Breeding (2011) also reports that in India,
parties often target vote payments to whole communities, rather than individuals.
In 2014, the authors administered a brief exit survey to 111 subjects included in experimental
sessions in Nairobi. 46% of the subjects reported that they had received cash or gifts from a
6
We construct an additional index of reciprocity Reci , defined as P erchigh
− P erclow
, censored at zero; where
i
i
low
P erchigh
(
P
erc
.)
is
the
percentage
of
funds
received
that
a
subject
would
return to sender in the trust game
i
i
if he received more than 50% of endowment (less than 50%). In the 2013 sessions and in Kenya, a simpler trust
game was employed in which the sender has the choice only to send all or nothing; accordingly, Reci can be
constructed only for the 2014 U.S. sessions. The mean index of reciprocity is .06. Interestingly, this is extremely
close to the average level (.04) reported by Finan and Schechter (2012) for their Paraguay sample.

7

politician or a politician’s representative in the last presidential election (in 2013); more broadly,
they estimated that two thirds of Kenyans received such a gift or transfer. Out of those who
reported receiving a transfer, 80% said the individual who provided it was previously known
to them, but only 20% stated that they interacted again with this individual after the transfer
exchange.
In 2015, we also surveyed 400 households in rural Bangladesh about their vote-buying experiences.7 Around 30% of respondents reported payment in cash or in kind in the last election.
However, in this context, 25% of respondents reported they had rarely interacted with the agent
who offered the payment prior to receiving it, and 55% reported they rarely interacted with the
person after the payment. Both sources of evidence seem consistent with limited targeting and
limited enforcement.
It is also useful to note that the literature on clientelism similarly highlights that clientelistic
benefits are generally provided to broad networks of beneficiary clients, with the objective
of providing a credible signal of commitment from the politician (Keefer and Vlaicu, 2008;
Robinson and Verdier, 2013). These networks can be defined by community boundaries; by caste
or other markers of social status; or by ethnicity (Anderson et al., 2015; Burgess et al., 2015;
Fujiwara and Wantchekon, 2013). Generally, analysts do not seek to systematically estimate
what percentage of a given community or constituency directly benefits from clientelistic policies,
and in some cases, this may be impossible if local public goods are provided. However, the
assumption is that all members of a certain network are at least presumptively able to access
the clientelistic benefit, and are jointly more likely to cast their votes for the politician in return.
Individual-level targeting is accordingly rare.

3

Theoretical framework

We begin by presenting a simple conceptual framework to inform our laboratory experiments.
Our objective is to analyze how subjects acting as voters and politicians make choices in a simple
voting game of retrospective accountability, conditional on different formulations of preferences.
In understanding subjects’ behavior as voters, we focus on three primary dimensions: the
response of voters who receive vote payments, the response of voters who do not receive vote
payments but are aware of payments, and the shift in both responses when the number of payments distributed increases (an experimental proxy for community targeting). In understanding
subjects’ behavior as politicians, we focus on rent-seeking.
Consider a setting with one politician, denoted p, and N ≥ 1 ex-ante identical voters. Each
voter v receives an initial endowment yv = y, and the politician receives a salary yp = y (i.e., the
voter and politicians’ endowments are identical). Each voter’s endowment is taxed at a rate τ ,
and the tax revenue T = τ N y is pooled in a common treasury. The politician can expropriate
from the treasury an amount up to λ · T, where λ ∈ (0, 1), i.e. some fraction of the tax revenue
is protected from expropriation. The politician chooses the amount λp · T ≤ λ · T to expropriate.
7

This survey was jointly conducted by Leight and Pande, and has not yet been published.

8

Each voter v chooses an expropriation threshold λv ·T that summarizes his choice of whether
or not to reelect the politician. The voter votes in favor of the politician’s reelection if, and only
if, the politician expropriates an amount less than or equal to this threshold. If the majority of
voters vote to reelect the politician (denoted ρ = 0), the politician retains both his full salary
and the amount he expropriated; if the majority of voters vote against the politician’s reelection
(denoted ρ = 1), the politician pays a penalty of 0.5 · y + , while retaining any expropriated
revenue. (Note that ρ is accordingly a dummy variable for the politician’s removal, rather than
his reelection.) The payoff for the politician can thus be summarized by:
Ep = 0.5 · y + λp · T + (1 − ρ) · (0.5 · y + ) .

(1)

Regardless of the reelection outcome, each voter’s payoff is constituted by the untaxed
portion of his endowment (1 − τ ) · y, as well as an equal share of the resources remaining in the
treasury following expropriation, (1 − λp ) · T /N . If the politician is not reelected, each voter
also pays a transition fee κ · y. The monetary payoff for each voter v is summarized by:
Ev = (1 − τ ) · y +

(1 − λp ) · T
− ρ · κ · y,
N

(2)

Vote payments are introduced as follows. A subset n ≤ N voters each receive a vote payment
p; the experimenter, not the politician, chooses who receives the payment, and vote payments
are funded separately (i.e., not drawn from the voters’ or the politician’s endowment). In
the base game, the payments are described simply as “a payment in exchange for your vote”.
Therefore, the payoff for a voter v who receives a payment is Ev + p. In addition, in the base
game, all voters are aware of n and the size of the payment p.
The full game can be summarized as follows:
1. Vote payments are made to n voters.
2. Each voter v chooses a threshold λv · T corresponding to the maximum level of expropriation he is willing to tolerate, and the politician chooses an amount λp · T to expropriate,
where λp ≤ λ.
3. Given an expropriation level λp · T, if a majority of voters vote to reelect the politician
(ρ = 0), he retains his full salary. If a majority of voters do not vote to reelect the
politician, the politician is removed (ρ = 1) and pays the associated penalty, while voters
incur the transition fee κ · y.
4. Payoffs are realized.
The analysis of this game and the characterization of the set of pure strategy Nash equilibria
is presented in Appendix A.1. In particular, we demonstrate that any expropriation level above
a threshold λ∗ · T can be supported in a pure strategy Nash equilibrium. Here, we focus on the
predictions for the pure strategy equilibrium with sincere voting, in which each voter chooses
the reelection threshold that maximizes his expected utility, assuming that he is pivotal.
9

3.1

Self-interest

Consider first the case in which subjects are purely self-interested and the utility of each subject
i is an increasing function of his payoff alone: ui = Ei . Throughout, we assume that subjects’
preferences are identical for voters and politicians.
Prediction 1 Given self-interested preferences,
1. A voter’s threshold choice is unaffected by the introduction of payments.
2. Introducing payments or altering the number of payments does not change the equilibrium
expropriation by the politician.
Proof. In Appendix A.2.
If individuals derive utility from their own payoffs, each voter optimally chooses the minimum
sustainable reelection threshold – the value at which the politician is indifferent between winning
reelection and deviating to the maximum level of expropriation. Since this threshold is a function
only of the politician’s payoff, payments to voters do not shift the threshold.

3.2

Self-interest and social preferences

Next, we consider the case in which subjects are characterized by both self-interest and social
preferences, and are thus sensitive to the payoffs received by other subjects. We consider three
common dimensions of social preferences: intention-based reciprocity as in Rabin (1993) and
Dufwenberg and Kirchsteiger (2004), altruism as in Andreoni and Miller (2002), and inequality
aversion as in Bolton and Ockenfels (2000), applied to the difference between the politician’s
payoff and the average voter payoff.
Broadly speaking, reciprocity leads subjects to derive utility from being kind to others when
others are kind to them. Given that the voter is informed that he is receiving a payment in
exchange for his vote, we assume a reciprocal individual is motivated to respond kindly towards
the politician. Altruism renders subjects sensitive to the other subjects’ payoffs, and inequality
aversion leads subjects to derive disutility when there is a difference between the politician’s
payoff and the average payoff of voters.8
Given these definitions, each subject’s utility can be described as follows:





X
X
1
Ui = Ei + γf ((λi T − λe T ) (pi − pe )) + ηm 
Ej  − α · h  Ep −
Ej 
N
j6=i

j

The function f (·) is weakly concave and increasing, with f (0) = 0 and γ ∈ [0, 1]. The measure
(λv − λe ) · T captures how kind subject i is to the politician, and measure (pi − pe ) captures
8
We can also explore analyzing this case using two other common formulations of inequality aversion. One is
inequality aversion as modeled in Fehr and Schmidt (1999); the other is a more general formulation of BoltonOckenfels preferences in which subjects derive disutility from any difference between their own payoffs and the
average payoff. While analyzing the former case of Fehr-Schmidt preferences yields similar results, the latter
formulation of preferences yields multiple equilibria.

10

how kindly subject i believes he is treated. The value λe · T denotes the equitable equilibrium
expropriation, defined as the average expropriation threshold on the Pareto frontier.9 The value
pe denotes the the equitable payment expected by the subject, defined as the expected value
of the payment given n payments and N voters: pe ≡ n/N · p. In addition, we assume that
00

e
e
− ff 0(x)x
(x) < 1. Intuitively, this suggest that (λi − λ ) · T and (pi − p ) are complements – the

utility value of reciprocal behavior is higher when there is more reciprocal behavior from the
other subject.
The increasing and concave function m(·) captures the altruism effect, with η ∈ [0, 1] measuring the weight placed on altruism in the individual’s preferences. Finally, h (·) is an increasing
and convex function capturing inequality aversion, with α ∈ [0, 1].10
We now consider cases in which the subjects’ preferences exhibit different combinations of
the above social preferences, in addition to a consistent self-interested preference for greater ownearnings. Specifically, we consider preferences that exhibit only reciprocity (γ > 0; η, α = 0);
preferences that exhibit reciprocity and altruism (γ, η > 0; α = 0); preferences that exhibit
reciprocity and inequality aversion (γ, α > 0; η = 0); and preferences that exhibit reciprocity,
altruism and inequality aversion (γ, η, α > 0).
3.2.1

Self-interest and reciprocity

We first consider the case in which reciprocity is the only relevant dimension of social preferences,
given that this has previously been the primary focus of the vote-buying literature.
Prediction 2 Given preferences characterized by self-interest and reciprocity,
1. A voter who receives a payment chooses a higher threshold λv than a voter who does not
receive a payment.
(a) A voter who receives a payment increases his selected threshold λv relative to the base
case of no payments.
(b) A voter who does not receive a payment does not shift his selected threshold λv relative
to the base case of no payments.
2. As the number of payments n increases, a voter who receives a payment decreases his
choice of λv .
Proof. In Appendix A.3.
Consider first a voter who receives a payment. If preferences exhibit reciprocity, the voter
responds by allowing the politician to expropriate more. However, if the number of payments
increases, then the expected value of the equitable payment g e increases, reducing the reciprocal
9
It is possible to solve for and specify algebraically the equitable expropriation level; however, the precise
specification of these levels will not prove to be relevant for our subsequent analysis, given the assumed shape of
the reciprocity function f (·).
10
For concision, we will subsequently refer to this postulated form of politician-voter group inequality aversion
simply as inequality aversion.

11

response. By contrast, voters who do not receive payments are already optimally choosing the
lowest sustainable threshold level of expropriation for the politician. Accordingly, they cannot
decrease this threshold in response to their failure to receive a vote payment.
3.2.2

Self-interest, reciprocity, and altruism

Next, we consider the case in which social preferences encompass reciprocity and altruism.
Prediction 3 Given preferences characterized by self-interest, reciprocity, and altruism,
1. A voter who receives a payment chooses a higher threshold λv than a voter who does not
receive a payment.
(a) A voter who receives a payment increases his selected threshold relative to the base
case of no payments.
(b) A voter who does not receive a payment decreases his selected threshold relative to the
base case of no payments, if he exhibits sufficiently high altruism (m0 (·) is sufficiently
high); otherwise, he does not shift his selected threshold.
2. If the number of payments n increases and subjects exhibit sufficiently strong altruism,
(m0 (·) is sufficiently high), all voters decrease their choice of λv compared to the n = 1
case. This includes voters who did and did not receive payments. If subjects exhibit weak
altruism (m0 (·) is low), then voters who receive a payment reduce their choice of threshold,
while voters who do not receive a payment do not change their choice of threshold.
Proof. In Appendix A.4.
Again, the intuition for the reciprocal response is consistent. Importantly, however, when
subjects are altruistic, the voter does not choose the minimum sustainable reelection threshold
for the politician in the baseline game.11 Accordingly, subjects who do not receive payments
respond to their exclusion (or more specifically, to their failure to receive the equitable payment)
by punishing the politician, lowering the reelection threshold.
An increase in the number of payments increases average income in the community, reducing
the marginal benefit of altruistically allowing the politician to expropriate more. Hence, for
voters who receive payments, both a reduced reciprocal response and considerations of altruism
lead to a decrease in the choice of λv as n increases. Similarly, for the voter who does not
receive a payment, the negative reciprocal response becomes larger in magnitude as the number
of payments increases, given that the voter expects a higher equitable payment. If the voter
exhibits sufficiently high altruism, then his choice of threshold when only one payment is offered
is above the minimum sustainable threshold, and the negative reciprocal response decreases this
threshold; however, if the voter exhibits low altruism, then he chooses the minimum sustainable
threshold in the one-payment game, and cannot lower this threshold any further.
11

More technically, this conclusion holds conditional on the assumption that subjects receive strong utility
benefits from altruism: i.e., ηm0 (·) is sufficiently high.

12

3.2.3

Self-interest, reciprocity, and inequality aversion

Now assume social preferences encompass exhibit reciprocity and inequality aversion.
Prediction 4 Given preferences characterized by self-interest, reciprocity, and inequality aversion,
1. A voter who receives a payment chooses a higher threshold λv than a voter who does not
receive a payment.
(a) A voter who receives a payment increases his selected threshold λv relative to the base
case of no payments.
(b) A voter who does not receive a payment does not shift his selected threshold λv relative
to the base case of no payments.
2. As the number of payments n increases,
(a) A voter who receives a payment decreases his choice of λv if the marginal cost of
inequality aversion increases sufficiently slowly, and increases his choice of λv otherwise.
(b) A voter who does not receive a payment increases his choice of λv .
Proof. In Appendix A.5.
The intuition for the reciprocal response is the same as described above. If subjects are also
averse to inequality, the provision of vote payments decreases the level of inequality between
the voters in aggregate and the politician, lowering the marginal cost to the voter of allowing
expropriation. Given that the politician is also inequality averse, his utility cost of engaging in
expropriation likewise decreases. Jointly, these effects yield an increase in λi .
We now consider the effect of an increase in the number of payments. For the voter who
receives a payment, the postulated effects are of opposite sign: reciprocal preferences suggest
that λi should be decreasing in n, while inequality averse preferences suggest that λi should be
increasing in n. The latter effect dominates if the voter is sufficiently averse to inequality. For
the voter who does not receive a payment, both reciprocity and inequality aversion lead him to
choose the minimum sustainable threshold λ∗ , and this threshold is increasing in n.
3.2.4

Self-interest, reciprocity, altruism, and inequality aversion

Finally, we consider the case in which social preferences encompass reciprocity, altruism and
inequality aversion.
Prediction 5 Given preferences characterized by self-interest, reciprocity, altruism, and inequality aversion,
1. A voter who receives a payment chooses a higher threshold λv than a voter who does not
receive a payment.
13

(a) A voter who receives a payment increases his selected threshold relative to the base
case of no payments.
(b) A voter who does not receive a payment decreases his selected threshold relative to
the base case of no payments.
2. If the number of payments n increases, a voter who receives a payment increases his choice
of λv if the marginal cost of inequality aversion is increasing sufficiently fast, and decreases
his choice of λv otherwise.
3. If the number of payments n increases, a voter who does not receive a payment decreases
his choice of λv if the marginal benefit of altruism is increasing sufficiently fast, and he
increases his choice of λv otherwise.
4. There exist concave functions f (·), m(·) and convex functions h(·) such that, when the
number of payments increases, the threshold λv increases for the voter who receives a
payment, and it decreases for the voter who does not receive a payment.
Proof. In Appendix A.6.
The dynamics described in Prediction 4 continue to play out. Given sufficiently strong altruism, however, a voter who does not receive a payment also prefers an expropriation threshold
above the minimum sustainable level. Accordingly, he will adjust his threshold in response to
a shift in the number of payments. Due to the negative reciprocal response and the cost of
inequality aversion, his threshold decreases as the number of payments increases.
3.2.5

Analyzing the politician’s choices

The politician’s preferences are assumed to be identical in structure to the voters’ preferences,
and in any equilibrium in the voting game, the politician sets λp equal to λv as chosen by a
majority of voters. Therefore, the politician’s choices in equilibrium can be described as follows.
Prediction 6 The politician’s choice of expropriation in equilibrium can be described as follows.
1. Given preferences that are purely self-interested, the politician’s level of expropriation will
not shift when payments are introduced.
2. Given preferences characterized by self-interest, reciprocity, and potentially inequality aversion, but not by altruism:
(a) If a minority of subjects receive payments, the politician’s level of expropriation will
be unchanged.
(b) If a majority of subjects receive payments, the politician’s level of expropriation will
increase.
3. Given preferences characterized by self-interest, reciprocity, and altruism, and potentially
inequality aversion:
14

(a) If a minority of subjects receive payments, the politician’s level of expropriation will
decrease.
(b) If a majority of subjects receive payments, the politician’s level of expropriation will
increase.
(c) Given an increase in the number of payments conditional on a majority receiving
payments, the politician’s response will shift in the same direction as the voters’
reelection thresholds.
3.2.6

Community targeting versus individual targeting

We conclude this analysis by highlighting how social preferences can influence a politician’s
choice of how to target vote payments, assuming that he seeks to maximize expropriation while
still winning reelection.
Prediction 7 Assume voters have preferences characterized by self-interest as well as reciprocity, altruism, and inequality aversion, and the politician has a fixed vote-buying budget. If
altruistic preferences are sufficiently strong (the value of η · m0 (·) is sufficiently large), then the
politician maximizes expropriation conditional on reelection by providing payments to all voters
(community targeting), rather than individual-level targeting of particular voters.
Proof. In Appendix A.7.

3.3

Comparative statics

We can also derive comparative statics with respect to two key parameters: the strength of
the reciprocal response, captured by γ, and the fraction of the treasury that is vulnerable to
expropriation, λ.
Prediction 8 An increase in γ (weakly) increases λv for voters who receive payments and
(weakly) decreases λv for voters who do not receive payments.
Proof. In Appendix A.8.
Intuitively, individuals who derive more utility from a reciprocal response are even more
willing to reward a politician who distributes vote payments. Conversely, more reciprocal individuals who do not receive a payment are more willing to punish the politician, if they are not
already constrained by an initial choice of the minimum sustainable threshold.
Prediction 9 An increase in λ weakly increases λv for all voters.
Proof. In Appendix A.9.
A higher λ increases the minimum sustainable threshold for politician reelection in a pure
strategy equilibrium. When the politician can expropriate more, this increases his outside option, rendering it more challenging for voters to discipline him with the threat of removal. Thus
if voters prefer the minimum sustainable reelection threshold, their choices shift accordingly.
15

If the voters’ preferred threshold(s) are above the minimum sustainable threshold ex ante –
because of altruism or the reciprocal response to a payment – then a shift in λ does not impact
the choice of these voters, unless their preferred choice(s) drops below the (new) minimum
sustainable threshold once λ increases. In the latter case, again the voters’ reelection thresholds
will increase, and will equal the (new) minimum sustainable threshold given higher λ.

3.4

Unequal endowments

In our laboratory experiments, we also seek to evaluate whether subjects respond differently to
an increase in endowment as opposed to a labeled vote payment, and we can use the theoretical
framework to generate predictions for how these two cases should differ. Consider the case
where, rather than receiving payments, voters receive different endowments at the initiation of
the game that incorporate the value of the payments. Specifically, n voters have an endowment
equal to y + p, and the remaining voters have endowment y; they are then engaged in the simple
baseline voting game, without payments.
Prediction 10 If voters have multifaceted social preferences and unequal endowments, then
1. If η is sufficiently small (weak altruism), all voters prefer the minimum feasible threshold.
2. If η is sufficiently large (strong altruism), voters given the higher endowment prefer a
higher threshold than the voters given the lower endowment.
3. The threshold chosen by voters with lower endowments exceeds the threshold chosen by
payment non-recipients in the game with payments. The threshold chosen by voters with
higher endowments is below the threshold chosen by payment recipients under the game
with payments. Accordingly, the gap between the thresholds chosen by voters with high and
low endowments is smaller in magnitude than the gap between the thresholds chosen by
voters who do and do not receive payments in the game with payments.
Proof. In Appendix A.10.

4

Experimental methods and data

We now map the voting games we implement in the laboratory to the model in Section 3, and
describe laboratory procedures.

4.1

Voting games

In each voting game played in the laboratory, six subjects — five voters and one politician —
constituted the polity. The endowment y was $20 in the U.S., and 500 shillings or approximately $6 in Kenya, while the tax rate τ was 0.5. The fraction of collective treasury available

16

for expropriation (λ) was set at 0.3; thus 15% of a voter’s endowment was vulnerable to expropriation. The cost of removing the politician, κ, was defined as 0.1y. In the game incorporating
vote payments, the payment size p was also set at 0.1y.
In every experimental session, subjects first played a simple baseline voting game, with no
reference to vote payments. Each subject specified his choice as a voter, answering the question,
“what is the maximum amount you would allow the politician to expropriate and still re-elect
him?” He also stated his expectation regarding how much the politician would expropriate. The
subject then specified his choice as a politician, answering the question, “what is the amount you
would expropriate from the treasury?” He also specified whether he expected to be re-elected.12
Next, we engaged subjects in the voting game including vote payments. Six variants of the
basic voting game were conducted, each designed to test a different key hypothesis. The first
two, denoted public payment and public gifts, can be described as follows.
1. Public payment: Subjects were informed that some subjects will receive a “payment in
exchange for your vote”, and were informed of the number and value of the payments.
This framing was implemented with one, four, and five payments.
2. Public gifts: Subjects were informed that “one (four) voter(s) will receive a gift of $2.
This gift does not come from the treasury.” No quid pro quo for the gift was specified.
Again, all subjects were informed about the number and value of the gifts. This framing
was implemented with one and four payments.13
By examining voter response to the introduction of payments, the variation in this response
when the number of payments increases, and the politician’s response and variation thereof,
we are able to test the relative salience of social preferences vis-a-vis own-regarding preferences
for subjects. The “public gifts” framing also enables us to evaluate the hypothesis that gifts
distributed without any quid pro quo, for example via clientelistic policies, are as effective as
vote payments that incorporate an explicit quid pro quo.
We use three additional variations on the voting game to evaluate the postulated comparative
statics. First, to generate experimental variation in the salience of reciprocity, we limited the
information that subjects received about vote payments and then requested their consent for
the payment; both modifications were designed to increase the subject’s perception that he was
engaging voluntarily in an implicit transaction conditional on a payment. Second, we examined
changes in voter response when the amount of the treasury vulnerable to expropriation varies.
These additional voting game variations can be described as follows.
3. Limited information, no prior consent: No initial information about the number, size, or
nature of payments was provided; the game description simply stated that some voters
may receive payments in exchange for their votes. This framing was implemented with
four payments.
12

The specific wording of these questions follows the games employed in the U.S. sessions. Minor differences
between the U.S. and Kenya sessions are detailed in the on-line Appendix, section D.
13
Some combinations of framing and number of payments were omitted due to resource constraints.

17

4. Limited information, prior consent: The information and payment structure was identical
to the previous framing. However, prior to choosing reelection thresholds, subjects were
asked if they would accept a payment, if offered. This framing was implemented with four
payments.
5. Big pot: The fraction of the treasury vulnerable to expropriation by the politician (λ) in
the basic payment game was increased from 0.3 to 0.5. This framing was implemented
with zero and five payments.
Finally, we conducted one game as a robustness check to evaluate the hypothesis that voters
were responding merely to the shift in their endowment, rather than to the payment itself.
6. Unequal endowments: Subject endowments were rendered unequal ex ante to mimic the
wealth distribution induced by the vote payments; i.e., subjects had an endowment of
either $20 or $22 (parallel to their endowment if they had received a $2 vote payment).
The standard voting game was played, without reference to vote payments.
To reiterate, the first two voting games (public payments and public gifts) are used to elucidate the salience of self-interest and social preferences. If subjects are purely self-interested, a
voter’s threshold should be unaffected by the introduction of payments. If subjects are motivated
in part by reciprocity, voters who receive a payment will increase their reelection thresholds. If
subjects are motivated in part by altruism, voters who do not receive a payment will decrease
their reelection thresholds. In each case, predictions differ about how these responses vary as
the number of payments increases; in particular, examining this response will allow us to elucidate the significance of inequality aversion, as predictions around the variation with respect to
N vary depending on whether inequality aversion is salient.
The limited information, prior consent, and big pot games are used to test the hypothesized
comparative statics. First, if reciprocity is salient in subjects’ preferences, then increasing the
experimentally generated sense of reciprocity should render payment recipients more responsive, while payment non-recipients show evidence of a (weakly) larger backlash effect. Second,
independent of subject preferences, increasing the share of the treasury that is vulnerable to
expropriation should (weakly) increase voters’ reelection thresholds. Finally, the unequal endowment games are used to evaluate the hypothesis that subjects respond identically to a
payment labeled a “vote payment” relative to an increase in their initial endowments.

4.2

Laboratory procedures

We conducted our experiments at the Harvard Decision Science Lab in Cambridge, MA and
the Busara Experimental Laboratory in Nairobi, Kenya between 2013 and 2015. At both
sites, subjects were recruited through the laboratories’ centralized databases, and each subject
participated in only one session. In the U.S., 450 subjects participated in 62 sessions, and a
typical session consisted of 12 subjects; only around 5% of subjects participated in a session
with six subjects. In Kenya, 366 subjects participated in 24 sessions, and each session consisted
18

of 12 or 18 subjects. All experimental sessions were programmed using zTree. Table E2 in the
on-line Appendix provides more details on the sample and session structure.
At the beginning of the session, each subject played a set of social preference games. This
included the dictator, trust, and ultimatum games; detailed protocols are provided in the on-line
Appendix, section C. Next, subjects were engaged in multiple iterations of the voting game;
we denote each iteration as a game round. A session included two to three independent game
rounds; in Kenya, the sessions always included only two game rounds. Subjects made new
decisions in each round, and could not revisit decisions made in previous rounds.
The first game round began with an overview of the simple voting game, with no reference
to vote payments. The instructions emphasized that subjects would make choices as both the
voter and the politician, and would be assigned to a game role (and paid on the basis of their
choices in that role) at the conclusion of the session. Subjects completed a comprehension
quiz, and were required to review the correct responses to the comprehension questions before
proceeding. Each subject then specified his choices. First, he answered the question, “what is
the maximum amount you would allow the politician to expropriate and still re-elect him?”, and
also stated his expectation regarding how much the politician would expropriate. The subject
then specified his choice as a politician, answering the question, “what is the amount you would
expropriate from the treasury?”. He also specified whether he expected to be re-elected.14
The use of the strategy method to elicit subject responses is often described as “cold”
decision-making, in contrast to “hot” decision-making in which subjects respond directly to
another’s choice. In general, the two methods yield similar results, though there is some evidence
that the strategy method results in lower levels of punishment (Brandts and Charness, 2011).
Given that our primary specification entails within-subject comparisons across games that are
all conducted using the strategy method, we do not regard this as a significant source of bias.
In all experimental sessions excluding the limited information sessions, the next game round
began with an overview of the voting game including payments, followed by a second comprehension quiz. Two key points were highlighted: first, the money employed for vote payments
was separate from subjects’ endowments and the politician’s salary; and second, the vote remained secret and anonymous. In addition, the number and value of payments to be distributed
were fully detailed. In the limited information sessions, this entire introduction outlining the
role of payments was omitted, and subjects moved directly to specify their in-game decisions.
To maximize power, each subject was asked to specify his reelection threshold with and
without payment. Subjects were presented with the following language: “suppose you are a
voter and that you have received $2 in exchange for your vote. What is the maximum amount
you would allow the politician to expropriate and still re-elect him/her, given that you received
$2?” To elucidate preferences in the absence of a vote payment, a parallel question is posed:
“suppose you are a voter and that you have not received $2 in exchange for your vote. What is
the maximum amount you would allow the politician to expropriate and still re-elect him/her,
given that you have not received $2?” The order in which these questions were posed varied;
14

Again, the specific wording of these questions follows the games employed in the U.S. sessions. Minor
differences between the U.S. and Kenya sessions are detailed in the on-line Appendix, section D.

19

an analysis of this variation can be found in Section 5.1.15 Finally, subjects specified their
choices as politicians, responding to the same question posed in the previous round (“what is
the amount you would expropriate from the treasury?”), and specified whether they expected
to be reelected.16
The unequal endowments game round followed a slightly different structure: rather than
specifying choices with and without payment, each subject specified what threshold he would
set for the politician if his endowment was $22, and if his endowment was $20. Each subject
was then asked to specify how much he would expropriate as the politician.
In the U.S., subjects generally played two vote-buying game rounds, and the number of
payments varied across game rounds. In Kenya, subjects played a single vote-buying game
round. The experimental sessions concluded with subjects completing a brief questionnaire on
their demographic characteristics and political experiences.
The six vote-buying session types were implemented with some minor country-specific variations, described in the on-line Appendix, section D.17 It is important to note that the framing
of a payment was uniform in a given session: any variation in the framing of the payment is
across sessions, and thus across subjects. However, the fact that subjects in the U.S. played
the voting game with payments multiple times with different numbers of payments creates
both within-session (within-subject) and cross-session (cross-subject) variation in the number
of payments.
Finally, each subject’s compensation was based on his choices in one randomly selected role
(politician or voter, and voter who did or did not receive a payment), during a randomly selected
game round. During the session, subjects were regularly reminded that any choice could affect
their final earnings. Section D.7 in the on-line Appendix provides more details and an example.

4.3

Data and descriptive statistics

Again, our sample includes 450 subjects from the U.S. and 355 from Kenya. In our analysis, the
unit of interest is the subject-decision. In game rounds with zero or five payments, the subject
makes a single decision as a voter, specifying the reelection threshold for the politician. He also
makes a single decision as a politician. However, in game rounds with one or four payments, the
subject makes two decisions as a voter — the reelection threshold conditional on a payment,
and the reelection threshold unconditional on a payment — in addition to a single decision as
a politician.
To elicit voters’ re-election thresholds, U.S. subjects were asked to specify the maximum
amount they would allow the politician to expropriate and still re-elect him, naming any integer
between zero and $15, inclusive, where $15 was the maximum level of expropriation available to
15
The question order never varied across different game rounds for the same subject in the same session. A
single subject faced only one ordering of the payment questions.
16
The questions posed about subjects’ expectation of the game outcome were not incentivized.
17
We denote country-specific session types by numbers. For example, session type A corresponds to public
payments; session type A1 was implemented in the U.S., and session type A2 in Kenya. A given session can have
up to three game rounds, denoted “game round I”, “game round II”, and “game round III”. Table E1 in the
on-line Appendix summarizes the session types implemented and the game rounds included in each session.

20

the politician. In Kenya, we posed a series of binary choices to increase comprehension: subjects
were asked if they would reelect a politician who expropriated a specified amount (0, 75, 150,
250, 300, or 375 Ksh, where 375 Ksh was the maximum level of expropriation available). In
section D.3 of the on-line Appendix, we describe how we construct a linear variable capturing
the reelection threshold for the Kenyan observations. We drop roughly 7% of observations
corresponding to subjects who stated that they would not reelect a politician expropriating a
lower amount, but would reelect a politician expropriating a higher amount, leaving a sample
of 755 subjects. (We will subsequently demonstrate that our primary results are robust to the
inclusion of subjects exhibiting non-monotonic behavior.)
Panel A of Table 1 reports summary statistics for these observations, where Kenyan subject
choices are rescaled to lie on the 0 to $15 scale employed in the U.S.18 The average voter
reelection threshold in the pooled sample is the equivalent of $7.33, with significantly higher
voter thresholds in the U.S. ($7.70) than Kenya ($6.59). Kenyan subjects are also significantly
more likely to set their reelection threshold at zero. Again, a higher threshold suggests a
greater tolerance by subjects as voters of expropriation by politicians.19 At $8, the average
level of politician expropriation is above the average voter threshold; this is again significantly
higher in the U.S. ($8.39) than in Kenya ($7.21).

5

Empirical analysis

We first evaluate subjects’ responses to vote payments as both voters and politicians, as well
as variation in these responses given variation in the number of payments. The objective of
this analysis is to test the hypotheses generated by the theoretical model around the response
to vote payments conditional on different formulations of subject preferences, and to identify
whether community targeting dominates individual targeting from the politician’s perspective.
In addition, we consider comparative statics related to varying the salience of the reciprocal
response γ and the maximum expropriation level λp , and analyze the unequal endowments game
as a robustness check.

5.1

Voter response to payments

To evaluate the effect of vote payments on the reelection thresholds subjects choose as voters,
we estimate the following equation. Note that Tidgs corresponds to the threshold chosen by
subject i in game decision d in game round g in session s.
Tidgs = β1 Ridgs + β2 Pgs + φi + idgs
18

(3)

In addition, choices made by subjects in the big pot games are re-scaled to lie on the same scale from 0 to

$15.
19

For graphical evidence about different subject choices in the U.S. and Kenya, Figure E3 in the on-line
Appendix shows the corresponding kernel densities and histograms of subject choices as voters.

21

Ridgs is a dummy equal to one if subject i’s decision is conditional on payment receipt, and
Pgs is a dummy equal to one if the game round includes vote payments. All specifications are
estimated with and without subject fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the session
level. Specifications without subject fixed effects include a Kenya dummy, a control variable for
the order in which questions about vote payments are posed, and comprehension index fixed
effects. Table E1 in the on-line Appendix includes an overview of all game sessions conducted.
Table 2 reports the primary results analyzing voter behavior, employing all session types
except big pot and unequal endowments.20 First, we observe in Columns (1) and (2) a positive
and significant coefficient on recipient (β1 ), demonstrating that subjects who receive a payment
increase their reelection thresholds relative to subjects who do not receive a payment. This
suggests that voters are not motivated solely by self-interest.
Second, we observe a negative and significant coefficient on payment (β2 ), suggesting a
backlash effect: subjects playing a voting game with payments who do not receive a payment are
harsher in their treatment of the politician, lowering their reelection thresholds. This suggests
the importance of altruism, given that only models including altruism predict a decrease in the
reelection threshold for payment non-recipients.21 The bottom row reports the sum of β1 and
β2 ; it is positive and significant at the 10 percent level conditional on subject fixed effects.
In order to examine how voters’ responses vary with the number of payments, we estimate
the following specification; it includes the recipient dummy variable interacted with the dummy
1 and P 4 , denoting game rounds in which payments are distributed to one and four
variables Pgs
gs

subjects, as well as the dummy Allgs , equal to one for game rounds in which all subjects receive
payments. Again, this specification is estimated with and without subject fixed effects.
1
4
1
4
Tidgs = β1 Ridgs × Pgs
+ β2 Ridgs × Pgs
+ β3 Pgs
+ β4 Pgs
+ β5 Allgs + φi + idgs

(4)

The results in Columns (3) and (4) in Table 2 suggest that both the positive effect of
payments on recipients’ reelection thresholds and the negative effect on the thresholds of nonrecipients are growing in magnitude as the number of payments increases. The bottom rows
of the table report the linear combinations β1 + β3 and β2 + β4 , capturing the net effect of a
payment when one payment and four payments are distributed, respectively. The net effect of
a $2 payment in the one-payment game is insignificant. The net effect of a $2 payment in the
four-payment and five-payment games is positive and significant, and larger for the all-payment
game; the recipient voter(s) allows the politician to expropriate about 40 cents more if four
voters receive payments, and 70 cents more if all voters receive payments. We can reject the
hypothesis that the net effect of a single payment, β1 +β3 , is equal to the effect of five payments,
β5 . The hypothesis that β2 + β4 = β5 cannot be rejected, though p=.11 for the specification
20

This is a sample of 2136 subject-decisions. The unequal endowment session types, F1 and F2, also include
some game rounds with five payments. For clarity of the within-subject comparisons, however, data from session
types F are omitted. The results are consistent if this data is also included.
21
The sign and significance of β1 and β2 are consistent irrespective of order of posing “reelection threshold payment” and “reelection threshold - no payment” questions. These results are available upon request.

22

employing subject fixed effects.22
A vote payment of $2 also leads to a decline of about 60 cents in the amount voters who do
not receive a payment are willing to allow the politician to expropriate if only one voter receives
a payment, and a decline of about 73 cents in the non-recipient threshold if four voters receive
payments — i.e., the backlash effect is increasing in magnitude as the number of payments
increases. However, the difference between these two coefficients is not statistically significant.
Finally, we estimate the following specification to examine whether there is any heterogeneity
in the response to payments when the payment is framed as a gift with no quid pro.
Tidgs =β1 Ridgs + β2 Ridgs × Gif tgs + β3 Pgs + β4 Pgs × Gif tgs + φi + idgs

(5)

Columns (5) and (6) report the results, and we observe that β2 and β4 are small in magnitude
and insignificant. That suggests subject responses generally do not vary when alternate framings
of an identical payment are introduced; if we interact the gift dummy with dummy variables
for framings including specific numbers of payments, we observe the same pattern.23
The observed gap in reelection thresholds across subjects who do and do not receive a
payment, an increase in the recipient response as number of payments increases, and a more
intense backlash effect among non-recipients as the number of payments increases is inconsistent
with subjects being motivated solely by self-interest. Rather, this evidence is consistent with
the hypothesis that subjects are characterized by multifaceted social preferences encompassing
altruism, reciprocity, and inequality aversion (specification P4). Given a sufficiently high degree
of inequality aversion and a large marginal reciprocal response, voters’ reelection thresholds are
decreasing in n for voters who do not receive a payment, and increasing in n for voters who
receive a payment. This is exactly the pattern we observe. In addition, the results suggest
that payments structured as clientelistic transfers without any explicit quid pro quo may be as
effective as vote payments in shifting voters’ behavior.24

5.2

Politician response to payments

Do politicians’ expropriation choices shift when vote-buying is introduced? Our model predicts
that politicians should set their expropriation level equal to the reelection threshold chosen by
the majority of voters. Given our previous findings, this suggests that politician expropriation
should increase when four or five payments are introduced, with the increase larger in magnitude
22
The absence of an increase in voters’ thresholds when one payment is introduced is inconsistent with the
theoretical predictions given λ is modeled as continuous. However, this empirical pattern could be consistent
with an alternate model where λ is modeled as discrete.
23
In the on-line Appendix, we reproduce the core results around voter behavior reported in Table 2 employing
two alternate samples. Table E5 expands the sample to include Kenyan subjects who exhibit non-monotonic behavior, and Table E6 limits the sample to exclude subjects who score in the bottom decile of game comprehension.
In both cases, our results are robust.
24
We can also demonstrate that the observed pattern is inconsistent with subjects who are motivated by only
one dimension of social preferences. Given subjects who are purely altruistic or averse to inequality, the effect of
a payment on the reelection threshold would be uniform for voters who do and do not receive a payment. Given
purely reciprocal subjects, voters who do not receive a payment would not alter their choice of threshold relative
to the base game with no payments.

23

for games including five payments. To evaluate this hypothesis, we estimate the following
specification:
Expigs = β1 Pgs + φi + igs

(6)

Expigs denotes the amount expropriated by subject i as a politician in game round g in session
s. Parallel specifications will be estimated including dummy variables for various numbers of
payments, as well as an interaction with the gift framing.
Table 3 presents the results. Columns (1) and (2) show that the introduction of vote
payments increases politician expropriation by around $0.50, an increase of 6% relative to
the mean. Columns (3) and (4) show a larger increase in expropriation when payments are
distributed to all subjects, but the difference is statistically insignificant. In addition, the fact
that there is an increase in politician expropriation when only one payment is distributed is not
consistent with the theoretical predictions; however, this increase is not statistically significant
in the absence of subject fixed effects. Finally, in Columns (5) and (6) we observe no significant
variation in expropriation when the gift framing is employed.
Importantly, the magnitudes of the observed coefficients are consistent with the observed
changes in voter behavior. The average increase in the voter threshold when payments are
introduced is between $0.30 and $0.50, while the increase in politician expropriation is $0.45.
The increase in the voter threshold when all voters receive payments is around $0.70, while
the increase in politician expropriation is $0.80. This pattern is also consistent with subjects’
beliefs about the probability that they will be reelected as politicians. We observe no significant
shift in subjects’ reelection expectations once payments are introduced, suggesting that they
accurately infer that both politician expropriation and voter thresholds are increasing.
Turning to the welfare of subjects as voters, the introduction of vote payments renders
voters who do not receive the transfers worse off, as expropriation increases. We do not observe
an increase in expropriation that exceeds the $2 value of the vote payment, and thus subjects
who receive payments are better off when payments are introduced. In a real-world polity, the
potential losses due to politician expropriation are presumably several orders of magnitude larger
than a typical voter incentive, but this difference cannot easily be replicated in the laboratory.

5.3
5.3.1

Comparative statics
Variation in reciprocity

We experimentally vary the subjects’ degree of reciprocity toward the politician in two ways.
First, we conduct sessions in which limited information about payments is provided, consisting
of a simple statement in the game introduction noting that some voters may receive payments in
exchange for their votes. The subjects are not informed of the number of payments distributed,
the targeting mechanism, or the payments’ value. Providing limited information may increase
subjects’ reciprocal motivation, given that a more private payment seems more targeted. Second, in a subset of the limited information sessions, subjects are asked whether or not they
would like to accept a payment, and only then are asked to specify their reelection threshold

24

in case they received a payment. (Even subjects who state they would not like to accept the
payment specify this threshold.) The active provision of consent is designed to mimic a contract
between the politician and the voter.
In order to test these hypotheses, we estimate the following specification including interaction terms with the limited information and prior consent framings, utilizing the same sample
employed in the previous section. The limited information dummy variable is equal to one for
sessions that employ limited information and no prior consent.25
Tidgs = β1 Ridgs + β2 Ridgs × Limgs + β3 Ridgs × Consgs
+ β4 Pgs + β5 Pgs × Limgs + β6 Pgs × Consgs + β7 Allgs + β8 Consgs + φi + idgs

(7)

The results are reported in Columns (1) and (2) of Table 4; in general, the introduction of
limited information and prior consent does not significantly shift voters’ responses. While the
interaction terms with the payment dummy β5 and β6 are negative, consistent with the theoretical prediction of larger backlash effects given a higher degree of reciprocity, the coefficients
are small in magnitude. The estimated interaction terms for the prior consent framing β2 and
β3 are heterogeneous in sign; there is some weak evidence that soliciting prior consent renders
voters more responsive to payments.26
Further suggestive evidence can be generated by comparing our two experimental sites. As
previously noted, Kenyan subjects on average demonstrate much greater reciprocity compared to
the U.S. subjects.27 Perhaps unsurprisingly, we also observe that the Kenyan subjects’ response
to payments is up to 70% larger, though this difference should be interpreted cautiously given
that there are many other differences between the subject pools.
5.3.2

Variation in the maximum expropriation level

In another variant of the voting game, the fraction of the treasury vulnerable to expropriation
λ was increased from 35% to 50%; the voting game was then played without any payments and
with five payments, while the vote payment remained fixed at $2. Data from these “big pot”
sessions allows us to examine whether voters’ responsiveness to payments diminishes when they
risk greater losses from the politician’s expropriation.
25

The dummy variables Allgs and Consgs vary within-subject and thus are included in subject fixed effect
specifications. The gift, limited information, and prior dummy variables, by contrast, only vary across subjects
and are omitted from subject fixed effects specifications. More details on coding are provided in Table E4 in the
on-line Appendix. In the specifications without subject fixed effects, we continue to include controls previously
enumerated for the no subject fixed effect specification.
26
Roughly 80% of subjects indicated they would consent to receive a vote payment. Compared to those who
declined to provide consent, we observe a greater increase in voter thresholds among subjects who state they
would accept the payment, though clearly providing consent may be endogenous to other unobserved subject
characteristics. Tabulations are not reported for concision, but are available upon request.
27
Subjects at both sites are engaged in a simple trust game in which the sender has the option to send all or
none of an endowment of $4 or 120 shillings, and whatever is sent is tripled prior to the partner’s choice of how
much to return. In the case of a positive transfer, Kenyan subjects return on average $.50 more to the sender,
and are 14 percentage points more likely to return a non-zero amount. (The magnitudes here are normalized
with respect to the endowment in the U.S. sessions.)

25

We estimate the following specification, where Biggs is equal to one if the session includes
a big pot vulnerable to expropriation.
f rac
Tidgs
= β1 Pgs + β2 Rigds + β3 Allgs + β4 Allgs × Biggs + φi + idgs

(8)

Columns (3) and (4) of Table 4 report the findings: the big pot dummy is positive and significant,
while the interaction between big pot and payment is negative and significant.
Again, the previous evidence suggests that all three dimensions of social preferences are
relevant for voters’ choices, and accordingly subjects are not choosing the minimum sustainable
threshold in equilibrium. Thus an increase in λ will shift voters’ chosen thresholds only if the
previously chosen thresholds are below the new minimum sustainable level. In this case, voters
will increase their thresholds to the new minimum sustainable level. Mechanically, this increase
will be larger for payment non-recipients, as they previously chose lower payment thresholds.
In fact, this is exactly the pattern we observe. There is a significant increase in voter
thresholds, suggesting both thresholds chosen ex ante are below the new minimum sustainable threshold given the higher amount vulnerable to expropriation. However, the increase is
significantly larger for payment non-recipients.

5.4

Additional robustness checks

An alternative interpretation of the results is that the subjects’ responses as voters simply reflect
a reaction to the receipt of a payment that is directed at the experimenter, but externalized via
decisions about re-electing the politician. For example, subjects who receive a payment may be
gratified and feel more generous; subjects who do not receive a payment may be angry.28
To test this hypothesis, we use the “unequal endowments” game. This game is equivalent
to the simple voting game without payments; however, four voters have endowments of $22,
and one voter has an endowment of $20, parallel to the endowments that are induced in the
four-payment voting game. All subjects are informed of this distribution of endowments. The
subjects are then engaged in the simple voting game without payments.
Our model of subject preferences suggests a very different response to this variation in
endowments, relative to the response to a payment. Intuitively, since there is no payment,
subjects with high and low endowments are not differentiated by any reciprocal response, and
since they all pay the same tax ($10), altruism would likewise not generate any differences in
their reelection thresholds. Higher-endowment individuals would allow a higher threshold due
to inequality aversion, but this difference is strictly smaller in magnitude than the difference
generated by a payment.
To examine whether high endowment individuals respond in the same way as subjects who
receive a transfer designated as a vote payment, we consider the full sample of games excluding
big pot (session types A–D and F). The following specification is again estimated with and
28

We can rule out the hypothesis that subjects simply seek to reach a target level of earnings in the experimental
session. In this case, we would see no change in behavior between the voting game without any payments, and the
decisions subjects make in a voting game in which payments are distributed but they do not receive a payment.

26

without subject fixed effects.29
Tidgs = β1 Ridgs + β2 Highidgs + β3 Pgs + β4 Ineqgs + φi + idgs

(9)

The dummy variable Highidgs is equal to one if a subject has a high endowment, and zero
otherwise; Ineqgs is equal to one for the unequal endowment game rounds. Again, the theoretical
predictions suggest that subjects who receive high endowments should set higher thresholds than
subjects who receive low endowments, but the magnitude of this gap should be smaller than
the gap between subjects who do and do not receive payments. Accordingly, we expect the
coefficient β2 to be positive, but strictly smaller in magnitude than β1 .
The results are reported in Columns (5) and (6) of Table 4, and show a consistently positive
coefficient β1 and a coefficient β2 that is also positive but much smaller in magnitude (and
also, noisily estimated). The final rows of the table reports the p-values corresponding to the
tests β1 = β2 and β1 + β3 = β2 + β4 : i.e., whether the effect of a payment is the same as
the effect of a high endowment, and whether the net effect of a payment in a payment game
is the same as the net effect of a high endowment in the unequal endowments game. In both
specifications, we can reject both hypotheses at the 5 percent level, suggesting that the effect of
receiving a payment is not the same as the effect of a high initial endowment. While the results
should be interpreted cautiously given that the salience of an additional transfer (in the form
of a payment) may be significantly greater than a higher endowment assigned at the initiation
of the game session, this pattern is consistent with the hypothesis that voters are not simply
responding to the payment by externalizing a general sense of gratitude at the experimenter.

6

Conclusion

Vote-buying is an important phenomenon in polities around the world. However, the prevalence
of community-level saturation of vote payments has remained largely unexamined in the existing
literature, despite the fact that this phenomenon poses an empirical puzzle.
In this paper, we develop a model designed to identify how social preferences on the part of
voters may shape the response to broadly targeted vote payments, and test this model by evaluating subject behavior in a simple game of retrospective voting conducted with 816 subjects in
the Harvard Decision Science Laboratory and the Busara Experimental Laboratory in Nairobi,
Kenya. Our results suggest that voters are highly responsive to payments: those who receive
payments are less willing to punish the politician, while those who do not receive payments
are more willing to punish the politician, suggesting possible backlash at their exclusion. Both
responses become larger in magnitude as the number of payments increases. At the same time,
we observe greater expropriation by subjects as politicians when vote payments are introduced.
The observed pattern is not consistent with a model of subjects who seek purely to maximize
29
The sample includes game round I (no payments) and any game round including four payments from session
types A-F as specified in Table E1: A1-III, A2-II, B1-III, B2-II, C1-II, C2-II, D1-II, D2-II, F1-I, F2-I and F2-II.
In the specifications without subject fixed effects, we include a Kenya dummy, a control variable for the order in
which questions about the receipt of vote payments is posed, and comprehension index fixed effects.

27

their own earnings. Rather, it is consistent with the hypothesis that individuals are motivated
by a diverse set of social preferences — altruism, inequality aversion, and reciprocity — all of
which shape their response to vote payments. Importantly, these preferences also imply that
a rent-seeking politician will favor community targeting over individual-level targeting in order
to maximize his probability of reelection. In addition, our analysis suggests that vote-buying
reduces voters’ willingness to punish politicians for rent-seeking, absent any selection channel.
Accordingly, vote-buying could have important implications for governance even if it has no
impact on the identity of the winning candidate.
Our results also link to a broader observation in the literature that there is a positive
correlation between social capital and elite capture of the policy-making process in developing
countries (Acemoglu et al., 2014; Anderson et al., 2015). One channel for this correlation
could be that strong social capital renders clientelistic mechanisms such as vote-buying more
effective, even when vote payments are relatively anonymous and unenforceable. This implies
that enhancing other, non-electoral methods of political accountability may be particularly
important in the developing world.

28

References
Abbink, Klaus, Bernd Irlenbusch, and Elke Renner, “An experimental bribery game,”
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 2002, 18 (2), 428–454.
Acemoglu, Daron, Tristan Reed, and James A. Robinson, “Chiefs: Economic development and elite control of civil society in Sierra Leone,” Journal of Political Economy, 2014,
122 (2), 319–368.
Anderson, Siwan, Patrick Francois, and Ashok Kotwal, “Clientelism in Indian villages,”
American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (6), 1780–1816.
Andreoni, James and John Miller, “Giving according to GARP: An experimental test of
the consistency of preferences for altruism,” Econometrica, 2002, 70 (2), 737–753.
Baland, Jean-Marie and James Robinson, “Land and power: Theory and evidence from
Chile,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 1737–1765.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Selvan Kumar, Rohini Pande, and Felix Su, “Do informed voters
make better choices? Experimental evidence from urban India,” 2011. Working paper.
Bo, Ernesto Dal, “Bribing Voters,” American Journal of Political Science, 2007, 51 (4),
789–803.
Bolton, Gary and Axel Ockenfels, “ERC: A theory of equity, reciprocity, and competition,”
American Economic Review, 2000, 90 (1), 166–193.
Brandts, Jordi and Gary Charness, “The strategy versus the direct-response method: a
first survey of experimental comparisons,” Experimental Economics, 2011, 14, 375–398.
Breeding, Mary, “Micropolitics and vote banks,” Economic and Political Weekly, 2011, 46
(1), 71–77.
Burgess, Robin, Remi Jedwab, Edward Miguel, Ameet Morjaria, and Gerard Padró
i Miquel, “The value of democracy: Evidence from road building in Kenya,” American
Economic Review, 2015, 105 (6), 1817–1851.
Cardenas, Juan-Camilo, “Real worth and experimental cooperation: experiments in the field
lab,” Journal of Development Economics, 2003, 70, 263–289.
and Jeffrey Carpenter, “Behavioral development economics: Lessons from field labs in
the developing world,” Journal of Development Studies, 2008, 44 (3), 331–338.
Carter, Michael and Marco Castillo, “Trustworthiness and social capital in South Africa:
Analysis of actual living standards experiments and artefactual field experiments,” 2009.
University of Wisconsin Working Paper.

29

Charness, Gary and Ernan Haruvy, “Altruism, equity, and reciprocity in a gift-exchange
experiment: an encompassing approach,” Games and Economic Behavior, 2002, 40 (2), 203–
231.
Croke, Kevin, “Tools of single party hegemony in Tanzania: evidence from surveys and survey
experiments,” Democratization, 2017, 24 (2), 189–208.
Cruz, Cesi, Philip Keefer, and Julien Labonne, “Incumbent advantage, voter information
and vote buying,” 2015. Mimeo.
Dekel, Eddie, Matthew O. Jackson, and Asher Wolinsky, “Vote buying: General elections,” Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (2), 351–380.
DellaVigna, Stefano, “Psychology and economics: Evidence from the field,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2009, 47 (2), 315–372.
Dufwenberg, Martin and Georg Kirchsteiger, “A theory of sequential reciprocity,” Games
and Economic Behavior, 2004, 47 (2), 268–298.
Fehr, Ernest and Klaus M. Schmidt, “A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (3), 817–868.
and Klaus Schmidt, “The economics of fairness, reciprocity and altruism - experimental
evidence and new theories,” in Serge-Christophe Kolm and Jean Mercier Ythier, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity, Netherlands: Elsevier, 2007,
pp. 615–691.
Finan, Federico and Laura Schechter, “Vote-buying and reciprocity,” Econometrica, 2012,
80 (2), 863–881.
Fujiwara, Thomas and Leonard Wantchekon, “Can informed public deliberation overcome
clientelism? Experimental evidence from Benin,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5 (4), 241–255.
Greig, Fiona and Iris Bohnet, “Is there reciprocity in a reciprocal-exchange economy?
Evidence of gendered norms from a slum in Nairobi, Kenya,” Economic Inquiry, 2008, 46 (1),
77–83.
Groseclose, Timothy and James Snyder, “Buying super-majorities,” American Political
Science Review, 1996, 90, 303–15.
Henrich, Joseph, Robert Boyd, Samuel Bowles, Colin Camerer, Ernst Fehr, Herbert Gintis, and Richard McElreath, “In search of homo economicus: Behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale societies,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (2), 73–78.
Hicken, Allen, Stephen Leider, Nico Ravanilla, and Dean Yang, “Temptation in voteselling: Evidence from a field experiment in the Philippines,” 2014. CESifo Working Paper,
No. 4828.
30

Keefer, Philip and Razvan Vlaicu, “Democracy, credibility, and clientelism,” The Journal
of Law, Economics, and Organization, 2008, 24 (2), 371406.
Kitschelt, Herbert, “Linkages between citizens and politicians in democratic polities,” Comparative Political Studies, 2000, 33, 845–879.
Kramon, Eric, “Why do politicians buy votes when the ballot is secret? Theory and experimental evidence from Kenya,” 2011. Working paper.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Klaus Schmidt, “You owe me,” 2011.
Nichter, Simeon, “Vote buying or turnout buying? Machine politics and the secret ballot,”
American Political Science Review, 2008, 102 (1), 19–31.
Pan, Xiaofei Sophia and Erte Xiao, “It’s not just the thought that counts: An experimental
study on the hidden cost of giving,” 2014.
Rabin, Matthew, “Incorporating fairness into game theory and economics,” American Economic Review, 1993, 83, 1281–1302.
Robinson, James and Thierry Verdier, “The political economy of clientelism,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 2013, 115 (2), 260–291.
Schnellenbach, Jan and Christian Schubert, “Behavioral political economy: A survey,”
European Journal of Political Economy, 2015, 40, 395417.
Snyder, James, “On buying legislatures,” Economics and Politics, 1991, 3, 93–109.
Stokes, Susan, “Perverse accountability: A formal model of machine politics with evidence
from Argentina,” American Political Science Review, 2005, 99 (3), 315–325.
, “Is vote-buying undemocratic?,” in Frederic Charles Schaffer, ed., Elections for sale: The
causes and consequences of vote-buying, Boulder: Lynne Riener Publishers, 2007.
Strassmair, Christina, “Can intentions spoil the kindness of a gift? - An experimental study,”
2009. University of Munich Discussion Paper.
Vicente, Pedro, “Is vote buying effective? Evidence from a field experiment in West Africa,”
Economic Journal, 2014, 124 (574), F356F387.

31

7

Figures and Tables
Table 1: Summary statistics
U.S. mean

Kenya mean

U.S. obs.

Kenya obs.

1794
1794
1236
1236
1236

886
886
610
610
610

Panel A: Subject choices in voting game
Voter threshold
Dummy for threshold at zero
Politician expropriation
Dummy for zero expropriation
Dummy for full expropriation

7.70
.11
8.39
.09
.20

6.59
.16
7.21
.26
.22

Panel B: Experimental measures of social preferences
Dummy for sending in the dictator game
Dummy for sending in trust game
Dummy for returning in trust game
Threshold in ultimatum game
Reciprocity

.66
.83
.42
2.91
.06

.81
.64
.58
5.72

372
372
372
150
222

Notes: Each panel reports means of the specified characteristics by experimental site.

281
281
281
118

The data reported

for Kenyan subjects is restricted to subjects who exhibit monotonic behavior and are thus included in the
primary sample. Panel A reports summary statistics for subjects’ choices as voters and politicians, including the
reelection threshold as a voter, a dummy for the threshold at zero, the amount expropriated as a politician, and
dummy variables for expropriating the minimum or maximum amount. This data is reported at the level of the
subject-game round-game decision.
Panel B reports summary statistics for subjects’ social preferences; this sample includes all subjects
other than those included in session type F (unequal endowments). The measures reported include a dummy
variable for sending a positive amount in the dictator game, a dummy variable for sending a positive amount in
the trust game, a dummy variable for whether the subject returned any funds in the trust game, a reciprocity
index, and the threshold in the ultimatum game; the reciprocity index can be calculated only for U.S. subjects
in 2014 and 2015, and the ultimatum game threshold is available only for subjects in 2014. The reciprocity
, censored at zero. All variables are normalized with respect to the dollar
index is defined as P erchigh
− P erclow
i
i
scales employed in the U.S.

32

Table 2: Voter behavior
Voter reelection threshold
(1)
Recipient

.963

(.138)∗∗∗

(2)

(3)

(4)

.964

.920

(.135)∗∗∗

Recipient x one payment
Recipient x four payments

(.185)∗∗∗

.278

.278

(.205)

(.205)

1.116

(.163)∗∗∗

-.703

(.196)∗∗∗

-.670

-.752

(.189)∗∗∗

All payments

.593

(.301)∗∗

.260
(.173)

-.597

-.733

(.188)∗∗∗

.729

(.224)∗∗∗

-.318

-.319

(.270)

(.224)

.364

(.195)∗

2136

.057
(.367)

7.07

7.07
Subject
2136

.294

β2 + β4

7.07

-.003
(.393)

(.170)∗

β1 + β3

Sample
Mean dep. var.
Fixed effects
Obs.

-.687

(.255)∗∗∗

(.253)∗∗

Payment x gift

β1 + β2

.121
(.269)

-.702

-.595

Four payments

.123
(.271)
(.279)∗∗
(.313)∗

.922

(.179)∗∗∗

1.116

(.188)∗∗∗

One payment

(6)

(.163)∗∗∗

Recipient x gift
Payment

(5)

7.07
Subject
2136

.383

(.191)∗∗

Session types A-D
7.07
7.07
Subject
2136
2136

2136

Notes: The dependent variable is the maximum threshold of expropriation at which the subject will vote to
reelect the politician. The independent variables are a dummy variable for receiving a payment and receiving
a payment in a game with one or four payments; the dummy variables for the game including payments or
including one or four payments; a dummy for the game including payments for all subjects; and the recipient
and payment dummies interacted with a dummy for the gift framing. β1 + β2 reports the sum of the coefficients
on recipient and payment. β1 + β3 and β2 + β4 report the sum of the recipient and payment dummies interacted
with the one payment and four payment dummies, respectively.
Fixed effects are as specified in the table; specifications without subject fixed effects include a Kenya
dummy, a dummy for ordering of the payment questions, and comprehension index fixed effects. All specifications include standard errors clustered at the experimental session level. Asterisks indicate significance at the
ten, five, and one percent level.

33

Table 3: Politician behavior
Politician expropriation
(1)
Payment

.499

(.211)∗∗

(2)

(3)

(4)

.553

(.202)∗∗∗

One payment

.482
(.357)

Four payments

.492

(.242)∗∗

All payments

.561
(.364)

7.82
1404

7.82
Subject
1404

(6)

.432

.427

(.285)

(.277)

.478

(.212)∗∗

.523

(.239)∗∗

.806

(.256)∗∗∗

Payment x gift

Sample
Mean dep. var.
Fixed effects
Obs.

(5)

Session types A-D
7.82
7.82
Subject
1404
1404

.205

.381

(.442)

(.356)

7.82

7.82
Subject
1404

1404

Notes: The dependent variable is the politician’s level of expropriation. The independent variables are dummy
variables for the game including payments, and for the game including one or four payments; a dummy for the
game including payments for all subjects; and the payment dummy interacted with a dummy for the gift framing.
Fixed effects are as specified in the table; specifications without subject fixed effects include a Kenya dummy, a
dummy for ordering of the payment questions, and comprehension index fixed effects. All specifications include
standard errors clustered at the experimental session level. Asterisks indicate significance at the ten, five, and
one percent level.

34

Table 4: Comparative statics

(1)
Recipient
Recipient x secret
Recipient x consent
Payment
Payment x secret
Payment x consent
All payment

.956

(.158)∗∗∗

(2)
.956

(.158)∗∗∗

-.536

-.536

(.493)

(.493)

.271

.271

(.256)

(.256)

-.597

(.246)∗∗

-.570

(.242)∗∗

-.050

-.209

(.464)

(.446)

-.314

-.341

(.521)

(.519)

Voter threshold
(3)
(4)
.910

(.139)∗∗∗

-.704

(.197)∗∗∗

.774

.208

.498

(.557)

(.425)

(.328)

Big pot int.
Big pot

.910

(.139)∗∗∗

-.679

(.189)∗∗∗

-.465
(.368)

12.946

Unequal endowment

.216

.216

(.162)

(.162)

1.316

β1 + β2 + β3 + β4

7.07
2136

7.07
Subject
2136

-.018

-.020

(.027)

(.022)

7.07

7.07
Subject
2326

2326

-.676

(.183)∗∗∗

(.190)∗∗∗

High endowment

Sample
Mean dep. var.
Fixed effects
Obs.

-.717

(.201)∗∗∗

.960

(.133)∗∗∗

.466

-.472
2.978

.989

(.142)∗∗∗

(6)

(.208)∗∗

(.426)
(.790)∗∗∗

(5)

.877

(.531)∗∗

(.364)∗∗

2466

Subject
2466

Notes: The dependent variable is the maximum threshold of expropriation at which the subject will vote to
reelect the politician. In Columns (1) and (2), the independent variables are a dummy variable for receiving
a payment and its interactions with dummy variables for the secret payment framing and the prior consent
framing, as well as a dummy variable for the game including payments, also interacted with the secret and
prior consent framing. In Columns (3) and (4), the independent variables include the recipient and payment
dummies, a dummy for the game including payments for all subjects, a dummy for the big pot game, and
the interaction between the two. In Columns (5) and (6), the independent variables include the recipient
and payment dummies, and the dummy variables for the unequal endowments framing and for an individual
receiving a high endowment. β1 + β2 + β3 + β4 reports the sum of the recipient and payment dummies, along
with the all payment dummy and the interaction with big pot.
Fixed effects are as specified in the table; specifications without subject fixed effects include a Kenya
dummy, a dummy for ordering of the payment questions, and comprehension index fixed effects. All specifications include standard errors clustered at the experimental session level. Asterisks indicate significance at the
ten, five, and one percent level.

35

A

Appendix - Proofs

A.1

Characterization of pure strategy Nash equilibria

There are multiple pure strategy Nash equilibria in the voting game described in the main text.
For any expropriation level λp · T ≥ λ∗ · T , where λ∗ · T = λ · T − (0.5 · y + ), there exists an
equilibrium in which the politician expropriates λp · T and voters set the reelection threshold
at λv = λp . For any expropriation level λp · T ≤ λ∗ · T , the politician’s expected payoff from
playing the strategy λ · T is 0.5 · y + λp · T + . If he deviates to the maximum expropriation
λ · T , he obtains payoff 0.5 · y + λ · T . Such a deviation would therefore be profitable. For
any λp · T > λ∗ · T , a deviation would yield a payoff of at most λ∗ · T . Accordingly, there is
no profitable deviation for the politician. Similarly, each voter would receive zero benefit from
altering his reelection threshold conditional on all other voters utilizing the threshold λp .
Notice that, with pure self-interest, the presence of vote payments does not affect the set of
pure strategy Nash equilibria, since λ∗ is independent of n.

A.2

Proof of Prediction 1

If the politician chooses to expropriate λp · T, his utility can be described as follows, assuming
each voter has the same income y.
Up = 0.5y + λp τ Y + (1 − ρ) (0.5y + )

(10)

Thus regardless of the value of ρ, the expropriation level that maximizes the politician’s utility
is λ∗ = λ.
We would like to derive the value λ∗ above which a PSNE exists such that the politician
expropriates λp · T and the voters set threshold λp τ Y. This value λ∗ is given by the solution to
the following equation.
0.5y + λτ y = y +  + λp τ y

(11)

For any total expropriation level λp · T ≤ λT − (0.5y + ), the politician’s expected payoff
from playing the strategy λp is y + λp · T + . If he deviates to the maximum expropriation level
λ · T, he obtains payoff 0.5y + λT. For any λp · T > λT − (0.5y + ), a deviation would yield a
payoff of at most λT − (0.5y + ) , and thus there is no profitable deviation for the politician.
Similarly, each voter would receive zero benefit from altering his reelection threshold conditional
on all other voters utilizing the threshold λv = λp .
The introduction of vote payments does not shift the above thresholds, as the effect of
payments enters additively in the politician’s utility function.

A.3

Proof of Prediction 2

(Part 1: Voter’s choice of expropriation threshold) Given no payments, the voter’s
utility is maximized when the threshold for expropriation is set at the minimum level λv = λ∗ .
Consider voter i and denote by ni the number of payments received by voters other than voter
36

i. If n is the total number of payments, then ni = n if voter i did not receive a payment (pi = 0),
and ni = n − 1 if voter i received a payment (pi = p). The welfare maximizing equilibrium for
voter i is the one in which he chooses threshold λv such that


n 
λi = arg max Ei + γf τ N y (λi − λe ) pi − p
N
λi ∈[λ∗ ,λ]

(12)

λi = arg max y − λi τ y + pi + γf (τ y (λi − λe ) (N pi − np))

(13)

This yields

λv ∈[λp ,λ]

This expression can be further simplified to the following.
(
λi =

λ∗

if γ (N pi − np) · f 0 (τ y (λ∗ − λe ) (N pi − np)) ≤ 1

λ∗i

otherwise

(14)

where λ∗i ∈ (λ∗ , λ] is defined implicitly by
1 = γ (N pi − np) f 0 (τ y (λ∗i − λe ) (N pi − np))

(15)

γ (−np) f 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (−np)) < 0

(16)

If pi = 0, then

λi (pi = 0) = λ∗

(17)

If pi = p and
γ (N p − np) f 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np)) < 1

(18)

λi (pi = p) = λ∗

(19)

γ (N p − np) f 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np)) > 1

(20)

λi (pi = p) = λ∗i > λ∗

(21)

then also

Otherwise,

and

(Part 2: Effect of increase in number of payments) For the voter who does not receive
a payment,
λi = λ∗ = λ −

0.5y + 
τy

(22)

Accordingly, increasing n has no effect on λi .
For the voter who receives a payment, consider the case in which there is an interior solution,
λi = λ∗i . (If a corner solution holds, then the marginal change in n has no effect.) Then,

37

applying the Envelope Theorem, the effect of a change in n on λi ,

∂λi
∂n ,

is given by

∂λi
= (−γp) f 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N − n) p)
∂n
∂λi
∂n
−γp2 (N − n) (λi − λe ) τ yf 00 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N − n) p)

+γp2 (N − n)2 τ yf 00 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N − n) p)

We can re-write

=
=

∂λi
∂n

as follows.

f 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np)) + p (N − n) τ y (λi − λe ) f 00 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np))
(24)
(N − n)2 pτ yf 00 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np))
1
e
00
e
γ(N −n)p + p (N − n) τ y (λi − λ ) f (τ y (λi − λ ) (N p − np))
(25)
(N − n)2 pτ yf 00 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np))
00

0

e

= f (τ y (λi − λ ) (N p − np))

e

(τ y(λi −λ )(N p−np))
1 + p (N − n) τ y (λi − λe ) ff 0 (τ
y(λi −λe )(N p−np))

(N − n)2 pτ yf 00 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np))
00

=

(23)

(26)

e

(τ y(λi −λ )(N p−np))
1 + p (N − n) τ y (λi − λe ) ff 0 (τ
1
y(λi −λe )(N p−np))
2
00
e
γ (N − n) p (N − n) pτ yf (τ y (λi − λ ) (N p − np))

(27)

By assumption,
xf 00 (x)
f 0 (x)
f 00 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np))
1 + p (N − n) τ y (λi − λe ) 0
f (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np))
1+

> 0

(28)

> 0

(29)
(30)

Accordingly, we can conclude

A.4

∂λi
∂n

< 0.

Proof of Prediction 3

(Part 1: Set of thresholds sustainable in equilibrium) If the politician chooses to
expropriate λp τ Y, he derives utility
Up = 0.5y + λp τ Y + (1 − ρ) (0.5y + ) + ηm (N y (1 − λp τ ) + ρN κy)

(31)

Since he receives no payment, there is no reciprocal component to his utility function. Thus
the politician’s preferred expropriation level can be written as follows.
(
λDEV
=
p

λ if 1 > ηm0 (N y (1 − λτ ) + N κy)
cp if 1 ≤ ηm0 (N y (1 − λτ ) + N κy)
λ

(32)

38

cp is defined implicitly by
where λ




cp τ + N κy
1 = ηm0 N y 1 − λ

(33)

We would like to derive the minimum value λ∗ above which a PSNE exists such that the
politician expropriates λp τ Y and the voters set threshold λp τ Y. The value λ∗ is defined
implicitly by the minimum solution to the following equality:

λ∗ τ Y + ηm (N y (1 − λ∗ τ )) = −0.5y −  + λDEV
τ Y + ηm N y 1 − λDEV
τ −κ
p
p

(34)

If λDEV
= λ, then
p
λ∗ τ Y + ηm (N y (1 − λ∗ τ )) = λτ Y − 0.5y −  + ηm (N y (1 − λτ − κ))

(35)

Since ηm (N y (1 − λτ − κ)) < ηm (N y (1 − λ∗ τ )) , it follows from the above equality that λ∗
when preferences exhibit altruism is lower than the corresponding value calculated in
Proposition 1.
(Part 2: Voter’s choice of expropriation threshold) If subjects’ preferences exhibit both
reciprocity and altruism, the utility of voter i is given by




X
n 
Ui = Ei + ηm 
Ej  + γf τ Y (λi − λe ) pi − p
N

(36)

j6=i

Consider voter i. Denote by ni the the number of payments received by voters other than
voter i. If n is the total number of payments, ni = n if voter i did not receive a payment
(pi = 0), and ni = n − 1 if voter i received a payment (pi = p). The welfare maximizing
equilibrium for voters is the one in which they choose threshold λi such that


n 
λi = arg max Ei + γf τ Y (λi − λe ) pi − p
N
λi ∈[λ∗ ,λ]
+ ηm(N y +  + λi τ yN + (N − 1)y (−λi τ ) + ni p)

(37)

This yields
λi = arg max y − λi τ y + pi + γf (τ y (λi − λe ) (N pi − np))
λi ∈[λ∗ ,λ]

+ηm(λi τ y + N y +  + ni p)

(38)

Hence


 λ∗
λi =

 ∗
λi

if

γ (N pi − np) f 0 (τ y (λ∗ − λe ) (N pi − np)) +
ηm0 (λ∗ τ y +  + N y + ni p) < 1

(39)

otherwise

39

where λ∗i is defined implicitly by
1 = γ (N pi − np) f 0 (τ y (λ∗i − λe ) (N pi − np)) + ηm0 (λ∗i τ y +  + N y + ni p)

(40)

Consider the case in which pi = 0. In this case,
γ (−np) f 0 (τ y (λ∗ − λe ) (−np)) < 0

(41)

ηm0 (λ∗ τ y +  + N y + np) < 1 + γnpf 0 (τ y (λ∗ − λe ) (−np)) ,

(42)

λi (pi = 0) = λ∗

(43)

λi (pi = 0) > λ∗ .

(44)

ηm0 (λi τ y +  + N y + np) > 1.

(45)

If

then

and otherwise,

Note that the latter case requires

Consider now the case when pi = p. In this case
γ (N p − np) f 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np)) > 0,

(46)

m0 (N y + λi τ y +  + (n − 1)p) > m0 (N y + λi τ y +  + np)

(47)

and

due to concavity. Accordingly, we can conclude
λi (pi = p) ≥ λi (pi = 0)

(48)

λi (pi = 0) ≤ λi (nopayments) ≤ λi (pi = p)

(49)

and

(Part 3: Effect of increase in number of payments) For the voter who does not receive
a payment, consider first the case in which
λi (pi = 0) = λ∗ ,

(50)

and thus ηm0 (λi τ y +  + N y + np) is sufficiently small such that
ηm0 (λ∗ τ y +  + N y + np) < 1 + γnpf 0 (τ y (λ∗ − λe ) (−np)) .

(51)

40

We denote this case as weak altruism. In this case, the effect of a change in n is
∂λi (pi = 0)
∂λ∗
=
>0
∂n
∂n

(52)

Consider now a voter for whom the solution for λi is interior, i.e.
ηm0 (N y + λi τ y +  + ni p) = 1 + γngf 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (−np))

(53)

We denote this case as strong altruism. The effect of a change in n can be derived applying
the Envelope Theorem to the first-order condition for λ∗i :


∂λi
e
0 = −γpf (τ y (λi − λ ) (−ng)) + γnτ yp f (·) (λi − λ ) + n
∂n


∂λi
+ ηm00 (·) p + yτ
∂n
0
∂λi
p γf (τ y (λi − λe ) (−np)) − γnτ ypf 00 (·) (λi − λe ) − ηm00 (·)
=
∂n
τy
γn2 p2 f 00 (·) + η(N − 1)m00 (·)
∂λi
< 0
∂n
0

2 00

e

(54)
(55)
(56)

For the voter who receives a payment, consider the case in which we have an interior solution,
and thus λi = λ∗i . In this case:
1 = γ (N p − np) f 0 (τ y (λ∗i − λe ) (N p − np)) + ηm0 (yp + λ∗i τ y +  + (N − 1)y + (n − 1)p) (57)
The effect of a change in n on λi is given by
(−1) γpf 0 (·) − γp2 (N − n) τ y (λi − λe ) γf 00 (·) + (N − n)2 pτ yγf 00 (.)
+ητ ym00 (·)

∂λi
∂n

=

∂λi
+ ηpm00 (·)
∂n

∂λi
=0
∂n

(58)

γgf 0 (·) + γp2 (N − n) τ y (λi − λe ) γf 00 (·) − ηpm00 (·)
(N − n)2 pτ yγf 00 (·) + ητ ym00 (·)
00

= f 0 (·)

e

(τ y(λi −λ )(N p−np))
1 + p (N − n) τ y (λi − λe ) ff 0 (τ
y(λi −λe )(N p−np)) −

(59)
ηpm00 (·)
f 0 (τ y(λi −λe )(N p−np))

(N − n)2 pτ yf 00 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np)) + ητ ym00 (·)

< 0

(60)
(61)

Given that by assumption 1 +

xf 00 (x)
f 0 (x)

> 0, we can conclude the following.

1 + p (N − n) τ y (λi − λe )

f 00 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np))
>0
f 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np))

(62)

41

A.5

Proof of Prediction 4

(Part 1: Set of thresholds sustainable in equilibrium) If the politician chooses to
expropriate λp τ Y, he derives utility
Up = 0.5y + λp τ N y + (1 − ρ) (0.5y + )
−αh (0.5y + λp τ N y + (1 − ρ) (0.5y + ) − ((1 − τ )y + (1 − λp )τ y − ρκy))

(63)

This can be simplified to
Up = 0.5y + λp τ N y + (1 − ρ) (0.5y + )
−αh (λp τ (N + 1) y +  − ρ (0.5y + ) + ρκy)

(64)

Consider the case in which ρ = 1 (i.e., the politician fails to be reelected). Then, the
politician’s payoff is higher than the voter’s when the following condition holds.
0.5y + λp τ Y
λp

> (1 − τ )y + (1 − λp )τ y − κy
y(1 − τ − κ) + τ y − 0.5yp
y(1 − κ) − 0.5yp
>
=
τ y (N + 1)
τ y (N + 1)

(65)
(66)

In this case, the first-order condition for λp in the politician’s problem is given by
N − (N + 1) · α · h0 (λp τ (N + 1) y +  − (0.5y + ) + κy) ≤ 0
If
αh0 (λτ (N + 1) y − 0.5y + κy) <

N
N +1

(67)

(68)

then the politician’s choice of expropriation threshold can be written as follows
λ∗p = λ >

0.5 − κ
τ (N + 1)

(69)

Now, consider the case in which ρ = 0 (the politician is re-elected). Then, the politician’s
payoff is higher than the voters’ when the following condition holds.
yp +  + λp τ N y > (1 − τ )y + (1 − λp )τ y
−
(1 − τ )y + τ y − y − 
λp >
=
τ y (N + 1)
τ y (N + 1)

(70)
(71)

Since yv = y = yp , the politician’s payoff is always higher than the voters’ payoff.
To characterize the optimal level λ∗ , two cases must be considered.
• If h0 (λτ (N + 1) y − 0.5y + κy) ≤

N
(N +1)α ,

then the politician’s preferred expropriation in

case of failing to win reelection is λ. In this case, if the voters set the threshold λ∗ > 0,

42

and the politician expropriates exactly λ∗ , he obtains utility:
Up = y + λ∗ τ N y +  − αh (λ∗ τ (N + 1) y + )

(72)

However, if the politician deviates, he obtains utility
0.5y + λτ N y − αh (λτ (N + 1) y − 0.5y + κy)

(73)

Therefore, the value of λ∗ is defined implicitly by
λ∗ τ N y − αh (λ∗ τ (N + 1) y + ) = λτ N y − 0.5y − 
−αh (λτ (N + 1) y − 0.5y + κy) .
• If h0 (λτ (N + 1) y − 0.5y + κy) >
politician’s preferred

N
∗
(N +1)α , then there exists a λmax <
expropriation is λ∗max , where λ∗max is given by:

h0 (λ∗max τ (N + 1) y − 0.5y + κy) =

(74)

λ such that the

N
.
α (N + 1)

(75)

In this case, the value of λ∗ is defined implicitly by
λ∗ τ N y − αh (λ∗ τ (N + 1) y + ) = λ∗max τ N y − 0.5y − 
−αh (λ∗max τ (N + 1) y − 0.5y + κy)

(76)

(Part 2: Voter’s choice of expropriation threshold) The utility of voter i is given by





X
1
n 
Ui = max Ei − α · h  Ep −
Ej  + γ · f τ yN (λi − λe ) pi − p .
N
N

(77)

j

If the politician wins reelection, then the voters’ earnings are below the average, and λ∗ is
derived from equation (74). Voter i0 s preferred level of expropriation is then given by:

n 
λi = arg max y (1 − λi τ ) + pi − α · h  + (N + 1) λi τ y − p
N
λi ∈[λ∗ ,λ]



n
+γ · f τ yN (λi − λe ) pi − p .
N

(78)

The first-order condition for an internal solution for λi can be written as follows.

n 
−1 − (N + 1) αh0  + (N + 1) λp τ y − p
N
+γ (N pi − np) f 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N pi − np)) = 0.

(79)

43

If pi = 0, the first-order condition is

n 
−1 − α (N + 1) h0  + (N + 1) λi τ y − p
N
+γ (−np) f 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (−np)) < 0.

(80)

Since the left-hand side is always negative, it follows that
λi (pi = 0) = λ∗ .

(81)

If pi = p, the first-order condition is

n 
−1 − (N + 1) αh0  + (N + 1) λi τ y − p + γ (N − n) pf 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N − n) p) ≤ 0. (82)
N
Accordingly, we can conclude that λi (pi = p) ≥ λi (pi = 0), with strict inequality when the
following condition holds.

n 
1 + (N + 1) αh0  + (N + 1) λi τ y − p = γ (N − n) pf 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N − n) p) .
N

(83)

(Part 3: Effect of increase in number of payments) If n voters receive a payment, then
the value λ∗ changes as follows:
• If h0 (λτ (N + 1) y − 0.5y + κy) ≤

N
(N +1)α ,

then


α Np h0 λτ (N + 1) y − 0.5y + κy − np
− h0 λ∗ τ (N + 1) y +  −
∂λ∗
N

=

∂n
τ N y 1 − α(NN+1) · h0 λ∗ τ (N + 1) y +  − np
N
This implies

∂λ∗
∂n

obtain

(84)

> 0.

• If h0 (λτ (N + 1) y − 0.5y + κy) >
∂λ∗
∂n

np 
N

N
(N +1)α ,

then applying the Envelope Theorem, we

> 0 as above.

If the voter receives no payment, pi = 0 and λi (pi = 0) = λ∗ . From the previous results, λ∗
increases in n. If the voter receives a payment, pi = p and applying the Envelope Theorem in
(79),
γ (−1) pf 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N − n) p)
− γτ y (λi − λe ) (N − n) p2 f 00 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N − n) p)
∂λp
+ γτ y (N − n)2 p2 f 00 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N − n) p)
∂n

 
∂λi
p
n 
− α (N + 1) (N + 1) τ y
−
h00 (N + 1) λi τ y +  − p = 0
∂n
N
N
∂λi
p γ (f 0 (xi ) + xi f 00 (xi )) − α NN+1 h00 (ai )
=
∂n
τ y γ (N − n)2 p2 f 00 (xi ) − α (N + 1)2 h00 (ai )

(85)

(86)

44

where
n
p
N
e
= τ y (λi − λ ) (N − n) p

ai = (N + 1) λi τ y +  −

(87)

xi

(88)

By assumption, f 0 (xi ) + xi f 00 (xi ) > 0. Since h00 (ai ) > 0, this implies that

and

Accordingly,

∂λi
∂n


∂λi
N + 1 00
< 0 if γ f 0 (xi ) + xi f 00 (xi ) > α
h (ai )
∂n
N

(89)


∂λi
N + 1 00
> 0 if γ f 0 (xi ) + xi f 00 (xi ) < α
h (ai )
∂n
N

(90)

> 0 if the reciprocity effect (the reduced benefit of offering a higher threshold

to the politician) is smaller than the inequality aversion effect (the reduced cost of a lower
level of inequality).

A.6

Proof of Prediction 5

(Part 1: Set of thresholds sustainable in equilibrium) The politician does not receive a
payment, and therefore he does not act reciprocally. His preferences take the form:
Up = max Ep + η · m

N
X

!
Ei

−α·h

i=1

N
1 X
Ei
Ep −
N

!
(91)

i=1

that is, he derives utility from his own earnings and disutility from inequality (how much his
earnings deviate from the mean voter income).
If he chooses to expropriate λp τ Y, the politician derives utility
Up = 0.5y + λp τ Y + (1 − ρ) (0.5y + ) + ηm (N y (1 − λp τ − ρκ) + np)


n 
−αh 0.5y + λp τ N y + (1 − ρ) (0.5y + ) − (1 − λp τ − ρκ) y + p
N

(92)

(Part 1a: Politician’s expropriation if he fails to win reelection) Consider the case in
which ρ = 1 (i.e., the politician fails to win reelection). Then, the politician’s payoff is higher
than the average payoff of voters whenever the following conditions hold — in other words,
whenever his level of expropriation is sufficiently high.
0.5y + λp τ Y
λp

n
p
N
n
(1 − κ) y + N p − 0.5y
≥ λp =
τ y (N + 1)
> (1 − λp τ − κ) y +

(93)

45

In this case, the politician’s utility is maximized at expropriation level λDEV
such that
p


τ Y − ητ Y m0 N y 1 − λDEV
τ − ρκ + np
p





Y
n
1
0
DEV
DEV
=0
−αh 0.5y + λp
τ Y − 1 − λp
+ p
τY 1 +
τ −κ
N
N
N

(94)

This can be rewritten as follows.
1 − ηm0 (N (1 − λp τ − ρκ) y + np) =



N +1 0 N +1
n 
DEV
α
h
τ Y λp
+ 0.5y − (1 − κ) y + p
N
N
N

(95)

If λDEV
≥ λp , then the most profitable deviation for the politician would be choose
p
λDEV
∈ [λp , λ]. The value λDEV
= λ if
p
p
T − ηT m0 (N y (1 − λτ − ρκ) + np)


n 
−αh0 0.5y + λτ Y − (1 − λτ − κ) y + p
τ y (N + 1) > 0
N

(96)

(Part 1b: Politician’s expropriation if he wins reelection) Now, consider the case in
which ρ = 0 (i.e., the politician wins reelection). Then, the politician’s payoff is always higher
(denoting
than the average payoff of voters. The politician’s utility is maximized at λRE
p
reelection) such that
0

1 − ηm N 1 −

T
λKEP
τ
p



N +1 0
− ρκ y + np = α
h
N




N +1
1
RE
τ Y λp + y +  −
(Y + np) .
N
N
(97)

Y
.
If κ N
< λDEV
< 0.5yp +  (as in the experiment), then λRE
p
p

(Part 1c: Determining the minimum threshold sustainable in equilibrium)
Consider the minimum value of λ∗ at which the politician would not be replaced, and a
deviation with replacement would not be profitable. This is defined implicitly by the
minimum of the set of solutions to:
yp + λ∗ τ Y +  + ηm (N (1 − λ∗ τ − ρκ) y + np)


N +1 ∗
1
−αh yp +
λ τY +  −
(Y + np)
N
N


DEV
0.5y + λp
τ Y + ηm N 1 − λDEV
τ − ρκ y + np
p


N + 1 DEV
1
−αh 0.5y +
λp
τY
((1 − κ) Y + np)
N
N

(98)

T . Since the politician’s
To characterize the set of PSNE, we need to compare λ∗ and λKEP
p

46

T , we know that
utility with reelection is maximized at λKEP
p


T
up (λ∗ |ρ = 0) ≤ up λKEP
|ρ = 0
p

(99)

T , the solution to equation
Notice that, given the strict concavity of Up , with an interior λKEP
p
 l r
T ≤ λr such that
(98) may not be unique: there exists an interval λp , λp , with λlp ≤ λKEP
p
 lp r 
the politician would not find it profitable to deviate whenever λp ∈ λp , λp . However, if the
T , the politician will choose λKEP T .
politician is reelected and has the ability to choose λKEP
p
p

Thus for values λp ≥ λrp , the politician would deviate. Hence, we can conclude that λ∗ = λlp ,
T.
and λ∗ < λKEP
p

(Part 2: Effect of increasing n on the set of thresholds sustainable in equilibrium)
Consider the change in n in equation (98):
∂λ∗
=
∂n

∂λDEV
p
∂n


τ Y 1 − α NN+1 h0 (W ) − ηm0 (ZD ) + α [h0 (W ) − h0 (X)] Np + ηN [m0 (ZD ) − m0 (ZP )]

τ Y 1 − α NN+1 h0 (X) − ηm0 (ZP )
(100)

We define the following variables.

n 
p
(N + 1) τ yλDEV
+
0.5y
−
(1
−
κ)
y
+
p
N


n
X = y + (N + 1) λ∗ τ y +  − y + p
N

ZD = N y 1 − λDEV
τ − ρκ + np
p
W

ZP

=



∗

= N y (1 − λ τ − ρκ) + np

(101)
(102)
(103)
(104)

We can note that ZD < ZP , m0 (ZD ) − m0 (ZP ) > 0
Notice that, from (95),
1 − ηm0 (ZD ) − α

N +1 0
h (W ) = 0
N

(105)

N +1 0
h (X) > 0
N

(106)

In addition, from λ∗ < λRE
and equation (97),
p
1 − ηm0 (ZP ) − α
This yields

p
N +1 0
0
∂λ∗
N 1 − α N h (X) − ηm (ZD )

=
∂n
τ Y 1 − α NN+1 h0 (X) − ηm0 (ZP )

(107)

∂λ∗
>0
∂n

(108)

47

(Part 3: Voter’s choice of expropriation threshold)
The utility of voter i when the expropriation fraction is λp can be written as follows.

N
X
1
Ej 
= max Ei + ηm Ep + (N − 1)
Ej  − α · h  Ep −
N
j=1
j6=i



n
+γ · f τ yN (λp − λe ) pi − p
N


Ui





X

(109)

Denote by ni the number of payments given to other voters than voter i. Thus ni = n if pi = 0
and ni = n − 1 if pi = p. If the politician is reelected, then the voters’ earnings are below the
average. Voter i0 s preferred level of expropriation is then given by:
λi = arg max y (1 − λp τ ) + pi + ηm (N y + λp τ y +  + ni p)
λp ∈[λ∗ ,λ]




N +1
n
n 
−α · h y +  +
λp τ Y − y − p + γ · f τ yN (λp − λe ) pi − p (110)
N
N
N
Accordingly, the first-order condition for an internal solution for λi is as follows.


n
N +1
λp τ Y − p
−1 + ηm (N y + λp τ y +  + ni p) − α (N + 1) h  +
N
N
0
e
+γ (N pi − np) f (τ y (λp − λ ) (N pi − np)) = 0
0

0

(111)

If pi = 0, the first-order condition is
0

0



−1 + ηm (N y + λp τ y +  + np) − α (N + 1) h

N +1
n
+
λp τ Y − p
N
N



+γ (−np) f 0 (τ y (λp − λe ) (−np)) ≤ 0

(112)

Since
γ (−np) f 0 (τ y (λp − λe ) (−np)) < 0

(113)

if ηm0 (N y + λp τ y +  + ni p) is sufficiently high, then λi (pi = 0) > λ∗ . Otherwise,
λi (pi = 0) = λ∗ .
If pi = p, the first-order condition is
0

0

−1 + ηm (N y + λp τ y +  + np − p) − α (N + 1) h
+γ (−np) f 0 (τ y (λp − λe ) (−np)) ≤ 0



N +1
n
+
λp τ Y − p
N
N


(114)

48

Then, λi (pi = p) ≥ λ∗ , holding with strict inequality when the following condition holds.
−1 + ηm0 (N y + λp τ y +  + np − p)


N +1
n
− α (N + 1) h0  +
λp τ Y − p
N
N
0
e
+ γ (N − n) pf (τ y (λp − λ ) (N − n) p) = 0

(115)

Since
m0 (N y + λp τ y +  + np − p) > m0 (N y + λp τ y +  + np)

(116)

and
γ (N − n) gf 0 (τ y (λp − λe ) (N − n) p) > 0 > γ (−np) f 0 (τ y (λp − λe ) (−np))

(117)

it follows that
λi (pi = p) ≥ λi (pi = 0) ≥ λ∗

(118)

(Part 4: Effect of increase in number of payments)
If pi = p, and the reciprocity or altruism effects are of sufficient magnitude, λi (pi = p) > λ∗ .
The first-order condition for λi is

n 
−1 + ηm0 (N y + λi τ y +  + (n − 1)p) − α (N + 1) h0  + (N + 1) λi τ y − p
N
+γ (N p − np) f 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N p − np)) = 0
(119)
Applying the Envelope Theorem yields
γf 0 (xi ) + γxi f 00 (xi ) − ηm00 (bi ) − α NN+1 h00 (ai )
∂λi
p
=
∂n
τ y γ (N − n)2 p2 f 00 (xi ) + ηm00 (bi ) − α (N + 1)2 λp h00 (ai )

(120)

where
xi = τ y (λi − λe ) (N − n) p

(121)

bi = N y + λi τ y +  + np − p

(122)

By assumption, f 0 (xi ) + xi f 00 (xi ) > 0. Since h00 (ai ) > 0 this implies that

and


∂λi
N + 1 00
< 0 if γ f 0 (xi ) + xi f 00 (xi ) − ηm00 (bi ) > α
h (ai )
∂n
N

(123)


∂λi
N + 1 00
> 0 if γ f 0 (xi ) + xi f 00 (xi ) − ηm00 (bi ) < α
h (ai )
∂n
N

(124)

Given weak altruism, the voter who does not receive a payment chooses λi (pi = 0) = λ∗ .
Then,

∂λi (pi = 0)
∂λ∗
=
> 0.
∂n
∂n

(125)

49

Given strong altruism, if the voter receives no payment, pi = 0, and

n 
1 + α (N + 1) h0  + (N + 1) λi τ y − p
N
+ γnpf 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (−np)) = ηm0 (N y + λp τ y +  + np)

(126)

Applying the Envelope Theorem,
∂λi
p
∂λi
+ α (N + 1) h00 (·) − α (N + 1)2 λp τ yh00 (·)
∂n
N
∂n
 2 00
∂λi
V
e
2 2 00
0
+γτ y λ − λ np f (·) + γτ yn p f (·)
− γpf (·) = 0
∂n
ηpm00 (·) + ητ ym00 (·)

Thus

∂λi (pi = 0)
p γf 0 (xi0 ) + γxi0 f 00 (xi0 ) − ηm00 (bi0 ) − α NN+1 h00 (ai )
=
∂n
τ y γn2 p2 f 00 (xi0 ) + ηm00 (bi0 ) − α (N + 1)2 λi h00 (ai )

(127)

(128)

where
ai = (N + 1) λi τ y +  −
xi0 = τ y (λi − λe ) (−n) p

n
p
N

bi0 = N y + λi τ y +  + ng

(129)
(130)
(131)

Then,

and


∂λi (pi = 0)
N + 1 00
< 0 if γ f 0 (xi0 ) + xi0 f 00 (xi0 ) − ηm00 (bi0 ) > α
h (ai )
∂n
N

(132)


∂λi (pi = 0)
N + 1 00
> 0 if γ f 0 (xi0 ) + xi0 f 00 (xi0 ) − ηm00 (bi0 ) < α
h (ai )
∂n
N

(133)

(Part 5: Existence of functions such that responses to increasing n diverge)
Since xi0 < xi , it follows that f 0 (xi0 ) > f 0 (xi ) . Thus for any functions m(·) and h(·), there
exists function f (·) such that


N + 1 00
γ f 0 (xi0 ) + xi0 f 00 (xi0 ) −ηm00 (bi0 ) > α
h (ai ) > γ f 0 (xi ) + xi f 00 (xi ) −ηm00 (bi ) (134)
N
and so

∂λi (pi = 0)
∂λi (pi = p)
< 0 and
>0
∂n
∂n

Note that

∂λi
∂n

(135)

> 0 if the reciprocity effect and the altruism effect are jointly smaller in

magnitude than the inequality aversion effect (the reduced cost of lower levels of inequality).

A.7

Proof of Prediction 7

We can demonstrate the result by considering an example. Consider a polity with N = 3
voters who vote retrospectively. Each voter chooses to reelect the incumbent if his utility Ui
from reelection is higher than some benchmark U i , where U 1 < U 2 < U 3 . This is equivalent to
50

a valence parameter that varies across voters. Each voter’s utility when the politician extracts
λp and remains in office is given by




N
X
X
1
Ej  (136)
Ui = Ei + pi + γf (τ yN (λp − λe ) (pi − pe )) + ηm 
Ej  − α · h  Ep −
N
j=1

j6=i

where
Ei = (1 − τ ) · yi + (1 − λp ) · τ

(137)

Ep = y +  + λp · τ · N

(138)

and

First, without any payments, utility in the case of reelection can be written as




N
X
X
1
Ui = Ei + ηm 
Ej  − α · h  Ep −
Ej 
N
j6=i

(139)

j=1

Thus, we can conclude
Ui = U = y (1 − λp τ ) + η · m (N y +  + λp τ y) − α · h ((N + 1)λp τ y + ) .

(140)

Assume that, without any payments U 1 < U < U 2 < U 3 .

(Part 1: Vote-buying with individual targeting) The politician has a fixed budget
P = p to use for vote buying. With individual targeting, the politician can make a payment p
to voter 2 to ensure that this voter is at least indifferent between the utility from reelecting
the politician and the outside option. However, voter 1 responds to the payment as well due
to the reciprocal function f (·), yielding a new level of utility in case of reelection.
U1new = y (1 − λp τ ) + η · m (N y +  + λp τ y) − α · h ((N + 1)λp τ y + )

 p 
+γf τ yN (λp − λe ) −
.
N

(141)

If U1new < U 1 , then the politician fails to win reelection due to the backlash from voter 1.
Let λind
be the maximum value of the expropriation fraction that the politician can choose in
p
equilibrium such that, with the payment p, voter 2 is indifferent between reelecting the
politician or not. If p is paid to voter 2 only (individual targeting), such that U2 (λind
p ) = U 2,



p
ind
p − α · h (N + 1)λind
τ
y
+

−
+
α
·
h
(N
+
1)λ
τ
y
+

p
p
N




p
e
= U 2 − U.
+γf τ yN λind
p−
p −λ
N

(142)

51

(Part 2: Vote-buying with community targeting)
With community-level targeting, the budget P is split among multiple voters. If

p
2

is paid to

voters 1 and 2 instead (community targeting), and the politician expropriates λp , with ρ = 0,
voters 1 and 2 each receive utility


p
p
p
Ui λp ;
= U + − α · h (N + 1)λp τ y +  −
+ α · h ((N + 1)λp τ y + )
2 
N
 2


p
p
p
−
+γf τ yN (λp − λe )
+ ηm N y +  + λp τ y +
− ηm (N y +  + λp τ y)(143)
.
2 N
2
Let λ∗p be the value of λp at which the above expression equals U 2 .
(Part 3: Comparing individual and community targeting)
Consider a politician who expropriates λind
p . Then

h 

p
p
p i
ind
ind
ind
Ui λind
;
−
U
(λ
)
=
α
·
h
(N
+
1)λ
τ
y
+

−
−
h
(N
+
1)λ
τ
y
+

−
2 p
p
p
p
N
h  2


i N
ind
ind
− α · h (N + 1)λp τ y +  − h (N + 1)λp τ y + 
h 

 p



p 
p i
e
ind
e
−
λ
+ γ · f τ yN λind
−
−
f
τ
yN
λ
−
λ
p
−
p
p
2 N 
N
h 
i p
p
ind
ind
+ η · m N y +  + λp τ y +
− m N y +  + λp τ y − .
(144)
2
2
This can be re-written as follows.

p
− U2 (λind
Ui λind
;
p )=
p
2
 p

h 



p i
p 
e
ind
e
p
−
γ · f τ yN λind
−
λ
−
−
f
τ
yN
λ
−
λ
p
p
2 N 
N
h 
i p
p
ind
ind
+ η · m N y +  + λp τ y +
− m N y +  + λp τ y − .
(145)
2
2

p
ind
ind
ind p
If Ui λind
p ; 2 − U2 (λp ), then Ui λp ; 2 > U 2 , and the politician can increase λp above λp .
For a very small value of p, this condition requires that the voters exhibit sufficiently strong
altruism:
 p





p
p 
e
e
η · m0 N y +  + λind
· f 0 τ yN λind
> 1 + γτ y · λind
−
(146)
p τy +
p −λ
p −λ
2
2 N
Thus, when the marginal utility from altruism is sufficiently large, we conclude that the
politician can expropriate more and still win reelection when payments are distributed to two
voters instead of just one voter.

A.8

Proof of Prediction 8

The first order condition with respect to λ leads to an expression in which the term
γ (N − n) gf 0 (τ y (λi − λe ) (N − n) p)

(147)

52

enters additivively. Applying the Envelope Theorem, it follows that an increase in γ leads to
an increase in λi , given the concavity of the f (·) function.

A.9

Proof of Prediction 9

A higher value of λ increases the politician’s income in case of deviation. Thus, the minimum
value λ∗ that can be sustained in equilibrium (weakly) decreases. This follows from applying
the Envelope Theorem to the condition for determining λ∗ .

A.10

Proof of Prediction 10

With altruism and inequality aversion (reciprocity is not relevant, since there are no
payments), the maximization problem for voter i is:





λi = arg max yi − λp τ y + ηm y + λp τ y +  +
λp ∈[λ∗ ,λ]

X

yj 

j6=i





−α · h y +  + (N + 1) λp τ y −

X

yj 

(148)

j

Notice that all voters still pay the same tax, regardless of their endowment.
With weak altruism,

ηm0 y +


X

yj + λp τ y +  < 1

(149)

j6=i

Thus the first-order condition for λi is
0

P



−1 − α · (N + 1) · h y +  + (N + 1) λp τ y −


X
+ηm y +
yj + λp τ y +  < 0

j

yj



N
(150)

j6=i

and therefore λi = λ∗ , regardless of the value of yi .
With strong altruism,

ηm0 yp +


X

yj + λp τ y +  > 1

(151)

j6=i

Accordingly, there will be an interior solution to the voter’s problem if ηm0 (·) is sufficiently

53

large. If this is the case,
P


j yj
0
−1 − α · (N + 1) · h y +  + (N + 1) λp τ y −
N


X
+ηm0 y +
yj + λp τ yi +  = 0

(152)

j6=i

and λi > λ∗p for all voters.
For the voter with higher endowment:

n 
−1 − α · (N + 1) · h0 y +  + (N + 1) λp τ y − y − p
N
+ηm0 (N y + λp τ y +  + (n − 1) p) = 0

(153)

For the voter with lower endowment:

n 
−1 − α · (N + 1) · h0 y +  + (N + 1) λp τ y − y − p
N
+ηm0 (N y + λp τ y +  + np) = 0

(154)

Therefore, the analysis is the same as in the proof to Prediction 5, and
λi (y) < λi (y + g).

(155)

54

