                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE INTRODUCTION OF TASERS AND POLICE USE OF FORCE:
               EVIDENCE FROM THE CHICAGO POLICE DEPARTMENT

                                            Bocar Ba
                                         Jeffrey Grogger

                                      Working Paper 24202
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24202


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2018




We thank Scott Ashworth, John MacDonald, Emily Owens, Daniel Tannenbaum, and participants
at the 2017 Transatlantic Workshop on the Economics of Crime for helpful comments. We thank
the staff at the Invisible Institute for access to and help with the data. Any errors are our own.
Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Bocar Ba and Jeffrey Grogger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Introduction of Tasers and Police Use of Force: Evidence from the Chicago Police Department
Bocar Ba and Jeffrey Grogger
NBER Working Paper No. 24202
January 2018
JEL No. K4

                                             ABSTRACT

In March 2010, the Chicago Police Department changed its Taser policy, issuing the weapons to
patrol officers instead of largely restricting their use to sergeants. We used that policy change to
obtain difference-in-difference estimates of how the availability of Tasers affected the types of
force employed by police, the total number of use-of-force incidents, injury rates per incident, the
total number of injuries, and the race distribution of civilians involved in use-of-force incidents.
The policy change initially led to a large increase in the use of Tasers, with limited substitution
from other types of force. After a period of re-training, substitution between Tasers and other types
of force, both greater and lesser, increased. Police injuries fell, but neither injury rates nor the
number of injuries to civilians were affected. There is no evidence that Tasers led to a reduction in
police use of firearms.


Bocar Ba
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
bocarba@uchicago.edu

Jeffrey Grogger
Irving B. Harris Professor of Urban Policy
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jgrogger@uchicago.edu
I. Introduction

       A key role of the police is to protect people and property. This often requires the use of

force, since many would-be arrestees would rather take their chances with patrol officers than

submit voluntarily to being arrested. Roughly 20 percent of arrests entail some use of force on the

part of police (Eith and Durose 2011).

       At the same time, police use of force is controversial. One dimension of controversy

involves the frequency of police use of force, with complaints that police use force even when

conflicts could be resolved by other means. Another involves the level of force, with claims that the

type of force deployed by police is disproportionate to the level of resistance offered by suspects.

       Either way, excess force can undermine the legitimacy of the police (Tyler 2004; Ramsey

and Robinson 2015; Lum and Nagin 2017; Nagin and Manski 2017). It can also violate civil rights.

In the US, courts have held that excess use of force violates the U.S. Constitution’s protections

against undue search and seizure (ACLU n.d.; Neuscheler and Freidlin 2015). Controversy over

police use of force has led to public unrest, including recent cases of mass demonstrations in locales

such as Baltimore, Chicago, and Ferguson, Missouri.

       To alleviate the controversy, many police departments have adopted weapons involving

less-than-lethal force. One example is pepper spray, which was widely deployed by US police

agencies during the 1980s and 1990s (Smith et al 2010). A more recent example is the Taser, a

conductive energy device (CED) that shoots wired barbs at its target, incapacitating him or her by

means of an electrical charge. The idea behind such weapons is to provide patrol officers with a

means of subduing resistant subjects that reduces the risk of injury or death relative to other means

of force.
        Indeed, injury risk has been the focus of most previous work on CED’s. Most studies

involve a cross-sectional design, comparing incidents in which Tasers were used to those in which

they were not, although a few studies have employed a before-and-after approach. The evidence is

somewhat mixed, although most studies have found that CED’s reduce the likelihood of injury,

particularly to police, in the typical use-of-force incident (Seattle Police Department 2003;

Jenkinson et al 2006; Smith et al 2007; MacDonald et al 2009; Taylor et al 2009; Lin and Jones

2010; Smith et al 2010; Taylor et al 2010; Kaminski et al 2015).

        In this paper we study injury risk, but we also analyze a range of important outcomes that

have received less attention in the literature. We start by analyzing substitution between Tasers and

other types of force. Subject to some data limitations, this lets us determine whether Tasers

substitute for greater or lesser types of force. This includes firearms, which pose a particularly high

risk for innocent bystanders as well as the target subject. The issue of substitution between Tasers

and firearms is also important because it has rarely been tested, even as several large police

departments have recently established or expanded their Taser arsenals on the grounds that they

reduce police shootings (Bustamante 2017, Hinkel 2017, Ho 2017).

        We also ask how the availability of Tasers affects the total number of use-of-force incidents.

If police become overly reliant on the devices, a phenomenon referred to by Alpert and Dunham

(2010) as “lazy cop syndrome,” then the availability of Tasers could lead to an increase in use of

force. Relatedly, we ask how Tasers affect the total number of injuries to police and civilians. If

the availability of Tasers increases police use of force, then injuries could potentially rise, even if

injury rates fall.

        Finally, we estimate whether the introduction of Tasers changed the race distribution of

civilians against whom force is used. Use-of-force incidents involve minority suspects in




                                                    2
disproportion to their representation in the population (Fryer 2016). Our analysis asks whether the

introduction of Tasers reinforces or alleviates that disproportion.

        Our approach makes use of a sizeable expansion of the deployment of Tasers undertaken by

the Chicago Police Department (CPD). Prior to March 2010, Tasers were issued only to sergeants

and field training officers. Starting in that month, CPD changed its policy, issuing roughly 400

Tasers to patrol officers. Its goal was to deploy one weapon per patrol car (Sweeney 2010).

        We analyze how the availability of Tasers affects police use of force by way of a difference-

in-difference analysis. Our comparison group consists of sergeants and field training officers,

hereafter referred to as “sergeants,” to whom Tasers were available during our entire sample period.

Our treatment group consists of patrol officers, to whom Tasers first became widely available after

the March 2010 policy change. We compare before-and-after changes in the use of force between

patrol officers and sergeants in order to estimate how the availability of Tasers affected patrol

officers’ use of force.

        Figure 1 helps motivate the analysis. There we plot use-of-force incidents involving Tasers

for the period 2005-2015. We highlight three key features of the Figure here, postponing a detailed

discussion of sources and definitions to Section III below. First, the use of Tasers rose sharply

beginning in March 2010. Second, Taser use fell almost as sharply in late 2012. Finally, Taser use

then stabilized at a rate roughly double that observed before March 2010.

        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides background

information. We provide more discussion of Tasers; weapons policy at CPD; prior work on the

effect of intermediate-force weapons; and sketch a theoretical model that helps explain our findings.

Section III discusses the data and Section IV discusses our difference-in-difference approach in

more detail. Section V presents results, followed by our conclusions in Section VI.




                                                   3
II. Background

         A. What is a Taser and what does it do?

         The Taser is a conducted energy device (CED) manufactured by Axon, formerly known as

Taser International. Tasers are in widespread use, deployed by 15,000 police agencies (National

Institute of Justice 2011). They have been discharged over 2 million times (LAAW International

2017).

         When used in “probe mode,” the hand-held weapon fires two probes, or darts, that are

attached to the handset by means of thin wires that can be up to 30 feet long. It produces 50,000

volts of electricity at 0.004 amps, stunning and temporarily disabling its target by causing

involuntary muscular contractions (Jenkinson et al 2006; National Institute of Justice 2011). It can

also be used in “drive-stun” mode as a pain-compliance device, whereby the police officer presses

the handset directly against the target and discharges a current.

         Despite the apparent dangers, most individuals who are shot with Tasers experience no or

only minor injuries (Bozeman et al 2009). At the same time, they cause involuntary muscular

contractions, which can cause the subject to fall, leading to injuries (National Institute of Justice

20008a). More than 200 people have died after being shocked by a Taser (National Institute of

Justice 20008a, 2011). The shock is said to be excruciating painful (Braidwood Commission 2009;

Alpert and Dunham 2010). Tasers have been controversial both because of the pain they inflict and

because of the risks they pose.

         B. CPD Taser policy

         CPD first acquired Tasers in 2004. Initially they were issued only to sergeants and field

training officers. Then as now, Taser use was governed by the CPD use-of-force model, which

spells out the types of force that police officers are authorized to use in response to different levels




                                                    4
of resistance offered by subjects. Since our data source is also linked to the CPD use-of-force

model, we describe it here in some detail.

       Table 1 shows subject resistance levels, police force options, our classification of those

options, and reporting requirements. The first column shows that subjects are classified broadly as

compliers, passive resisters, active resisters, or assailants. Types of force that are an option in

response to a particular resistance level are also options against higher levels of resistance. In

general, higher levels of force are authorized for higher levels of resistance. Tasers are an option

for use against active resisters and assailants, but not against compliers or passive resisters (Chicago

Police Department 2016).

       In March 2010 CPD more than doubled the number of Tasers in their inventory, issuing

them to patrol officers for the first time with the goal of equipping all squad cars with the weapon

(Hinkel 2010). This policy change, or treatment, provides the key explanatory variable for our

analysis below. Officers must be certified in order to use Tasers; Figure 1 shows that certifications

spiked in March 2010. Use-of-force incidents involving Tasers rose sharply as well.

       In late 2012, use-of-force incidents involving Tasers fell rather abruptly. Shortly prior to that

time, CPD purchased a new model of Taser and required officers to become certified in its use

(Hinkel 2017). Figure 1 shows a sharp increase in new certifications at that time. Between the

2010 and 2012 spikes in certification, Axon changed its Taser training materials. Materials

introduced in May 2010 included health and safety issues that were not present in earlier materials,

including discussions of cardiac, pulmonary, other physiological and metabolic risks involved with

the use of Tasers, as well as higher-risk populations (Taser International 2010). Materials

introduced in July 2011 added information on legal matters, including 4th Amendment issues and




                                                    5
issues involving officers’ personal legal liability for excessive use of force (Taser International

2011).

         The new weapons and 2012 recertification involved all officers, both sergeants and patrol

officers. As such, they do not constitute an intervention whose effects we can evaluate with our

difference-in-difference approach. Nevertheless, since we thought they might change the treatment

effect associated with the March 2010 introduction of Tasers to patrol officers, we allow our

estimated treatment effects to vary before and after September 2012.

         C. Theoretical framework

         To see how the availability of a Taser might affect a police officer’s behavior, consider a

situation in which the officer seeks to arrest a subject. For simplicity, suppose the officer can use

either no force, relying solely on verbal persuasion; a low level of force, such as physical coercion;

or a high level of force, such as a firearm. Each option varies in its expected costs to the officer. The

costs involve the time involved in resolving the incident; the probability and expected extent of

injury to the officer; the probability and expected extent of injury to the subject, which the officer

may at least partially internalize; and the probability and expected extent of administrative sanction.

Under certain conditions, the police officer will choose her option on the basis of the level of

resistance she perceives from the subject: for sufficiently low resistance, she will use no force; for

somewhat greater resistance, she will use the low-force option; and for a high level of resistance,

she will use the high level of force.

         Now add an intermediate force option between the high and low levels, such as a CED. The

important observation is that the new option may have lower costs than both the low-and high-force

alternatives. Relative to the high-force option, the CED may have less-dire potential consequences

for the suspect. The CED may also entail a lower likelihood of being labelled as an excessive use of




                                                    6
force, and thus less likelihood of provoking an administrative sanction. Under these conditions, the

officer would prefer the CED to the firearm, provided the suspect’s resistance is not too high. This

is how an intermediate-force option could reduce police use of firearms, often among the goals of

adopting such weapons.

       CED’s may also entail less risk of physical injury to the officer than the low-force option, as

discussed in Section IV below. At intermediate levels of suspect resistance, the officer may choose

the CED over physical coercion. If so, the availability of CED’s may cause the officer to substitute

away from both the low- and high-force options.

       Beyond substitution, the availability of CED’s could lead to an increase in the overall use of

force. This may happen if the cost of using CED’s is lower than that of using no force. For

example, a CED may speed the resolution of an incident relative to verbal persuasion, which can be

time-consuming. The notion that police could see CED’s as an easy way to resolve even low-level

incidents has been referred to as “lazy cop syndrome” and has led to concerns about police overuse

of the weapon (National Institute of Justice 2011).

       D. Prior research

       The question of weapon substitution has received relatively little attention. Sousa et al

(2010) conducted a field-training experiment with 32 police officers each in the treatment and

control groups. The control group was equipped with their usual set of weapons; to that the

treatment group added Tasers. In response to low to moderate subject resistance, none of the

officers deployed their firearms. In response to potentially lethal resistance, 17 members of the

control group and 7 members of the treatment group deployed their firearms. Although the

difference was statistically significant, the small samples and training-ground setting raise questions

as to whether their results would generalize. Lin and Jones (2010) track weapon use among the




                                                   7
Washington State Patrol from 2005 to 2007, corresponding to one year before and one year after the

introduction of Tasers. Over the entire three-year period, they registered only 13 uses of firearms,

which provide an insufficient basis for inference. Finally, Taylor et al (2009) compared changes in

firearm use among a set of law enforcement jurisdictions that adopted CEDs during their sample

period with a set that did not. They found no significant effect of CED adoption on firearm use,

although their sample seems to have included only about 100 incidents involving firearms.1

       Most of the research on the effects of CED’s has focused on the link between those weapons

and injury risk to police and suspects. The studies differ in their details; some analyze the

availability of CED’s whereas other focus on their actual use. One feature common to the great

majority of studies on injury risk is their use of individual use-of-force incidents as the unit of

observation. A typical study relates the occurrence of an injury to characteristics of the incident as

well as an indicator for whether a CED was used (Jenkinson et al 2006; Smith et al 2007;

MacDonald et al 2009; Lin and Jones 2010; Smith et al 2010; Taylor and Woods 2010; Terrill and

Paoline 2011; Paoline et al 2012; Taylor et al 2012; Kaminski et al 2015). Although there are

exceptions, most of these studies credit CED’s for reducing injuries per incident among both

subjects and police.

       A limitation of most prior studies is that they speak to only one mechanism by which the

availability of CED’s may affect injuries. As discussed in the previous subsection, the availability

of CED’s could affect the number of use-of-force incidents as well as injury rates per incident. The

effect of CED’s on the total number of subject or officer injuries involves their effects on both the

injury rate per incident, an intensive margin, and the number of use-of-force incidents, an extensive




1
  In their regression tables, the largest samples that the authors report include fewer than 10,000
incidents. They indicate that only about 1 percent of incidents involved firearms.

                                                    8
margin. If CED’s increase the use of force by a sufficient amount, total injuries could rise despite a

reduction in injury rates.

       Only two studies provide any evidence on the question of whether the availability of CED’s

increases police use of force. Both were longitudinal studies that focused primarily on other

outcomes. However, both provided before-and-after tabulations on the number of use-of-force

incidents. Lin and Jones (2010) reported that the number of use-of-force incidents involving the

Washington State Patrol rose from 269 in 2005, the year before Tasers were adopted, to 469 in

2007, the year after. Smith et al (2010) report a sharp increase in the number of use-of-force

incidents per month in Orlando, Florida after the police department deployed CED’s. They report a

decrease in Austin, Texas, although they indicate that there is some ambiguity in their Austin data

as to whether they are measuring unique incidents or the number of officers involved in the

incidents.

       The data from Washington State and Orlando are consistent with the notion that the

availability of CED’s could lead to an overall increase in use-of-force incidents. At the same time,

they do not establish a causal link, and it is important to emphasize that the authors do not construe

their results as such. Many factors that could contribute to an increase in use of force besides the

introduction of CED’s. One example would be an increase in crime; another could be a rise in

levels of violence in the conduct of narcotics markets. In Section IV, we detail our method for

distinguishing the effects of CED availability from trends in other factors that influence police use

of force.

III. Data

       Our main source of data comes from CPD Tactical Response Reports (TRR). CPD requires

police officers to fill out a TRR after use-of-force incidents in a manner that is tied to the CPD use-




                                                   9
of-force model. As shown in Table 1, a TRR must be filed after use-of-force incidents involving

subjects classified as active resisters or assailants.2 For subjects classified as cooperative or as

passive resisters, police are required to fill out a TRR if the subject is injured or alleges an injury. A

TRR must also be filed for “all incidents where a subject obstructs a police officer when the

obstructing is a physical act between the subject and the officer” (Chicago Police Department

2016b).

       TRR’s require a supervisor’s approval. The supervisor is then supposed to notify the

external oversight agency for incidents involving the use of deadly force, the discharge of a firearm,

the discharge of a Taser, the discharge of pepper spray and other chemical weapon, or an allegation

of excessive force. In principle, the oversight agency is required to investigate those incidents.

However, because of limited resources, the agency does not investigate them all. Starting in 2009,

for example, the oversight agency chose to investigate only those Taser incidents involving serious

injury or death, a minor (17 and under) or a senior citizen (65 or older).

       We obtained the TRR data by means of Freedom of Information Act requests for the period

from 2004 through early 2016. We make use of data from 2005 to 2015 because reporting for 2004

and early 2016 seemed incomplete. The key variables in the dataset include the date of the incident,

number of involved oﬃcers, injured oﬃcers, suspects’ race and ethnicity, injured suspects, and the

type of force used against the suspect. One limitation of our dataset is that it includes no records for

incidents involving juvenile suspects.




2
  The exception to this rule involves subjects whose only active resistance involves fleeing and
when the member's actions did not extend beyond verbal commands and/or control holds utilized in
conjunction with handcuffing and searching techniques which do not result in injury or allegation of
injury.

                                                    10
       We classify use-of-force incidents into the six categories shown in Table 1 according to the

highest type of force used in the incident, which is a common practice in the literature. Our type-of-

force hierarchy comes from the CPD use-of-force model. Table 2 reports the distribution of use-of-

force incidents over our sample period. Only 15 percent of incidents involved no or minor force.

This probably reflects reporting requirements. No and minor force are the only types of force that

are authorized for compliant or passively resistant subjects. As mentioned above, TRR’s are not

required for such incidents unless the subject is injured. We suspect that many incidents involving

minor force or less that do not result in injuries are unreported.

       Of the 36,112 use-of-force incidents reported during our sample period, 30,641 involved

more than minor use of force. A majority involved the use of intermediate force; Tasers were

involved in another 10 percent of the incidents. More than one in six of the incidents resulted in the

use of major force. Seven hundred thirty-three of the incidents involved firearms, a much larger

number than were available in previous studies.

       The third and fourth columns of the Table report injury rates per incident to police and

suspects, respectively. These injuries are reported by police; the TRR specifically asks whether the

subject was injured by the police officer. The injury rates for incidents involving no and minor

force are hard to understand. On the one hand, one might expect incidents involving low levels of

force to result in low injury rates. On the other, most incidents involving low levels of force are

only required to be reported if they result in injury. The observed injury rates may reflect some

combination of reporting requirements and voluntary reporting.

       Injury rates for incidents involving intermediate force are roughly similar for police and

subjects. In contrast, injury rates for Taser-related incidents are quite different. Whereas 36.9

percent of Taser-involved incidents result in injuries to subjects, only 16.5 percent of such incidents




                                                   11
result in injuries to police officers. The situation reverses for incidents involving major use of

force, with injury rates of 53.6 percent for police and 41 percent for subjects. For incidents

involving firearms, 28.5 percent of police, and 58.1 percent of subjects, are injured. We suspect

that many of the firearm incidents in which subjects were not injured involved shots that missed

their mark.

       It’s worth highlighting that police injury rates are lower for Tasers than for both

intermediate and major uses of force. In the context of the model above, this should provide police

with an incentive to substitute toward Tasers from both lesser and greater types of force. Of course,

this incentive could be mitigated to the extent that police officers internalize risks facing subjects

when selecting among types of force, since injury rates for subjects rise with the level of force.

       One limitation of our data is that we have no information about the severity of injuries.

Although this information is reported on the TRR, it was withheld from our FOIA request on the

grounds that it referred to the subject’s medical condition. One question we can speak to indirectly

is whether probe punctures from Taser shots are included as injuries. The probes themselves are

fairly small and the punctures they produce have generally not been classified as injuries by

previous researchers (Kaminski et al 2015). Whether the probe punctures themselves are counted as

injuries is important, because doing so leads to the conclusion that Tasers raise subject injury rates

(Terrill and Paoline 2011; Kaminski et al 2015). Kaminski et al (2015) is the only study of which

we are aware that calculates injury rates with and without probe punctures. They report that the

subject injury rate from the use of Tasers is 81 percent when probe punctures are included, but only

32 percent when they are excluded. Table 2 shows a subject injury rate of 36.9 percent for use-of-

force incidents involving Tasers, suggesting that probe punctures by themselves are generally not

being counted as injuries in our data.




                                                   12
         To calculate our difference-in-difference estimates, we aggregated these incident-level data

into monthly time series. We constructed monthly data on the number of use-of-force incidents (by

type of force and total); the number of incidents involving at least one injury, to police and subjects

separately; and the number of incidents involving at least one black subject or one Hispanic subject.

Incidents and injuries are normalized by the number of police officers on the CPD payroll each

month, divided by 100,3 in order to provide commensurable magnitudes for patrol officers and

sergeants. We use the number of incidents and the number of injuries per 100 police to study the

extensive margin: how the introduction of Tasers affected the number of use-of-force incidents and

use-of-force-related injuries.

         To study injury risk, we analyze monthly injury rates constructed as the number of incidents

involving at least one injury divided by the number of incidents. Such injury rates have been the

focus of most previous research on the effects of CED’s. We use these variables to study the

intensive margin: how the introduction of Tasers affected the probability of injury to police and

subjects.

         Finally, we construct two variables reflecting the race of subjects. The first is the number of

incidents in which at least one subject was black divided by the number of incidents. The second is

a comparable measure for Hispanics. We use these variables to analyze whether the introduction of

Tasers changed the race distribution of subjects involved in use-of-force incidents.

         Table 3 presents means of our dependent variables by time period and treatment group. We

divide the sample period into the pre-intervention period, from January 2005 to February 2010; the

first post-intervention period, from March 2010 to September 2012; and the second post-

intervention period, following the change of Taser models and the re-training in late 2012, from



3
    CPD payroll data came from a separate FOIA request.

                                                   13
September 2012 to December 2015. Our treatment observations are based on incidents that

involved only patrol officers; our comparison observations are based on incidents that involved

sergeants.

       The top panel of the Table presents statistics for patrol officers. There we see that the

number of incidents involving no force, minor force, or firearms was roughly constant over time.

Intermediate-force incidents fell steadily. Taser-related incidents follow the pattern suggested by

Figure 1, rising dramatically between the pre-period and first post-period before falling substantially

during the second post-period. Incidents involving major force first rose and then fell, as did the

total number of use-of-force incidents.

       The monthly number of officer injuries per 100 officers fell steadily over the sample period.

In contrast, the monthly number of subject injuries per 100 officers rose between the pre-period and

the first post-period, then fell during the second post-period to a level slightly below where it

started. Officer injury rates/incident fell sharply between the pre-period and the first post-period,

then remained flat. Subject injury rates/incident were essentially constant. The shares of incidents

involving black and Hispanic subjects likewise were roughly constant over the sample period.

       The bottom panel of the Table presents statistics for sergeants. The monthly number of

incidents per 100 sergeants involving either no, minor, intermediate, or major force rose between all

three periods. In contrast, the number of incidents involving Tasers remained roughly constant

during the pre-treatment and first post-treatment periods, then fell markedly after the re-training that

occurred in late 2012. The use of firearms fluctuated little over the entire sample period.

IV. Identification and Estimation

       A. Identification




                                                   14
       From the monthly data described above, we seek to estimate the average effect of treatment

on the treatment group, that is, the average effect of making Tasers available to patrol officers. To

analyze identification via our difference-in-difference estimator, we adopt potential outcomes

notation that is adapted for our setting. Denote the treatment dummy by !" = 1 if Tasers are

available at time t and !" = 0 otherwise, where time t=1,…,T is measured in months, with t=1

denoting January 2005 and t=T denoting December 2015. Denote the treatment status indicator by

D=1 for the treatment group, i.e., patrol officers, and D=0 for the comparison group, i.e., sergeants.

For each month, we have one observation for each value of D, that is, one for the treatment group

and one for the comparison group.

       Let the potential outcome at time t, such as use-of-force incidents per 100 officers, be given

by &" !" . Thus &" 1 is the potential treated outcome, when Tasers are available, and &" 0 is the

potential untreated outcome, when they are not. Let t’ denote March 2010, so t≥t’ denotes the post-

treatment period and t<t’ denotes the pre-treatment period. The average effect of treatment on the

treated (ATT) at some date a>t’ is given by

'(() = * &) 1 ! = 1 − * &) 0 ! = 1 .

This is the difference between the expected treated potential outcome and the expected untreated

potential outcome among patrol officers, at some post-treatment period a. It should be thought of as

an intent-to-treat effect, since if measures the effect of the policy of making Tasers available to

patrol officers, not the effect of actually using them.

       The problem for estimation is that * &) 0 ! = 1 , the expectation of the untreated

outcome among patrol officers after Tasers were made available, cannot be estimated from the data.

It is a missing counterfactual. However, if we can invoke a parallel trends assumption, we can

nevertheless identify the ATT via a difference-in-difference estimator.




                                                   15
       To derive the parallel trends condition, let period t=b denote some pre-treatment date. The

population analogue of the difference-in-difference estimator can be written as

Δ) = * &) 1 ! = 1 - * &. 0 ! = 1 − {* &) 1 ! = 0 - * &. 1 ! = 0 }.

The difference-in-difference estimator subtracts the before-after difference in the comparison group,

* &) 1 ! = 0 - * &. 1 ! = 0 , from the before-after difference in the treatment group,

* &) 1 ! = 1 - * &. 0 ! = 1 . It uses the comparison group to adjust for changes that would

have taken place in the treatment group had Tasers not been issued to patrol officers. The before-

after difference for the comparison group involves treated outcomes &) 1 and &. 1 because

sergeants had access to Tasers during our entire sample period.

       Adding and subtracting the missing counterfactual * &) 0 ! = 1 and rearranging terms,

we can rewrite the difference-in-difference estimator as

Δ) = '(() + {* &) 0 ! = 1 − * &. 0 ! = 1 } − {* &) 1 ! = 0 - * &. 1 ! = 0 }.

In this expression, the first term in braces represents a counterfactual trend: it represents the trend in

outcomes involving patrol officers that would have obtained had patrol officers never been issued

Tasers. The second term in braces represents the trend in outcomes involving sergeants, who had

access to Tasers the entire time. Our parallel trend assumption involves these two terms: if the

counterfactual trend among outcomes involving patrol officers equals the trend in outcomes

involving sergeants, then the difference-in-differences estimator identifies the ATT.

       A sufficient condition for the parallel trends assumption to hold at all time periods can be

written as:

* &" 0 ! = 1 − * &" 1 ! = 0 = 4 for all t.




                                                   16
For t≥t’, the first term on the left side of the above expression cannot be estimated because it

represents a missing counterfactual. However, for t<t’, the expressions can be estimated and used

to test the validity of the assumption.

       B. Estimation

       For estimation, we can define the observed dependent variables, such as use-of-force

incidents/100 police, in terms of the potential outcomes, the treatment dummy, and the treatment

status dummy as

&5" = (1 − ! + !!" )&" 1 + !(1 − !" )&" 0 ,

which implies that &8" = &" 1 for t=1, … (; &;" = &" 0 , < < < > ; and &;" = &" 1 , < ≥ < > . In the

development above, we allowed the ATT to vary by month. For estimation purposes, we impose

more structure, allowing the ATT to vary between the first and second post-treatment periods, but

assuming it to be constant within those periods. Letting <" denote September 2012, we assume

'((" = A; for t=< > ,…, <"-1, and '((" = AB for t= <",…,T. Define two post-treatment dummy

variables corresponding to these two time periods: C;" = 1(< > ≤ < < <") and CB" = 1(< ≥ <"),

where the expression 1 E = 1 if z is true and =0 otherwise.

       With these definitions, we could use ordinary least squares (OLS) to estimate A; and AB by

means of the following regression:

(1)    &5" = A8 + A; !C;" + AB !CB" + AF C;" + AG CB" + AH !+I5"              D=0,1; t=1,…,T.

In (1), there are two observations for each time period, one for the patrol officers and one for the

sergeants. The ATT’s are estimated as the coefficients on interactions between variables defined in

terms of treatment status and the post-treatment dummies. In addition, the regression includes the

two post-treatment dummies and a treatment status variable D, which equals one for the patrol




                                                   17
officers and equals zero for the sergeants. Finally, I5" is an idiosyncratic disturbance term that

varies by treatment status and over time.

       An equivalent approach to estimating A; and AB can be obtained by evaluating (1) at D =0

and D =1, then subtracting the former from the latter. This yields:

(2)   &;" − &8" = A; C;" + AB CB" + AH +I;" − I8"                          t=1,…,T.

OLS applied to (2) yields estimates of A; and AB that are algebraically identical to OLS estimates

obtained from (1). The advantage of estimating (2) is that it provides a straightforward means of

dealing with potential temporal dependence in the composite disturbance term I;" − I8" . To test for

dependence, we estimated AR(1) models that allowed for 1st-order autocorrelation in I;" − I8" . For

those few outcomes for which the autocorrelation parameter was significant, we report maximum

likelihood estimates. For the remaining outcomes, we report OLS estimates. In all cases, the two

sets of coefficients were very similar.

       We can augment this specification to test for parallel pre-treatment trends by adding pre-

treatment period dummies to (2), which is equivalent to adding interactions between those period

dummies and the treatment status dummy to (1). Since we have one monthly observation each for

patrol officers and sergeants, we aggregate months into years in order to test for parallel trends.

Define the year dummies as

'J" = 1 if month t falls within year 2000+j and 'J" = 0 otherwise, for j=5,…, 9, and

';8" = 1 if month t is January or February 2010, and =0 otherwise.

Choosing 2009 as the base year, we then generalize equation (2) as
                                            ;8
(3)   &;" − &8" = A; C;" + AB CB" + AH +    JLM KJ 'J"   + I;" − I8"                      t=1,…,T.
                                            JNO




                                                   18
The test for parallel trends is computed as a test for the joint hypothesis4

(4)   P8 : KH = ⋯ = KS = K;8 = 0.

        C. Defining the comparison group

        Up to this point, we have discussed the comparison group as consisting of sergeants, or more

precisely, of observations constructed from incidents in which sergeants were involved. However,

the specific definition of sergeant-involved incidents could have implications for our estimates. The

reason has to do with the pre-treatment deployment of Tasers. Before they were assigned to patrol

officers, Tasers were available only to sergeants. Thus, sergeants may have been called to incidents

specifically to provide Taser support. This is a type of spillover effect and means that Taser use

among sergeants may have been higher prior to treatment than it would have been otherwise.

Presumably, sergeants’ use of Tasers post-treatment would have fallen under this scenario, since

there would have been no need to call in a sergeant to provide Taser support once the weapons were

available to patrol officers.

        To gain insight into this problem and provide a potential solution, we initially worked with

two comparison groups. The first we refer to as sergeant-involved. These were constructed from

all incidents at which sergeants were present, including those at which patrol officers were present.

These would include incidents to which sergeants may have been called expressly to provide Taser

support.

        We refer to our second comparison group as sergeant-only. It was constructed from all

incidents at which only sergeants were present, usually a single sergeant acting on his own.

Presumably, these were incidents that the sergeants encountered while on patrol. It should exclude



4
   One might have concerns about the power of this test, considering the number of observations
involved. Our concerns are at least partly allayed by the fact that the test often rejects for a non-
linear alternative to the model above, as discussed in Section V.B.

                                                   19
incidents to which they were called to provide Taser support, since Tasers were available to

sergeants from the beginning of our sample period.

       Figure 2 plots the number of use-of-force incidents involving Tasers per 100 officers for

both of these potential comparison groups. Taser-related incidents were higher pre-treatment, and

fell more post-treatment, for the sergeant-involved case than for the sergeant-only case. This is

consistent with the spillover hypothesis.

       However, what is important for estimation is not so much the effect of spillovers on

sergeants’ Taser use per se, but rather its effect on their use of other weapons. The reason is that we

seek to estimate the effect of CPD’s Taser policy on the use of other weapons (and injuries and

other outcomes), and it is the before-after change in sergeants’ use of those other weapons that

affects our difference-in-difference estimates. If Tasers are substitutes for other weapons, then the

spillover effect described above may have led sergeants to use other weapons less often pre-

treatment, and more often post-treatment, than they would have in the absence of the spillover. This

would impart a downward bias (in algebraic terms) to our estimates. Depending on the rate at

which other weapons substitute for Tasers, it could also impart downward bias on our estimated

effect of the introduction of Tasers on the total use of force.

       To analyze the importance of spillovers, we estimated all regressions two ways, once with

the sergeant-involved comparison group and once with the sergeant-only group. The estimates

based on the sergeant-involved group were always algebraically smaller, consistent with the

discussion above. For this reason, we present estimates based on the sergeant-only comparison

group in the next section.

V. Results

       A. Main findings




                                                   20
        Table 4 presents estimates of the coefficients of equation (2) above, where the dependent

variables measure use-of-force incidents per 100 police, by type of force and for all types of force in

total. The coefficient on C; is the estimate of A; ; the coefficient on CB is the estimate of AB .

Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The bottom row of the table presents the p-values for

the tests of parallel trends from equation (4). They are based on the regression in equation (3).

Except for the case of Tasers themselves, none of the tests rejects the null hypothesis of parallel

trends. Figure 3 plots estimates of the KJ coefficients from equation (3), together with 90 percent

confidence intervals, for total use-of-force incidents. The joint test for parallel trends failed to

reject, as seen in at the bottom of column (7). The Figure shows that none of the individual

coefficients were significant individually, either.

        The estimated treatment effects, reported in the top two rows of Table 4, differ between the

two post-treatment time periods. We focus first on the first period, from March 2010 to August

2012, corresponding to C; . The estimate in column (4) shows, not surprisingly, that the policy

change greatly increased the use of Tasers among patrol officers. This is what Figure 1 would have

led one to expect.

        More interesting are the estimated effects of introducing Tasers on other uses of force. The

effect on incidents in the “no force” category was negative, though small and insignificant. The

availability of Tasers reduced the use of minor force by 0.064, which amounts to about 25 percent

of the pre-treatment mean among patrol officers. This coefficient is significant at the 10 percent

level. The use of intermediate and major force also fell, although only the coefficient for

intermediate force is significant, and then only at the 10 percent level. The coefficient on firearm

use is positive, contrary to expectation, though insignificant. Taken as a whole, there is marginally




                                                      21
significant evidence that the introduction of Tasers led patrol officers to substitute away from lesser

types of force, and no significant evidence that they substituted away from greater types of force.

       The coefficient in the last column shows that total number of use-of-force incidents rose

during the first period following the introduction of Tasers to patrol officers. The estimated

increase of 0.277 incidents/100 officers/month amounts to just over 10 percent of the pre-treatment

mean among patrol officers. It is significant at the 10 percent level. Total use-of-force incidents

rose because Taser-involved incidents rose by more than enough to counteract the small decline in

other types of force.

       The second row of the Table reports estimates of AB , the effect of Tasers during the second

post-treatment period, following the re-training of late 2012. The coefficient in column (4), for uses

of force involving Tasers, is essentially the same as its counterpart for the initial post-treatment

period. This may seem surprising at first, considering the large drop in Taser incidents apparent in

Figure 1 that took place in late 2012. The explanation has to do with the behavior of sergeants.

Table 2 shows that Taser use fell among sergeants during this period. The estimate of AB reflects

the fact that the change in Taser use between the second post-treatment period and the pre-treatment

period is greater for patrol officers than for sergeants, even though both groups reduced their use of

Tasers between the first and second post-treatment periods.

       In the period after the re-training of late 2012, the availability of Tasers among patrol

officers had different effects on the use of other weapons than it had during the earlier period.

Estimates are reported in the second row of the Table. During this period, Tasers widely substituted

for other weapons. The estimate in column (3) shows that they substituted for other intermediate

uses of force, as one might expect. Column (5) shows that they also substituted for major force.

This is consistent with the theoretical model in Section III, considering that Table 2 shows that




                                                   22
injury rates to police are lower for incidents involving Tasers than for incidents involving major

force.

         Columns (1) and (2) show that Tasers also substituted for lesser uses of force. Taken at face

value, this is consistent with concerns raised by researchers and others regarding over-reliance on

Tasers, or “lazy cop syndrome” (Alpert and Dunham 2010). At the same time, CPD reporting

requirements are such that it is difficult generalize from reported incidents involving no or low force

to the population of such incidents.

         Column (6) shows that firearms are the exception to the rule. The estimated effect of Tasers

during this time period is negative, but it is barely larger than its standard error. Thus, there is no

significant evidence that Tasers substitute for firearms.

         Finally, the last column of the Table shows that the availability of Tasers led to a reduction

of 0.368 use-of-force incidents/100 officers during the second post-treatment period. This amounts

to 14 percent of the pre-treatment average among patrol officers.

         Table 5 reports how the introduction of Tasers affected injury rates per incident and the

number of injuries per 100 police officers. Results for injuries/use-of-force incident, the focus of

most previous research, are reported in column (1) for police officers and column (2) for civilian

subjects. The first column shows that the introduction of Tasers reduced the likelihood that officers

were injured during an incident involving police use of force. This is true before and after the re-

training in late 2012. However, the second column shows that the subjects involved in those

incidents enjoyed no such benefit: the coefficients for both time periods are small and insignificant.

         Although most studies of Tasers have found that they reduce injury rates, our findings to the

contrary have several precedents. Smith et al.’s (2007) analysis of the Richland County, South

Carolina Sheriff’s Department, for example, showed no link between Taser use and police or




                                                   23
civilian injuries (see also Smith et al 2010). Likewise, Lin and Jones (2010) found that Tasers

reduced police injury rates, but reported mixed results for civilian subjects.

        Columns (3) and (4) present results for the number of injuries per 100 police, the product of

the number of incidents and the rate of injuries/incident. The estimates in column (3) show that

police injuries fell after Tasers were introduced, although the effect was only significant after late

2012. Civilian injuries actually rose slightly, albeit insignificantly, in the first post-treatment period.

They fell slightly during the second period, although that coefficient too is insignificant.

        The results in Table 6 show how the introduction of Tasers affected the race distribution of

civilians involved in police use-of-force incidents. Neither the share of blacks nor Hispanics

changed significantly in either follow-up period. Put differently, Tasers did not exacerbate the

disproportionate representation of minority civilians involved in use-of-force incidents, but they did

not ameliorate it either.

        B. Robustness

        The model in equations (1) and (2) assumes additivity of the treatment effect; a natural

alternative would be to assume proportionality. If our dependent variables were always positive,

this would amount to merely specifying the dependent variable in logs. However, since our

dependent variables sometimes equal zero, this option is not available to us. Instead, we estimated

negative binomial regression models, which are a variant on the more familiar Poisson model that

relaxes the mean-variance equality that is imposed by the Poisson.

        For the negative binomial regressions, the dependent variable is specified to be an

exponential, rather than linear, function of the treatment status dummy, period dummies, and

interactions between the two, as appear on the right side of (1). The dependent variables for these

models are the numbers of events, rather than their rate per 100 police or per incident. That is, they




                                                    24
are the numerators of the dependent variables that appear in the linear regressions reported above.

The log of the denominator is included on the right-hand side of the model with a unit coefficient,

so that the other coefficients can be interpreted as proportionate changes in the rates.5

       Estimates from these models were qualitatively similar to those from the linear models

reported above. Almost all of the estimated treatment effects had the same signs, and most the

estimated treatment effects that were significant at the 5 percent level or better remained significant

at similar levels. An important difference involved the tests for parallel trends. Whereas only 1 of

the 13 tests of the linear models reported in Tables 4 through 6 rejected the null of parallel trends, 7

of the 13 tests applied to the exponential models rejected. Based on this comparison, we prefer the

additive to the proportional specification of the model.

VI. Conclusions

       Tasers and other CED’s have long been controversial. Civil libertarians complain that they

represent excessive force and are often used when less aggressive tactics would suffice. At the

same time, evidence suggests that they reduce injury rates per use-of-force incident. Several large

police departments have sought to expand their Taser arsenals on the belief that doing so would

reduce police shootings.

       We took advantage of a change in policy at the Chicago Police Department to analyze how

the availability of Tasers affects police behavior. Prior to the policy change, Tasers had been

available only to sergeants and field training officers. Starting in March 2010, they were made

available to patrol officers as well. We took advantage of that policy change to study how the

availability of Tasers affected patrol officers’ choice of tactics in use-of-force incidents, the total




5
  We also estimated an unconstrained version of each model so as to test the null hypothesis that
the coefficient on the denominator was equal to one. None of the tests rejected.

                                                    25
number of use-of-force incidents, injury rates per incidents, and total injuries. We also analyzed

how Tasers affected the racial and ethnic makeup of civilians on the other side of those altercations.

       Like many other studies, we found that Tasers reduced injury rates among police. Unlike

most prior studies, we analyzed whether the availability of Tasers increased the overall use of force

among patrol officers. During the first two years it did, although the effect was marginally

significant. Total injuries to police fell, but injuries to civilians were unaffected. There is no

evidence that Tasers affected police use of firearms.

       Roughly two years after the policy change, the department purchased a new model of Taser

and re-trained much of the force. After that point, Tasers became a substitute for other types of

force, both greater and lesser. Total use of force fell, although subject injuries and police use of

firearms remained unaffected.

       One lesson is that training appears to matter. The producer of Tasers changed their training

materials prior to the 2012 re-training at Chicago PD, adding materials on health risks and officer

liability. It would be useful to analyze more systematically how different approaches to training

affect police officers’ choice of tactics in confrontational situations.




                                                    26
References


Alpert, G. P., & Dunham, R. G. (2010). Policy and Training Recommendations Related to Police
    Use of CEDs: Overview of Findings from a Comprehensive National Study. Police Quarterly,
    13(3), 235–259. https://doi.org/10.1177/1098611110373993

American Civil Liberties Union. (n.d.). Less Lethal Force: Proposed Standards for Massachusetts
   Law Enforcement Agencies.

Bozeman, W. P., Hauda, W. E., Heck, J. J., Graham, D. D., Martin, B. P., & Winslow, J. E. (2009).
    Safety and Injury Profile of Conducted Electrical Weapons Used by Law Enforcement Officers
    Against Criminal Suspects. Annals of Emergency Medicine, 53(4), 480–489.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annemergmed.2008.11.021

Braidwood Commission on the Death of Robert Dziekanski. (2010). Why? The Robert Dziekanski
     Tragedy. Retrieved from http://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/law-crime-and-justice/about-bc-
     justice-system/inquiries/braidwoodphase2report.pdf

Bustamante, Alexander A. 2017. “Overview of Less-Lethal Force Tools and Deployment.” Los
    Angeles. http://www.lapdpolicecom.lacity.org/022817/BPC_17-0057.pdf.

Chicago Police Department. (2016). TACTICAL RESPONSE REPORT - FORM PREPARATION
    INSTRUCTIONS, CPD-63.467, 467.

Chicago Police Department. (2016). TACTICAL RESPONSE REPORT (Vol. CPD-11.377).

Chicago Police Department. (2016b). Incidents Requiring the Completion of a Tactical Response
    Report (Vol. General Or). Chicago, Illinois. Retrieved from
    http://directives.chicagopolice.org/directives/data/a7a57be2-1291da66-88512-91e2-
    cdd76fd8ae76d83d.html

Chicago Police Department. (2016a). Force Options. Chicago, Illinois. Retrieved from
    http://directives.chicagopolice.org/directives/data/a7a57be2-128ff3f0-ae912-9001-
    1d970b87782d543f.html

Eith, C., & Durose, M. (2011). Contact between the Police and Public, 2008. Special Report.
     Retrieved from https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/cpp08.pdf

Fryer, R. G. (2016). An empirical analysis of racial differences in police use of force. Working
     Paper, (July). https://doi.org/10.3386/w22399

Hinkel, D. (2012, January 1). Doubts surface as police sharply increase Taser use. Chicago Tribune.

Hinkel, D., & Smith Richards, J. (2017, August 28). Chicago cops get more Tasers, but red flags
    remain. Chicago Tribune.
Jenkinson, E., Neeson, C., & Bleetman, A. (2006). The relative risk of police use-of-force options:
     Evaluating the potential for deployment of electronic weaponry. Journal of Clinical Forensic
     Medicine, 13(5), 229–241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcfm.2005.11.006

Kaminski, R. J., Engel, R. S., Rojek, J., Smith, M. R., & Alpert, G. P. (2015). A Quantum of Force:
   The Consequences of Counting Routine Conducted Energy Weapon Punctures as Injuries.
   Justice Quarterly, 32(4), 598–625. https://doi.org/10.1080/07418825.2013.788729

Kaminski, R. J., & Sorensen, D. W. M. (1995). A multivariate analysis of individual, situational and
   environmental factors associated with police assault injuries. American Journal of Police,
   14(3/4), 3–48. https://doi.org/10.1108/07358549510111938

LAAW International, LLC. (2017). Outline of Partial Selected CEW Research and Information.
   LAAW International, LLC.

Lin, Y.-S., & Jones, T. R. (2010). Electronic control devices and use of force outcomes: Incidence
    and severity of use of force, and frequency of injuries to arrestees and police officers. Policing:
    An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, 33(1), 152–178.
    https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/13639511011020647

Lum, C., & Nagin, D. S. (2017). Reinventing American Policing. Crime and Justice, 46(1), 339–
   393. https://doi.org/10.1086/688462

MacDonald, J. M., Kaminski, R. J., & Smith, M. R. (2009). The effect of less-lethal weapons on
   injuries in police use-of-force events. American Journal of Public Health, 99(12), 2268–2274.
   https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2009.159616

Manski, C. F., & Nagin, D. S. (2017). Assessing benefits, costs, and disparate racial impacts of
   confrontational proactive policing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
   United States of America, 114(35), 9308–9313. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1707215114

National Institute of Justice. (2008). Monitoring Police Use of Conducted Energy Devices.
     Retrieved from https://www.nij.gov/topics/technology/less-lethal/pages/monitoring-ced-
     use.aspx

National Institute of Justice. (2011). Police Use of Force, Tasers and Other Less-Lethal Weapons.
     Washington, DC. Retrieved from http://www.ncjrs.gov/ pdffiles1/nij/grants/231176.pdf

National Institute of Justice. (2008). How Conducted Energy Devices Work. Washington, DC.

Neuscheler, Jena, and Akiva Freidlin. 2015. “Report on Electronic Control Weapons (ECWs)
    Submitted to the City of Berkeley.”
    https://sanfranciscopolice.org/sites/default/files/Documents/PoliceCommission/2015-
    StanfordStudy_ECW from DPA.pdf.




                                                  2
Paoline, E. A. I., Terrill, W., & Ingram, J. R. (2012). Police Use of Force and Officer Injuries:
     Comparing Conducted Energy Devices (CEDs) to Hands- and Weapon- Based Tactics. Police
     Quarterly, 15, 115–136. https://doi.org/10.3868/s050-004-015-0003-8

Perez, J., Wong, G., Thayer, K., Bowean, L., & Coen, J. (2015, November 27). Crowds close stores,
     march on Mag Mile to protest Laquan McDonald killing. Chicago Tribune.

Ramsey, C. H., & Robinson, L. O. (2015). Final Report of the President’s Task Force on 21st
   Century Policing.

Seattle Police Department. (2003). Special Report on the M26 Advanced TASER ( Pt . 1 ). Seattle.
     Retrieved from http://www.cityofseattle.net/police/Publications/Special/M26Taser.PDF

Smith, M. R., Kaminski, R. J., Rojek, J., Alpert, G. P., & Mathis, J. (2007). The Impact of
    Conducted Energy Devices and Other Types of Force and Resistance on Officer and Suspect
    Injuries. Policing: Int’l J. Police Strat. & Mgmt, 30, 423–446.

Smith, M., Kaminski, R., Alpert, G., Fridell, L., MacDonald, J., & Kubu, B. (2010). A Multi-
    Method Evaluation of Police Use of Force Outcomes: Final Report to the National Institute of
    Justice. Washington, DC. Retrieved from
    https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/231176.pdf

Sousa, W., Ready, J., & Ault, M. (2010). The impact of TASERs on police use-of-force decisions:
    Findings from a randomized field-training experiment. Journal of Experimental Criminology,
    6(1), 35–55. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11292-010-9089-1

Stambaugh, H., Beaupre, D., Icove, D. J., Baker, R., Cassaday, W., & Williams, W. P. (2000).
    National Institute of Justice Journal.1043. Research in Brief, (August 2000).

Sweeney, A. (2010, December 6). Police expand Taser use on Chicago streets. Chicago Tribune.
    Retrieved from http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2010-12-06/news/ct-met-police-taser-use-
    20101206_1_tasers-police-misconduct-field-training-officers

Taser International. (2010). User Certification Course TASER X26 Electronic Control Device.
    Scottsdale, AZ: Taser International.

Taser International. (2011). User Certification Course TASER X26 Electronic Control Device.
    Scottsdale, AZ: Taser International.

Taylor, B., & Woods, D. J. (2010). Injuries to Officers and Suspects in Police Use-of-Force Cases:
    A Quasi-Experimental Evaluation. Police Quarterly, 13(3), 260–289.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/1098611110373994

Taylor, B., Woods, D., Kubu, B., Koper, C., Tegeler, B., Cheney, J., … Kappelman, K. (2009).
    Comparing safety outcomes in police use-of-force cases for law enforcement agencies that




                                                 3
    have deployed Conducted Energy Devices and a matched comparison group that have not : A
    quasi-experimental evaluation, (September), 100.

Terrill, W., & Paoline III, E. A. (2012). Conducted energy devices (CEDS) and citizen injuries: The
     shocking empirical reality. Justice Quarterly, 29(2), 153–182.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/07418825.2010.549834

Tyler, T. R. (2004). Enhancing Police Legitimacy. The ANNALS of the American Academy of
     Political and Social Science, 593(1), 84–99. https://doi.org/10.1177/0002716203262627

US Government Accountability Office. (2005). Taser Weapons: Use of Tasers by Selected Law
    Enforcement Agencies, (May), 31.




                                                 4
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Table 1: Subject resistance, force options, and reporting requirements
 Subject resistance            Force options                             Our classification        TRR required?
 Cooperative                   Police presence,                          No force                  If subject injured or alleges
                               Verbal control                                                      injury
 Passive resistance            Holding techniques that do not involve    Minor force               If subject injured or alleges
                               pain-compliance, Pain-compliance                                    injury
                               techniques, Control instrumentsa
 Active resistance             Stunning; OC (pepper) spray,              Intermediate force        Yesb
                               Capsaicin II powder, LRAD (acoustic
                               device), Canines,
                               Taser                                     Taser                     Yes
 Assailant
   Without weapons             Striking, Kicking, Powerful locks and     Major force               Yes
                               pressure, Impact weapons, Impact
                               munitions
   Likely to cause injury      Same as above                             Major force               Yes
   Likely to cause serious     Chokeholds,                               Major force               Yes
 injury or death               Firearms                                  Firearms                  Yes

Notes: First and second columns adapted from Chicago Police Department (2012, 2016a). Third column gives our label for each
group of force options. Fourth column adapted from Chicago Police Department (2016b).

a. OC (pepper) spray and LRAD (acoustic device) may also be used under certain circumstances with supervisor approval.
b. A TRR is not required when the subject’s only action of resisting is fleeing, and the officer’s actions did not extend beyond verbal
commands and/or control holds utilized in conjunction with handcuffing and searching techniques which do not result in injury of
allegation of injury (Chicago Police Department 2016b).
Table 2
Distribution of use-of-force incidents and injury rates to police and subjects by type of force
                                                                             Injury           Injury
                                                                     rate/incident, rate/incident,
Type of force                              Number         Percent       police (%)     subjects (%)
1. No Force                                   2,214            6.1             19.2              9.8
2. Minor Force                                3,257            9.0             16.8             11.9
3. Intermediate Force                        20,128          55.7              26.0             22.3
4. Taser                                      3,678          10.2              16.5             36.9
5. Major Force                                6,102          16.9              53.6             41.0
6. Firearm                                      733            2.0             26.5             58.1
Total                                        36,112           100              28.5             26.0
Table 3
Mean monthly rates of use of force per 100 police, injuries/incident, injuries per 100 police, and share of use-of-force
incidents involving minority subjects, by time period and treatment group
A. Patrol officers
Period:                                                                1/2005 to           3/2010 to
Variable                                                               2/2010              8/2012             9/2012 to 12/2015
Use-of-force incidents/100 police
     1. No Force                                                              0.17               0.20                 0.17
     2. Minor Force                                                           0.26               0.25                 0.25
     3. Intermediate Force                                                    1.65               1.56                 1.48
     4. Taser                                                                 0.02               0.55                 0.26
     5. Major Force                                                           0.45               0.49                 0.42
     6. Firearm                                                               0.05               0.07                 0.05
     Total                                                                    2.59               3.12                 2.63
Officer injuries/incident                                                     0.32               0.25                 0.25
Subject injuries/incident                                                     0.26               0.25                 0.25
Officer injuries/100 police                                                   0.83               0.77                 0.67
Subject injuries/100 police                                                   0.68               0.78                 0.65
Share of UOF incidents involving at least one black subject                   0.74               0.75                 0.75
Share of UOF incidents involving at least one Hispanic subject                0.15               0.15                 0.14
 Table 3 (cont.)
 B. Sergeants
 Period:                                                          1/2005 to   3/2010 to
 Variable                                                         2/2010      8/2012      9/2012 to 12/2015
 Use-of-force incidents/100 police
      1. No Force                                                      0.10        0.16         0.21
      2. Minor Force                                                   0.14        0.20         0.24
      3. Intermediate Force                                            0.59        0.65         0.94
      4. Taser                                                         0.62        0.64         0.35
      5. Major Force                                                   0.14        0.20         0.24
      6. Firearm                                                       0.03        0.02         0.04
      Total                                                            1.62        1.87         2.03
 Officer injuries/incident                                             0.18        0.17         0.16
 Subject injuries/incident                                             0.24        0.23         0.21
 Officer injuries/100 police                                           0.29        0.31         0.36
 Subject injuries/ 100 police                                          0.39        0.43         0.45
 Share of UOF incidents involving at least one black subject           0.69        0.72         0.69
 Share of UOF incidents involving at least one Hispanic subject        0.16        0.15         0.16

Notes: UOF=use of force.
 Table 4: Effect of Introducing Tasers on Use of Force Incidents by Type of Force
 Dependent variable is difference in number of UOF incidents/100 police between patrol officers and sergeants
                             No Force        Minor        Intermed.         Taser       Major         Firearm           All
 Variable                        (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)          (5)             (6)           (7)
 !"                            -0.025        -0.064         -0.143          0.518       -0.023           0.021         0.277
                              (0.026)       (0.036)        (0.086)        (0.067)      (0.042)         (0.015)       (0.168)
 !#                            -0.108        -0.102         -0.516          0.511       -0.139          -0.016        -0.378
                              (0.022)       (0.032)        (0.078)        (0.061)      (0.038)         (0.014)       (0.153)
 Constant                       0.064         0.114          1.055         -0.600        0.315           0.026         0.979
                              (0.018)       (0.020)        (0.049)        (0.038)      (0.024)         (0.009)       (0.122)
 AR(1)                         -0.177                                                                                  0.173
                              (0.087)                                                                                (0.077)
 N                               132           132            132            132          132             132           132
 P-value, test for              0.611         0.583          0.567          0.031        0.537           0.525         0.894
 parallel trends

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Coefficients in columns (1) and (7) were estimated by maximum likelihood; those in
columns (2)-(6) were estimated by OLS. AR(1) indicates the autoregressive parameter. UOF =use of force.
 Table 5: Effect of Introducing Tasers on Injury Rates/Incident and Injuries
 Dependent variable is
 difference between patrol
 officers and sergeants in:              Injuries/Incident            Injuries/100    police
                                       Police          Subjects          Police      Subjects
 Variable                                (1)               (2)             (3)          (4)
 !"                                    -0.065            -0.000          -0.080        0.072
                                      (0.025)           (0.025)         (0.055)      (0.057)
 !#                                    -0.045             0.020          -0.225       -0.085
                                      (0.023)           (0.023)         (0.050)      (0.052)
 N                                      132             132               132          132
 P-value, test for parallel            0.626           0.852             0.616        0.907
 trends

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses.
 Table 6: Effect of Introducing Tasers on Race/ethnicity distribution of subjects
 Dependent variable is
 difference between patrol
 officers and sergeants in
 share of incidents involving
 at least one:                             Black                    Hispanic
 Variable                                    (1)                        (2)
 !"                                        -0.016                      0.006
                                          (0.029)                    (0.022)
 !#                                         0.021                     -0.006
                                          (0.027)                    (0.020)
 N                                            132                      132
 P-value, test for parallel                  0.504                    0.750
 trends

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses.
