                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DO SCHOOL SPENDING CUTS MATTER? EVIDENCE FROM THE GREAT RECESSION

                                           C. Kirabo Jackson
                                              Cora Wigger
                                              Heyu Xiong

                                         Working Paper 24203
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w24203


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2018




The statements made and views expressed are solely the responsibility of the authors. Wigger and
Xiong are grateful for financial support from the US Department of Education, Institute of Education
Sciences through its Multidisciplinary Program in Education Sciences (Grant Award # R305B140042).
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24203.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by C. Kirabo Jackson, Cora Wigger, and Heyu Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do School Spending Cuts Matter? Evidence from The Great Recession
C. Kirabo Jackson, Cora Wigger, and Heyu Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 24203
January 2018, Revised August 2019
JEL No. H0,H61,I2,I20,J0

                                               ABSTRACT

During The Great Recession, national public-school per-pupil spending fell by roughly seven percent,
and took several years to recover. The impact of such large and sustained education funding cuts is
not well understood. To examine this, first, we document that the recessionary drop in spending coincided
with the end of decades-long national growth in both test scores and college-going. Next, we show
that this stalled educational progress was particularly pronounced in states that experienced larger
recessionary budget cuts for plausibly exogenous reasons. To isolate budget cuts that were unrelated
to (a) other ill-effects of the recession or (b) endogenous state policies, we use states’ historical reliance
on State taxes (which are more sensitive to the business cycle) to fund public schools interacted with
the timing of the recession as instruments for reductions in school spending. Cohorts exposed to these
spending cuts had lower test scores and lower college-going rates. The test score impacts were larger
for children in poor neighborhoods. Evidence suggests that both test scores and college-going were
more adversely affected for Black and White students than Latinx students.


C. Kirabo Jackson                                     Heyu Xiong
Northwestern University                               School of Business
School of Education and Social Policy                 Case Western Reserve University
2040 Sheridan Road                                    heyuxiong2018@u.northwestern.edu
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
kirabo-jackson@northwestern.edu

Cora Wigger
Northwestern University
2120 Campus Drive
Evanston IL 60208
CoraWigger2021@u.northwestern.edu
I     Introduction
    During The Great Recession, real pre-tax income fell by almost seven percent (Larrimore et al.
2015), national consumption as a percentage of GDP fell by 6 percentage points (Petev and Pista-
ferri 2012), and property values fell by about 18 percent.1 Public schools are largely funded by a
combination of property, income, and sales taxes. As such, public-school per-pupil spending fell
by roughly seven percent nationally, by over ten percent in 7 states, and more than twenty percent
in 2 states (Leachman et al. 2017). While per-pupil spending growth slowed during previous reces-
sions, the Great Recession represents the largest and most sustained decline in national per-pupil
spending in over a century (NCES 2017; Jackson et al. 2014).2 While compelling recent evidence
based on localized quasi-experimental variation indicates that increased school spending typically
improves child outcomes (Jackson 2018a), the sheer magnitude of this historical episode allows
for a unique examination of the extent to which large-scale and persistent education budget cuts
may harm students in general, and poor children in particular. In this paper, we exploit plausibly
exogenous reductions in public school spending induced by the Great Recession and examine the
effect of school spending cuts on student test scores, and college-going rates.
    We document that, nationally, the decline in school spending beginning with the onset of the
recession is associated with the first time that average national test scores declined (in both math
and reading) in the past 50 years (Figure 1). The stalled progress in the National Assessment of
Educational Progress (NAEP) after 2009 has been documented by education scholars (e.g. West
2018, Loeb 2018) and has been dubbed the “Lost Decade” in educational progress (Petrilli, 2018).
The timing of the recessionary spending cuts also coincides slower growth in the number of first-
time college entrants in the united states (Figure 1). A “naive” estimate based on the coincident time
trends, is that a $1,000 reduction in per-pupil spending (about an 8.3 % increase) was associated
with an 8.7 percent of a standard deviation reduction in test scores and a 13.7 percent reduction in
the number of first-time college entrants. While these patterns are suggestive, one must interpret
coincident national trends with caution (Jackson et al., 2015). Because many other things may
have changed nationally after the recession that could drive these associations, these relationships
may not be causal.3 To address these concerns and to isolate the impact of recession-induced school
spending cuts from the broader impacts of the recession itself, we propose an instrumental variables
approach that uses plausibly exogenous state-level variation in public K12 school spending.
    1 This is based on the Case-Shiller Index at the start and end of the recession. Note that housing prices has been on
the decline before the onset of the Great Recession, so that this does not reflect the full peak to trough decline.
    2 Indeed, as of 2016, 25 states had not recovered to their inflation adjusted per-pupil spending levels, and by 2019

(more than a decade later) 12 states spent below their 2007 levels (link).
    3 In related work, Shores and Steinberg (2017) find that school districts in locations that were hardest hit by the

recession had larger test score reductions when these districts hired fewer teachers and spent less on schools. However,
they do not isolate the impact of school spending from that of other impacts of the recession.



                                                           1
    Our identification strategy relies on the fact that states that were more reliant on state-collected
revenues to fund public education (due to the particulars of their funding formulas) tended to ex-
perience larger school-spending reductions during the recession. This is for two distinct reasons:
First, during the Great Recession, as payments increased for Medicaid and Unemployment Insur-
ance, states allocated a smaller share of their budgets to K12 education – a crowd-out effect. This
reduction is illustrated in the left panel of Figure 2. Second, state-collected revenues are based on
tax bases that are more responsive to market fluctuations than are local or federal revenues (Sobel
and Wagner; Evans et al. 2017) – a revenue effect. For both these reasons, while overall school
spending declined after recession onset, revenues from state taxes fell the most sharply (right panel
of Figure 2). In Section III, we discuss why this was true even though the Great Recession was asso-
ciated with declining house prices. We show that a state’s reliance on state revenues to fund public
education is highly predictive of reductions in per-pupil spending after the recession. Exploiting
this pattern, we instrument for per-pupil spending with the share of a state’s public school revenues
that came from state sources before the recession interacted with the timing of the recession.
     Our strategy requires that states with different reliance on state revenues were not differentially
affected by the recession for reasons other than through school spending. We show that this is likely
to be true in a few ways. First, our instrument predicts overall school spending primarily through
its predictable impact on state revenues (as opposed to local or federal revenues). Also, conditional
on ex-ante predictors of recession intensity, instrumented school spending is unrelated to measures
of economic conditions such as unemployment or poverty rates. Finally, our main results persist in
models that control for contemporaneous local economic conditions and even house prices directly.
    Our first main outcome of interest is student test scores from the National Assessment of Educa-
tional Progress (NAEP). Our other main outcome is college-going obtained from the the Integrated
Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). We link these outcome data to state-level spending
data from the Census F33 School District Finance Survey (CCD) and our instruments for public
school K12 spending. Our final dataset straddles the recession and includes data between years
2002 and 2017. We proxy for a state’s vulnerability to recessionary budget cuts using its reliance
on state revenues to fund public K12 schools in 2008. Relative to each state’s own time trend, we
document a robust monotonic relationship between greater reliance on state funds in 2008 and the
annual decline in per-pupil spending after the onset of the Great Recession. The pattern of greater
deteriorating outcomes after the recession for states that are more reliant on state revenues is mir-
rored for both test scores and college-going rates. These declines in test scores and college-going
track the recession-induced decline in per-pupil spending, and do not abate as the economy re-
covered – evidence that these impacts are driven by the spending changes rather than other effects
of the recession per se. Using these patterns in an instrumental variables approach, on average, a
$1000 reduction in per-pupil spending led to about 0.045 standard deviations lower test scores (p-


                                                   2
value<0.01) and between a 2.6 and 6.2 percentage points lower college-going rate (p-value<0.05).
    We test for heterogeneous effects in a few ways. First, we use the individual-level NAEP to
compute the relationship between the district poverty rate and NAEP scores in each state in each
year (following Card and Payne 2002 and Lafortune et al. 2018). We then estimate the impact of
recession-induced spending changes on this slope. We find a consistent positive impact of spending
on this slope – indicating that test scores in high-poverty areas were more adversely effected by the
spending cuts than in low-poverty areas. We also examine impacts by student race. In general, the
marginal impacts are similar for Black and White students. However, impacts are larger for Black
and White students than for Hispanic students. We also explore heterogeneity in the college-going
effect by institution type. We find increases at both 2-year and 4-year colleges. The 4-year college
effects are concentrated at non-selective institutions and those with more part-time than full-time
students. We also find large increases at minority serving institutions (particularly those serving
Black students)– a pattern consistent with our test-score impacts by race.
    To explore mechanisms, we examine what kinds of spending categories were most affected.
In general, states cut spending across a broad range of categories. States that cut spending (as
predicted by our instruments) hired fewer teachers, fewer aides, and fewer library staff. However,
states responded to spending cuts by disproportionately cutting more from construction expendi-
tures and less from core K12 spending. While construction spending makes up 6.9 percent of
the average school’s budget, it accounted for between 31 and 48 percent of the reduced spending.
These patterns differ from those documented for spending increases due to school finance reforms
(Jackson et al., 2016), suggesting that the marginal propensity to spend on different inputs may vary
when there are spending increases versus decreases. This may reflect districts attempting to shield
core operational spending (to some extent) or districts being more constrained in their ability (or
desire) to cut spending on core school operations.4 To determine whether the impact of these large
recessionary spending cuts differ from those found in other studies (based largely on school spend-
ing increases and localized quasi-random variation) we summarize the studies outlined in Jackson
(2018b).5 Our estimated impacts are near the median effect across quasi-experimental studies that
examine the impacts of spending (not tied to specific uses) on test scores – suggesting that the
marginal effects of education spending cuts are largely symmetric to those of spending increases
documented in other settings.
    Our results shed some light on how the changing structure of school finance may have made
student achievement more sensitive to the business cycle. While state taxes account for about
   4 These  different marginal propensities to spending categories could have lead to asymmetric spending impacts if
the marginal benefit of construction spending differed markedly from that of other kinds of spending. However, as
documented in Jackson (2018a) construction spending does, at times, affect student outcomes so that this reallocation
of budgets may not have changed the marginal impact of school spending (relative to that for a spending increase).
    5 We are deeply grateful to Claire Mackevicius for coding the studies and running the formal meta-analysis.




                                                         3
half of all public school spending, this was not always so. Prior to the 1970s, school districts in
the United States funded public schools mostly through locally raised property taxes (Howell and
Miller 1997; Hoxby). As such, poor districts tended to spend less per pupil than wealthier districts.
The school finance reform movement (starting in the 1970s) lead to increased state collected taxes
to maintain a more equitable distribution of school spending across districts. Because state funding
is more vulnerable to recessionary cuts, one potential “side-effect” of the increased centralization of
school funding (i.e. use of more state funding) is an increased vulnerability of education spending
and, therefore, student achievement to fluctuations in the business cycle. Our results show this to
be the case. Our results also suggest that this increased sensitivity may be most pronounced for
high-poverty districts that rely more heavily on state aid.
    Broadly, our findings contribute to long-standing debates around whether school spending mat-
ters and whether schools make do with less by showing that spending cuts harm students. Our
analysis contributes to the field of public finance by shedding light on how the revenue sources
used to fund public schools may have implications for student achievement. Finally, our results
deepen our understanding of the long-run effects of growing up during a recession. While it is
well-documented that growing up during a recession can lead to long lasting ill-effects through
channels such as parental job displacement (Oreopoulos et al. 2008; Ananat et al. 2011; Stevens
and Schaller 2011) and increased food insecurity (Gundersen et al. 2011; Schanzenbach and Lau-
ren 2017), we provide new compelling evidence that recessions have lasting ill-effects on young
individuals through their effects on the governments’ abilities to provide public education services.
  The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section II describes the data. Section III describes the
empirical strategy. Section IV presents the results. Section V concludes.

II      Data
    We link several data sources for our analysis.6 School finance data come from the Annual
Survey of School System Finances at the U.S. Census Bureau. The surveys contain financial data
for all public school districts in the United States (approximately 13,500). The financial surveys
are available from 1987 through 2016. They provide education revenue broken down by source
(local, state, and federal), and break down expenditures into broad categories. The share of school
spending from each source varies substantially by state. Between 2002 and 2016, the average share
of school revenue from federal, state, and local sources were 9.5%, 48.7%, and 41.7%, respectively.
While the share of federal revenue varies only between 4% (Connecticut and New Jersey) and 22%
(Mississippi), variation in local and state revenue sources is much broader. The share of funding
that comes from state sources varies between 0% (Washington, D.C.) and 90% (Hawaii). The
share of revenue coming from state sources is central to our empirical strategy. We discuss in
     6 We   provide more detail on our data sources in the Appendix.


                                                             4
detail how we use this variable to classify states in Section III. On average, 85% of public school
spending goes to current elementary and secondary spending, which broadly includes expenses for
instruction and support services. Ten percent of public K12 education expenditures go towards
capital, which includes construction, land, and equipment. Salaries and benefits (instructional and
non-instructional) make up 68% of public school spending on average.
     Test score data come from the NAEP. The NAEP is referred to as the Nation’s Report Card as
it tests students across the country on the same assessments and has remained relatively stable over
time. The NAEP is administered every other year to a population-weighted sample of schools and
students. For the main analyses, we use publicly-available state-year average scores.7 We focus
on public school students’ 4th and 8th grade Math and Reading assessment scores. To facilitate
comparisons over time, we report NAEP scores standardized to a base year of 2003. The NAEP
sample has been increasing over time and only stabilized after 2000 (Table A1). We focus on the
period between 2002 and 2017.8 To conduct subsample analyses, we also utilize restricted-use data
files with student-level scores and demographics. The individual-level NAEP dataset includes 4.3
million individual NAEP scores from 11,477 school districts between 2002 and 2015.
    Our college-going data are from the the IPEDS. These data report surveys submitted at the
aggregate-level from postsecondary institutions. These data do not have student-level informa-
tion. Institutions report on the number of first-time college freshman from each state in each year.
By aggregating these data to the state of origin level, we obtain counts for the number of first-
time freshmen from each state in each year. Using information on postsecondary institutions from
IPEDS and the Carnegie Foundation, we compute enrollments by college type (2-year vs 4-year)
and selectivity level. To compute college-going rates for these years, we obtain population counts
by age in each state in each year from the American Community Surveys (ACS) from 2000 to 2016.
Our college-going measure is the number of first-time college enrollees divided by the number of
17-year-olds in the state two years prior.
    As additional variables, we obtain estimates on the total population, child population, and child
population living in poverty for the geographic areas associated with school districts from the
United States Census Bureau Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates (SAIPE). We also use
area economic indicators of employment and wages from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
and an annual measure of home values in each state from Zillow. We also include public school
district staffing and student enrollment information from the Common Core of Data LEA Universe
surveys from the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES).9 Our state-year level dataset is
summarized is summarized in Table 1.
   7 Obtained from http://apps.urban.org/features/naep/
   8 Because the 2017 school spending data was not available at the time of our analysis, we use 2016 school spending
data for 2017 test scores.
   9 When these data are missing, we impute with the mean. This does not affect the results.



                                                         5
III     Empirical Strategy
    The Great Recession led to a historic decline in per-pupil spending. As shown in Figure 1, the
decline in school spending during the recession coincides with the first average national test score
decline (in both math and reading) in the past 50 years, and with a slowing in the number of first-
time college entrants in the United States. While these coincident trends are highly suggestive, they
may not reflect causal relationships. As such, we seek to separate the effect of recession-induced
school spending declines from that of the recession itself (and other potentially confounding policy
or demographic changes). To this aim, we employ an instrumental variables approach. Our instru-
mental variables strategy relies on the fact that states that were more reliant on states revenues to
fund public K12 schools were more likely to experience declines in school spending for reasons un-
related to the intensity of the recession in the state or other policy changes that may have occurred
at that time. This basic pattern holds true for two related, but distinct reasons.
    The first reason is that as the labor market worsened, demand for state-funded services such as
unemployment insurance and Medicaid increased (Moffitt 2013). To cover these additional costs,
many states cut their education budgets – resulting in a crowding out effect. This pattern is shown
in the left panel of Figure V. Prior to the Great Recession, states spent about 27% of their budgets
on K12 schools. However, after the Great Recession, this fell to about 23% and remained at that
level through 2015. This pattern is not unique to the Great Recession and can also be observed with
the early 2000s recession when the share of state spending going to K12 school fell from about 29%
to about 27%. This suggests that, even even if state revenues were unchanged during the recession,
states that were more reliant on state taxes to fund K12 schools would be more likely to experience
education budget cuts. We refer to this as the crowd-out channel.
    The second reason that greater reliance on state revenues to fund public schools was associated
with deeper education spending cuts has to do with the tax bases. Revenue sources used to collect
state taxes (mostly income and sales taxes) are more variable than revenues used to collect local
taxes (mostly property taxes). Estimates suggest that income and sales taxes have a short-run
elasticity (with respect to the tax base) of over 1 (Holcombe and Sobel 1995). In contrast, property
taxes (which comprise the lion’s share of local revenues) are more stable. Property tax revenues
have a short-run elasticity (with respect to home values) of only between 0 and 0.4 because (a) taxes
are collected on assessed values which follow market value with a considerable lag (Lutz 2008),
and (b) policy-makers often offset declines in assessed values with higher tax rates (McMillen
2011; Lutz et al. 2010).10 The greater sensitivity of state taxes (as opposed to federal or local taxes)
to the business cycle suggests that, even if there were no crowd-out channel, states that were more
reliant on state taxes to fund K12 school would experience deeper education budget cuts (as shown
  10 Evans   et al. (2017) show that revenues from property taxes actually grew for three years after recession onset.


                                                             6
in Chakrabarti et al. 2015; Leachman and Mai 2014). We refer to this as the revenue channel.
     We define the parameter Ωs as the share of state K12 revenues in state s that came from state
sources in 2008.11 Through both channels, Ωs is meant to capture vulnerability to recessionary
school spending cuts.12 We classify states based on the source of the revenue as reported in Annual
Survey of School System Finances at the Census Bureau. For almost all states, this classification
captures both channels outlined above. An example of a highly vulnerable state is Hawaii. In 2008,
Hawaii received 85% of its education funding from the state (making it vulnerable to the crowd-out
effect), and 75% of its state revenues came from income or sales taxes (making a large share of its
revenue sensitive to the business cycle).13 An example of a less vulnerable state is Illinois. In 2008,
Illinois received 34% of its K12 spending from the state (making it less vulnerable to the crowd-
out effect), and only 30% of its revenues come from income or sales taxes (making a relatively
small share of its revenue sensitive to the business cycle). To further elucidate our instrument,
we discuss a slightly less straightforward state – California. Due to California’s Proposition 98,
the state collects some (but not all) locally raised property tax revenue that goes into the State
general fund. From the centralization perspective, one may consider the locally raised taxes that are
collected by the state to be state revenue. However, because the Proposition 98 funding is typically
earmarked specifically for education and cannot be borrowed from, it makes more sense to classify
these funds as local (i.e. less sensitive to the centralization channel). Also, from the revenue
cyclicality perspective, these property taxes are less variable than income and sales taxes so that
one may wish to classify them as local taxes. For both these reasons, we follow the Census Bureau
categorization and classify these funds as local funds. Doing so, we classify 58% of California’s
education revenue as coming from state sources. Note that all of our results are robust to how we
classify these potentially ambiguous funds, and to dropping California from the sample.14
  11 FollowingEvans et al. (2017), we compute the share of K12 revenues in state s that came from state sources in
2007-2008 (determined pre-recession) across all districts in the state as follows:

                                                      ∑d∈s StateRevenued
                                               Ωs =
                                                      ∑d∈s TotalRevenued
StateRevenued denotes the school revenue in district d which came from state sources in the 2007-2008 school year;
and TotalRevenued is the total revenue collected in district d in the same year.
   12 Figure A3 shows that Ω is evenly distributed across the geographic regions of the nation.
                               s
   13 Information on revenue sources come from (Saito, 2008)
   14 There is one ”state” for which classification is unclear, which is the District of Columbia (DC). In essence, DC is

not a state, so by definition does not have state taxes. Because DC serves as the federal capital, the constitution grants
the United States Congress jurisdiction over the District. This is evidenced by the fact that the Federal government
covers about one-quarter of DC’s budget, and the fact that DC received large amounts of increased Federal funds
during the recession. As such, from the centralization perspective, we follows the categorization employed by the
Census Bureau and classify municipality funds that support education as “local” and set state revenues equal to 0. This
suggests that D.C. experiences little vulnerability to recessionary spending cuts due to our instrument. Based on Figure
2, this categorization appears to hold empirically. Because this is a judgment call, we show that all of our results are
robust to dropping data from D.C. entirely.



                                                            7
    Through both the crowd-out and revenue channels, while overall school spending declined after
recession onset, revenues from state taxes fell most sharply (Figure 2). As such, states that were
more reliant on state revenues to fund public education in 2008 (due to the particulars of their school
funding formulas) tended to experience larger school spending reductions during the recession.
Figure 3 plots the state-level percent change in per-pupil spending between 2007 and 2011 (pre-
and post-recession) against the share of K12 spending in the state that came from state sources in
2008. As one might expect, Figure 3 shows a clear tendency for states that were more reliant on
state sources prior to the recession to have larger reductions in K12 spending during the recession.
The basic pattern of larger spending cuts in state that were more reliant on state revenues to fund
public education motivates our instrumental variables approach. We use Ωs as an exogenous shifter
of K12 spending within states during the recession. For our approach to uncover a school spending
effect, Ωs should not be correlated with changes in other policies or economic conditions within
states. We argue that a state’s reliance on state revenues to fund education prior to the recession is
unrelated to the impact of the recession on other dimensions in that state. To asses this, the right
panel of Figure 3 plots changes in the state unemployment rate between 2007 and 2011 by Ωs .
While there was a general increase in unemployment in the average state, Ωs was unrelated to the
impact of the recession in that state. We present more formal tests below.

III.1    Estimation Equation
    Our empirical approach is to compare the change in outcomes before and after the recession
across states that were more or less reliant on state revenues (and therefore experienced larger or
smaller reductions in school spending). To rely only on within-state variation, we allow each state
to have its own intercept and linear time trend in both spending and in the outcomes.
   In our first stage regressions, we show that relative to each state’s own pre-recession trend in
school spending states that were more reliant on state revenues to fund public education (in 2008),
had a more negative post-recession time trend in school spending. If school spending affects out-
comes, then in a reduced-form model, the change in the trend in school spending should correspond
with a change in the trend in test scores and college-going. We show that this is the case.
  In Figure V, we present an event-study for the recession’s effect on K12 spending, average
NAEP scores, and college-going rates by states’ reliance on state revenue sources. We estimate
models as below on our state-level panel for various outcomes Y for each state s in each year t, Yst .

                                  2017
                         Yst =    ∑       βt · (Ig>1,s × IT =t ) + γs + (τs × T ) + υst            (1)
                                 t=2002

In 1, IT =t is an indicator denoting if the observation is for calendar year t and Ig=1,s denotes the
states that are more reliant on state revenues for public schools (that is, states that relied on state


                                                         8
revenues for more than one third of education spending in 2008). To account for differences across
states we include state fixed effects γs . To compare changes in each state’s outcome to its own time
trend, we include the state-specific linear time trends τs . The variable υst is a random error term.
The coefficients βt map out the differences in outcomes between states with low and high Ωs in
each year (relative to each states own pre-recession intercept and linear time trend). We estimate
this model by OLS on per-pupil spending (in 2015 dollars), average state-level NEAP scores, and
college-going rates. We plot these coefficients along with the 95% confidence interval for each
coefficient estimate in Figure 4 where the reference year is 2007.
    The event study for test scores are in the top left panel. Prior to the recession, school spending
was on a similar trajectory in areas with different levels of Ωs , but after the recession, states with
heavy reliance on state revenues experienced a clear linear decline in per-pupil spending. While
there is no visual evidence of a level shift, the decline appears to be roughly linear in time since
recession onset. Average NAEP scores (top right) and college-going (bottom left) followed a very
similar pattern. Student test scores and college-going rates in states with greater dependence on
state revenues to fund public K12 schools declined following the recession, relative to other areas.
While the individual point estimates are only significantly different from 2007 levels after 2013, as
we show later, the linear post trend in these outcomes is statistically significantly different from the
pre-trend. Overall, the patterns indicate that outcomes in states that relied on revenues raised from
primarily state sources were on a similar trajectory as other states until the onset of the recession.
However, in states with greater reliance on state revenues for public school funding (and which
therefore saw greater declines in per-pupil school spending), student performance dropped follow-
ing 2008, the start of the recession, and continued to decline thereafter. While Figure 4 is helpful
for presenting the variation used, and providing visual evidence that our estimated relationship may
be causal, we now turn to the formal first stage and reduced form regression results below.
    Using this variation, our instrumental variables model compares the change in the trend in
student achievement before and after the recession across states with a high or low fraction of
revenue from state sources. If the only reason for a change in the trend in outcomes across areas
with high and low Ωs is the differential effect of the recession on public K12 spending across these
states, our instrument is valid. We present many empirical tests revealing that this condition is
likely satisfied. We present three complementary identification strategies that rely on somewhat
different sources of variation but all reveal the same overall pattern.
    Linear IV with State Linear Trend Controls: Our first approach is to model the change in trend
to be linear in state reliance on state revenues. To capture this trend change variation in spending
parametrically, we model school spending as declining linearly starting with recession onset (as
indicated in Figure 1). In our first approach we model the change in this linear trend as varying
linearly with Ωs . Because the slope change may not be linear in Ωs , we relax this restriction in

                                                   9
subsequent models for additional precision. We estimate equations of the following form by 2SLS.

   PPEst = π1 (Ωs × I post × T ) + ρ11 (Ωs × I post ) + ρ12 (I post ) + δ1Cst + α1s + (τ1s × T ) + ε1st   (2)

          Yst = β · (PPEst ) + ρ21 (Ωs × I post ) + ρ22 (I post ) + δ2Cst + α2s + (τ2s × T ) + ε2st       (3)

The endogenous treatment, PPEst , is per-pupil school spending in state s during year t. The out-
come Yst is either (a) the average standardized NAEP test scores for students in state s in year t, or
(b) the college-going rate for 17 year olds in year t − 2 who were expected to graduate from high
school in state s in year t. To account for differences across states we include state fixed effects α1s
and α2s in the first and second stage, respectively. T is a scalar in the calendar year, and I post is a
post-recession indicator denoting all years after 2008. To compare changes in each state’s outcome
to its own time trend, we include the state-specific linear time trends τ1s and τ2s in the first and sec-
ond stages, respectively. This accounts for any pre-recession time-trend differences between high
and low Ωs states. To capture the roughly linear-in-time decline in spending for more reliant states
after the recession, our excluded instrument is the interaction between reliance on state funding in
2008 and the post-recession change in linear time trend, Ωs × T × I post . To account for any level
shift in outcomes at recession outset, we also include I post and Ωs × I post as additional controls. ε2st
and ε2st are random error terms.
     Because the recession may have had ill economic effects through channels other than school
spending, it is important that we control for underlying predictors of recession intensity itself. In
principle, the POST indicator would control for changes in outcomes that occur after the recession.
However, because the recession was not a permanent shift but a transitory spike in unemployment
it is important to account for this transitory time pattern to control for the impacts of the recession
itself. As such, following (Yagan, 2017) and others, a key conditioning variable in Cst is a Bartik
predictor of the state unemployment rate. To create this key control, we compute the proportion
of all workers in each industry in each state in 2007. We multiply these 2007 industry proportions
by the national unemployment rate in that industry for each year. For each state, we sum these
products across all industries in each year. Our models include the predicted unemployment in
year t, through t − 3 to account for dynamic impacts of unemployment. Appendix Figure A4 shows
how the Bartik predictors evolve over time to predict transitory changes in outcomes during the
recession. As we show in Section IV, these controls remove any systematic correlation between
our instrument and economic conditions that may predict our outcomes.
    Group IV with State Linear Trend Controls: In our second approach, to increase the precision of
our estimates, we relax the linearity of the relationship between Ωs and the change in the slope after
the recession. We classify states as low, medium, or high reliance on state taxes to fund public K12
schools. Schools that have less than one-third of their revenues from state sources are in the low

                                                     10
group (g = 1), those with between one- and two-thirds are in the middle group (g = 2), and those
that have more than two-thirds of their revenues from state sources are in the high group (g = 3).
The group indicator variable Igs connotes the group g of state s. We then replace the single scalar
variable Ωs , with three indicators for states in the low, middle, and high groups. Formally, using
the state-by year level panel, we estimate systems of equations of the following form by 2SLS.

 PPEst = Σ3g=1 [π1g · (Igs × I post × T )] + Σ3g=1 [φ1g · (Igs × I post )] + δ1Cst + α1s + (τ1s × T ) + ε1st (4)

               Yst = β · (PPEst ) + Σ3g=1 [φ2g · (Igs × I post )] + δ2Cst + α2s + (τ2s × T ) + ε2st                   (5)

All common variables are as defined in equation (2) and (3). The three excluded instruments are the
interactions between the group indicators and the post recession linear time trend, Igs × T × I post .
Models also include a level shift after the recession for each group (Igs × I post ) as controls.
    Group IV with State Linear Trend Controls and Year Fixed Effects: In our third, and most
restrictive models, we estimate the group IV model while including individual calendar-year fixed
effects (in lieu of the other controls). This is a flexible way to account for any time effects that may
affect student outcomes across all states. The resulting 2SLS model is as below.

   PPEst = Σ3g=2 [π1g · (Igs × I post × T )] + Σ3g=2 [φ1g · (Igs × I post )] + θ1t + α1s + (τ1s × T ) + ε1st          (6)

                Yst = β · (PPEst ) + Σ3g=2 [φ2g · (Igs × I post )] + θ2t + α2s + (τ2s × T ) + ε2st                    (7)

All variables are as defined in equations (4) and (5) and θ1t and θ2t are year fixed effects for the
first and second stage, respectively.15 All our main result are robust across these three models.

III.2     First Stage and Reduced Form
    Table 2 presents the first-stage relationship between the excluded instruments and per-pupil
spending (in thousands) on our state-year panel. Column 1 presents results from the Linear IV
model without any controls, and column 2 presents the first stage with the Bartik controls. As one
can see, the point estimates are largely similar. Without controls (column 1) the change in slope
is -0.546 (se=0.069) and with the Bartik controls (column 2) the change in slope is slope is -0.344
(se=0.285). while the estimated change in slope is similar across the two models, the standard
error is four-times as large with the Bartik controls. Because the Bartik predictors are constructed
to predict the recessionary spike in the unemployment rate, it is very highly correlated with the
POST indicator - which has a p-value above 0.8.16 To remove this likely collinearty, we estimate
  15 In the interest of parsimony, we do not include the Bartik predictors in these models. Note that the results are
unchanged from their inclusion.
  16 A regression of the Bartik predictor on the Post variable controlling for state-trends yields a t-statistic of 65.74.




                                                           11
the same model without the POST indicator. In this model (column 3) the change in slope is -
0.402 (se=0.0991) – very similar to the estimates slope with the POST indicator. As we will show
in Section IV, all the 2SLS results yield similar point estimates both with and without the POST
indicator, and all our falsification checks look good without the POST indicator. Accordingly,
this is our preferred Linear IV model. The fact that the POST indicator is not significant is not
surprising given the visible lack of a level shift at recession onset in Figure V. This point estimate
suggests that a state with a state revenue share 10 points higher (in 2008), would have had per-pupil
spending fall by (0.1) × (0.402) × ($1000) = $40 per year. Between 2009 and 2015, this would
amount to a difference of about $240 per pupil. In this model, the first stage F-statistic is 16.41 –
sufficiently large for reliable statistical inference.
    Column 4 presents the coefficients on the excluded instruments from the group IV model when
the dependent variable is the level of spending in thousands without the Bartik controls. Consis-
tent with the linear model, there is a monotonic relationship between reliance on state revenues
and the relative decline in per-pupil spending after recession onset. That is, the coefficient on
LOW×POST×YEAR is positive and significant, that on MID×POST×YEAR is negative and sig-
nificant, and that for HIGH×POST×YEAR is even more negative and significant. The point es-
timates indicate that relative to pre-trend, school spending increased by roughly $280 per year in
states that were not very reliant on state revenues, declined by about $273 per year in states that had
moderate reliance on state revenues, and declined by about $524 per year for the states that were
most reliant on state revenues to fund public schools. Column 5 shows the first stage coefficients
with the inclusion of the Bartik controls. In this model all of the slope change coefficients are more
positive, but the monotonic relationship remains– in fact, the differences in slope across the groups
is virtually unchanged with the Bartik predictor. The Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic for the
three excluded instruments presented is 22.74 – indicating some efficiency gains from using the
less restrictive model over the linear IV model. Finally, in our most restrictive models (Group IV
with year fixed effects) the patterns are largely the same. With year fixed effects, all identification
is based on comparisons within each year. As such, there are only two groups for which differential
slopes are estimated. In column 6, relative to the low reliance group (the omitted group), after the
recession onset the middle reliance group spent about $553 less per year (p-value<0.01), and the
high reliance group spend about $805 less per year (p-value<0.01). The F-statistic for the three
excluded instruments presented is 26.73 – indicating a strong first stage.
    Echoing the patterns presented in Figure 4, we present the reduced form estimates for aver-
age NAEP scores in columns 7 through 9. The basic pattern of the change in trends in spending
are mirrored for NAEP scores. Conditional on Bartik controls (column 7), the coefficient on the
excluded instrument is -0.0167 indicating that a state with a state revenue share 10 points higher,
would have had test scores fall by (0.1) × (0.0.0167) = 0.167 of one percent of a standard devia-


                                                  12
tion per year. Between 2009 and 2015, this would amount to a difference of about 1 percent of a
standard deviation. This slope change is significant at the 1% level. In the Group IV model, we
see a similar pattern. In the models with the Bartik controls (column 8), and those with year fixed
effects (column 9), the test score declines are larger for the states that are more reliant on state
revenues. Relative to states with low reliance on state revenues, after recession onset NAEP scores
fell by roughly 0.0269σ per year in medium reliance states and fell by by roughly 0.034σ per year
in highly reliant states. In sum, the test score patterns mirror those for spending.
     The basic pattern of the change in trends in spending are also mirrored for college-going. We
present the reduced form estimates for college-going rates in columns 10 through 12. Conditional
on Bartik controls (column 10), the coefficient on the excluded instrument is -0.0348 indicating
that a state with a state revenue share 10 points higher, would have had college-going rates fall by
(0.1) × (0.0.0348) = 0.348 percentage points per year. Between 2009 and 2015, this would amount
to a difference of about 2.1 percentage points. This slope change is significant at the 1% level. In
the Group IV model, we see a similar pattern. In the models with the Bartik controls (column 8),
and those with year fixed effects (column 9), the college-going declines are larger for the states
that are more reliant on state revenues. Relative to states with low reliance on state revenues, after
recession onset college-going rates fell by roughly 0.023 per year in medium reliance states and
fell by by roughly 0.031 per year in highly reliant states.

IV     Results
    Test Scores: The event study plots in Figure 4 shows that the reductions in school spending
during the Great Recession (as predicted by states’ reliance on state revenues) coincided with de-
clines in NAEP scores. We now quantify this plausibly causal relationship using our 2SLS models.
Models 1 through 6 of Table A17 present the 2SLS estimated effects of the level of spending (in
thousands of dollars) on state average standardized NAEP scores. To provide a basis for com-
parison we also estimate OLS models that do not instrument for school spending (appendix Table
A4). In OLS models with no controls, the estimated coefficient on per-pupil spending is 0.0109
(p-value<0.01) – indicating that with no controls a $1000 increase in per pupil spending is associ-
ated with about a 1 percent of a standard deviation increase in NAEP test scores. Adding the Bartik
controls reduces this coefficient to 0.00795, and in models with year fixed effects, the coefficient
falls to 0.00465 and is no longer statistically significant at traditional levels.
    Model 1 of Table A17 presents the effect of per-pupil spending on NAEP scores. This is the
most parsimonious model with state fixed effects and state-specific linear trends (i.e. no controls).
The 2SLS coefficient is 0.0471 (p-value<0.01). Adding the Bartik predictors for state unemploy-
ment, the point estimate increases to 0.0698, but is no longer significant owing to a very large
standard error (almost 9 times larger than without controls). To help increase precision, we drop


                                                 13
the POST indicator (which is not significant in the NAEP model). The resulting 2SLS estimate
is 0.0415 and is significant at the 5 percent level. Column 4 presents the results of the Group IV
estimator without Bartik controls (but including the POST indicator), mirroring the specification
in model 1 with the group instrument. The point estimate is .0502 (p-value<0.01). Column 5
presents the results of the Group IV estimator with both the Bartik controls and controls for post
recession changes in outcomes. The point estimate is 0.0236 (p-value<0.05). Adding year fixed
effects to this model in column 6, the coefficient on spending is 0.044 (p-value<0.01). Across all
6 specifications, the point estimates are largely similar and range between 0.0236 and 0.0689. We
take models 3, 5, and 6 to be our preferred specifications. Across these models, the point estimate
is roughly 0.036. This indicates that a $1000 reduction in per-pupil spending dues to the recession,
led to a decline in test scores of about 3.6 percent of a standard deviation.17
    College-Going Rates: We show the estimated 2SLS results on college-going in Table A17. As
with test scores, as a basis for comparison we also estimate OLS models that do not instrument for
school spending (appendix Table A4). In OLS models with no controls, the estimates coefficient on
per-pupil spending is 0.0112 (p-value<0.01) – indicating that with no controls a $1000 increase in
per pupil spending is associated with about a 1.1 percentage-points higher college-going. Adding
the Bartik controls has little effect on this estimate, and in models with year fixed effects, the
coefficient falls to 0.00868 and remains statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
    As with the NAEP results, the 2SLS estimates on college-going are larger than the OLS. Model
7 of Table A17 presents the most parsimonious 2SLS model with state fixed effects and state-
specific linear trends (i.e. no controls). The 2SLS coefficient is 0.0426 (p-value<0.01). Adding the
Bartik predictors for state unemployment, the point estimate increases to 0.0574, (p-value<0.10).
When we drop the POST indicator (which is not significant in the college-going model), the point
estimate is 0.0624 (p-value<0.01). Column 11 presents the results of the Group IV estimator
with both the Bartik controls and the post recession indicator. The point estimate is 0.026 (p-
value<0.01). Adding year fixed effects to in column 12, the coefficient on spending is 0.0279
(p-value<0.01). Across the three preferred models (9, 11, and 12), the point estimate is roughly
0.039. This indicates that a $1000 reductions in per-pupil spending due to the recession, led to a
decline in the college-going rate of about 3.9 percentage points. In our most conservative model, a
$1000 reduction in per-pupil spending led to a 2.6 percentage points decline in the college-going
rate.
    The national trends in Figure 1, the event-study plots presented in Figure 4, the reduced form
patterns in Table 2, and the 2SLS results presented in Table 4 all indicate a strong and robust as-
sociation between recession induced spending reductions and deteriorating test scores and college-
  17 Asis found in other settings, our test score impacts are larger for math than for reading. We also find evidence that
impacts are larger on 4th grade scores than 8th grade scores. See Appendix Table A16.


                                                           14
going. However, if our results are to be interpreted causally, it is important that our effects work
through the proposed channels, and are driven by any other ill-effects of the recession. We present
several empirical tests to support a causal interpretation in Section IV.1 below.

IV.1       Robustness checks and Falsification Tests
    A. Our identification strategy relies on the assumption that the reason for the systematic as-
sociation between school spending and test scores is a school spending effect driven primarily by
changes in state revenues. To show that this is the case, we estimate our first stage model on rev-
enues collected from different sources (state, local, federal). We report the coefficients in Table 3.
We present our three preferred models (Linear IV excluding the POST indicator, the Group IV with
all controls, and the Group IV with year fixed effects). Columns 1 through 3 present the reduced
form impacts on federal revenues, columns 4 through 6 present the reduced form impacts on state
revenues, and columns 7 through 9 present the reduced form impacts on local revenues. To sum-
marize the results, for each specification we test whether the slope is the same for the high and low
reliance groups (for the linear IV this is simply the test of significance of the excluded instrument).
In none of the models, can one reject that the slope is the same for local revenues. For federal
revenues, the slope is statistically significant in the Linear IV model but have p-values above 0.3
in both the Group IV models. In contrast, the slope difference is statistically significant for state
revenues in all models. In sum, consistent with our proposed mechanisms, the results reveal that
our instruments operate though their systematic impacts on state revenues.
    B. We now test whether instrumented school spending predicts economic conditions. We have
several variables that measure economic conditions, so to avoid problems with multiple hypothesis
testing we create predicted NAEP scores and college-going rates based on these economic condi-
tions. We regress each outcome on the state unemployment rate, the 4-year moving average of the
state unemployment rate (to account for cumulative exposure), the total county employment, the
percentage of residents living in poverty, the percentage of children living in poverty, and the logs of
the child population, total population, and child population living in poverty. To capture the within-
state variation in outcomes associated with these economic variable, this model includes state fixed
effects and state-specific linear time trends. This model yields a within-entity R-Squared of 0.211
for NAEP scores and 0.08 for college-going rates – indicating that these economic variables ex-
plain a meaningful fraction of the within state variation over time (after accounting for shared time
effects).18 If our instruments impact predicted scores similarly to actual scores it would imply that
much our our main effects were through economic conditions. However, if we find no impact on
predicted scores and sizable impacts on actual scores, it would be compelling evidence that our test
  18 The
       estimation results for the predicted scores are presented in Appendix Table A2. A binned scatter-plot of actual
outcomes against the predicted outcomes are in Appendix Figure D.



                                                         15
score impacts are not driven by underlying economic conditions. We present estimated impacts on
predicted outcomes for the same specifications as our main results in the lower panel of Table A17.
In models with controls, school spending (as predicted by our instruments) is unrelated to predicted
NAEP scores across all specifications. Moreover, the magnitudes are small. Looking to predicted
college-going, the Linear IV yields small positive impacts on predicted college-going while in the
Group IV models, the estimated impacts on predicted outcomes is small and not statistically signif-
icant – suggesting no systematic association between instrumented school spending and economic
conditions that predict outcomes.19 This stands on stark contrast to the large and robust impacts on
actual outcomes– lending further credibility to our research design.
    C. Despite the previous tests, one may still worry that other state-level changes drive our es-
timates. If true, one would observe similar patterns in both public and private schools. However,
if our effects operate through reductions in public-school spending, we should observe test score
effects for public schools but not for private schools. We show this in Appendix Table A9, columns
1 through 3. While the estimated impacts are noisy, there is no evidence of any systematic impacts
on private school scores. That is, while the impacts on public school scores are consistent (and
significant) across all specifications, the impacts on private scores are never statistically significant
and change sign across specifications– precisely what one would observe if there were no effect.
    D. To assuage lingering concerns that our estimates are confounded by underlying recession in-
tensity, Appendix Table A11 presents results that control for economic conditions directly. We also
add an annual housing value index as an additional “control.” Note that because school spending
is capitalized in housing prices (Barrow and Rouse 2004; Cellini et al. 2010), observing a positive
association between instrumented school spending and house prices is not indicative of bias. This
is why we do not estimate impacts of our instrument on house values. We consider these models
to be “over controlling”, but present it to establish the robustness of our result. The fully saturated
models (columns 4, 8, and 12) include total population, child population, state unemployment rate,
the state employment level, child poverty rate, total poverty rate, and average house values. In
models with these controls, the estimates are largely similar to that of our preferred models.
    E. Another concern readers may have is that our estimated impacts are driven by comparisons
across a small number of highly influential states. For example, both Hawaii and D.C. are likely
to be influential states because they have very high and low values of our exogenous instrument.
Because our Group IV model puts states into groups rather than using the continuous measure,
that model is less susceptible to outlier bias. However, to systematically show that our results are
  19 We   also present impacts on the individuals economic outcomes in Appendix Table A10. As one might expect,
there is no consistent association between economic conditions and our instrumented school spending. In many cases,
the impacts on employment and unemployment go in opposite directions, and the signs for many economic variables
flip from one model to the next. Most importantly, across all models, there is no systematic relationship between
instrumented school spending and predicted outcomes based on all of the economic variables.


                                                        16
not driven by some small number of states, we conduct permutation tests in which we estimate
our least restricted Linear IV models and our most restricted Group IV with Year effects models,
excluding one state at time, two states at a time and three states at a time (note that this involves
running about 250 thousand regressions). In sum, in none of the models is the estimated coefficient
on spending negative. While not all models yield statistically significant impacts, there is no com-
bination of three excluded states that will yield a negative spending effect (this includes HI, DC,
or any other state).20 To be more representative of the student population and address any concern
that small states (in term of population) drive the findings, we also estimate our main models using
population-weighted least squares. We use both person weights as well as weights derived from
the child population in the state. The results are presented in Appendix Table A14. The results are
qualitatively similar. We take the robustness of the positive relationship across the different models
for both outcomes and samples to be compelling evidence that our estimated impacts are not driven
by any single group of states, but rather reflects a general pattern.

IV.2       Evidence on Spending Mechanisms
     To better understand mechanisms, we use our 2SLS specification to estimate the extent to which
different spending and staffing categories were reduced in response to recession-induced expendi-
ture decreases. Table 5 reports the results of the 2SLS models. Using our three preferred models,
we regress the level of spending in each sub category (in per-pupil units) on the overall (instru-
mented) level of spending (in thousands per-pupil). The resulting coefficient reveals the marginal
propensity to spend in each category. This specification allows for a formal test of whether the
marginal and average propensities to spend in any category are equal. If the marginal and average
propensities differ, it may suggest that districts respond differently to spending increases than they
do to spending reductions. The vast majority (95%) of overall spending is divided between capital
(9.6%) and operating (85.3%) expenditures. For every dollar in per-pupil spending cuts, districts
decrease capital spending by $0.27-$0.57 and current elementary/secondary spending by $0.35-
$.78. While capital spending accounted for 9.6% of overall annual spending, it made up 27-57% of
overall reductions, suggesting that districts cut capital spending more than other forms of spending
on the margin. In contrast, Jackson et al. (2016) find that each dollar increase in total spending was
associated with $0.1 increased spending on capital (a marginal propensity similar to the average).
An examination of the types of capital spending affected reveals that all of the reduction in cap-
ital spending was from construction (columns 7-9). The disproportionate cutting of construction
projects is consistent with the descriptive patterns documented in Leachman et al. (2016) and re-
ports in the press that budget shortfalls forced schools to defer maintenance and construction. By
cutting disproportionately more from construction, states may be able to cut disproportionately less
  20 We   present results dropping DC, HI, or CA specifically in Appendix Table A13.



                                                         17
from core operating expenses. Indeed, elementary and secondary current spending accounts for
85.3% of overall spending, but only about 35-78% of spending cuts.
    Columns 10 to 12 and Appendix Table A8 show effects across additional spending sub-categories.
For every dollar in spending cuts, districts reduced instructional spending by $0.45-$0.62 on aver-
age. Roughly half of this reduction can be accounted for by reduced instructional salaries, while
reduced instructional benefits make up most of the rest of these cuts (see Appendix Table A8).
While support services account for about 30 percent of spending on average, each dollar of cuts
was associated with, at most, 0.17 fewer dollars spent on support services (columns 1-3 of Ta-
ble A8). In contrast to Jackson et al. (2016) who demonstrate that funding shocks that increased
spending resulted in disproportionately higher increases to both instructional spending and support
services, we find that spending cuts are disproportionately smaller in support services.
     Because reductions in instructional salaries and benefits could have been due to the hiring of
fewer staff (which would likely affect outcomes) or the hiring of cheaper staff (which could have
little effect on outcomes), we look at staffing directly in Table 6. The top panel examines impact
on the log of overall staff counts. Looking at the most conservative model, on average a $1000
decline in spending was associated with hiring 4% fewer teachers, 5.8% fewer teachers aides 13%
fewer guidance councilors, and 10% fewer library staff. If one controls for student enrollment,
these effect are smaller and are only marginally statistically significant. In the conservative model,
conditional on total enrollment, a $1000 decline in spending was associated with hiring 2% fewer
teachers, 3% fewer teachers aides 11.6% fewer guidance councilors, and 10% fewer library staff.
The bottom panel shows the 2SLS estimates of per-pupil spending on student:staff ratios. These
impacts are less precise but are consistent with the reduction in staffing conditional on enrollment.21

IV.3      Distributional Impacts
    Many of the recent studies on the causal impact of increased school spending based on school
finance reforms find that low income students are most impacted (Jackson et al. 2016 ; Lafortune
et al. 2018). However, Hyman (2017) finds the opposite result in Michigan wherein districts tar-
geted the marginal dollar toward schools serving less-poor populations within the district. As such,
the extent to which school spending cuts (which occurred primarily at the state level) may dispro-
portionately harm the poor remains an open question. To examine this, we follow Lafortune et al.
(2018) and measure the relationship between the district poverty rate and test scores within a state.
That is, for each year of the NAEP, we use the restricted data to compute the slope between the
district poverty rate and individuals NAEP scores. This is a measure of test score regressivity. To
  21 In conservative models, a $1000 decline in spending led to roughly 0.3 more students per teacher and .877 more
student per teachers aide (neither effect is statistically significant). However, a $1000 decline in spending led to roughly
81 more students per guidance counselor and 66 more students per library staff (both effects are statistically significant
at the 10 percent level).


                                                            18
avoid using any classification that could have been affected by the recession itself, we use each
districts poverty rate in 2007 (before recession onset) in all years. A large negative slope would
indicate that higher poverty districts perform worse relative to low poverty ones, and a slope of
zero would imply that the district poverty rate is unrelated to NAEP scores. The average slope in
our data is -3.55. This suggests that on average, in the typical state a district with a poverty rate of
zero would have test scores about 1 standard deviations higher than a district with a poverty rate of
30%. The standard deviation of this slope is 1.17.
    The bottom right panel of Figure V presents the event study of this slope. While there is little
evidence of a pre-existing trend differences in high and low Ω states before the recession, there is
clear evidence of a more negative slope after the recession for states that were more reliant on state
taxes to fund public schools. We summarize this patters in our 2SLS models in Table 7. Columns
1 through 3 show the three main specifications where the dependent variable is the slope. The
estimated slope is large, statistically significant, and similar across all models. Across all models,
a $1000 decrease in per-pupil spending led to a decrease in the slope of about 0.4. This is one-third
of a standard deviation change in the test-score regressivity. For a typical state, this implies that
the test score gap between district with a poverty rate of zero and one of 30% would fall by about
0.12 standard deviations (in student achievement units). In sum, the analysis provides compelling
evidence that the achievement losses associated with recessionary public school spending cuts were
disproportionately experienced by those in high poverty districts.
    Using state level averages as reported in the publicly available NAEP, we examine impacts by
student race. Results are reported in Table 7, columns 4-12. Because different states may have very
different shares of students by race, we weight each state estimate by the population of residents
of that race (from the IPUMS). The point estimates do vary across models, but one key pattern
does emerge. While the spending effects are positive for both whites and blacks, they are small and
of inconsistent sign for Hispanic students. This suggests that the test score reductions are driven
largely by Black and White students. Among White and Black students, the point estimates do not
allow one to reject that they marginal spending effects were the same.

IV.4    College Type
    Using the IPEDS data, we are able to shed further light on the kinds of colleges that students
were less likely to attend due to the recessionary spending cuts. We estimate our main specifica-
tions on the percentage of age-eligible students who attend colleges of a particular type. The results
are in Table 8. For each institutional category, we calculate the share of all students who attended
that type of college by students’ home states (we also report marginal impacts as percent changes
relative to the average enrollment share for each category). The overall decrease in college-going
(associated with a $1,000 decline in per-pupil spending) was about 2.8 percentage points – a 5.3%


                                                  19
decline relative to the mean (column 3, panel 1). The results in Table 8 suggest that the overall de-
crease in college going was roughly similar in magnitude across 2-year, 4-year, public, and private
institutions. In our most conservative model with the group IV and year fixed effects, enrollments
declined by 4.1-6.7% for each of these types of institutions when students experienced a $1,000
decline in per-pupil spending, though not all estimates are statistically significant. However, we
do find some differences by school selectivity. Enrollment declines were relatively larger at 4-year
institutions where more than 40% of students are attending part-time (32.5% decline per every
$1,000 in spending cuts) than at 4-year institutions where less than 40% of students are part-time
(3.5% decline per every $1,000 in spending cuts) – only the effect for the less selective schools is
significant at the 10 percent level. At selective or highly selective 4-year institutions, effects were
also relatively small and insignificant (2.9% decline per every $1,000 in spending cuts), suggesting
that enrollment declines were not concentrated in higher selectivity institutions. 22
    Given that there were test score effects for both minority students and white students, one
might expect college-going impacts on both Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) and non-Minority
Serving Institutions. While we do find effects for both MSI’s and non-MSI’s, enrollment declines
were much larger at MSI’s. Across all specifications, a $1000 reduction in spending led to about
a 17% relative decline in attendance at MSI’s (p-value<0.01 or p-value<0.1). At non-MSI’s,
the same spending reduction was only associated with between a 2.1 and 9.2% relative decline in
enrollments. Given that the test score impacts were larger for Black students and near-zero for
Hispanic students, one might expect the college-going impacts to be driven by MSIs that enroll
lower shares of Hispanic students. To test this, we compute the effect on enrollments at specifically
Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI’s) and MSI’s that were not also HSI’s. Using this measure
(columns 4-9 of panel 4), we find large, significant effects on enrollments at non-HSI MSI’s and
smaller, insignificant impacts at HSIs – consistent with the larger test score impacts for Black
students. In our most conservative model with group IV and year fixed effects, a $1,000 decline in
per-pupil spending led to a 20.2% decline in enrollment at non-HSI MSI’s (p-value<0.05) and a
statistically insignificant 10% decline in enrollment at HSI’s. 23

V      Discussion and Conclusions
    The policy and scholarly debates regarding whether public school spending matters have been
going on for decades. Recent studies using idiosyncratic quasi-random variation in school spending
tend to find that increased school spending improves student outcomes (Jackson et al. 2016; Can-
delaria and Shores 2017; Lafortune et al. 2018; Card and Payne 2002 Hyman 2017; Miller 2017;
Gigliotti and Gigliotti 2017). However, despite a growing consensus that money can matter, there
  22 Selective/Most  Selective institutions have incoming student with test scores between the 40th and 100th per-
centiles. Additional enrollment breakdowns by selectivity are shown in Appendix Table A15.
  23 We also compute the enrollment rate for Black Serving Institutions (see Table A15). Results are similar.



                                                       20
has been no study on how schools respond to large persistent cuts to spending and large spending
cuts impact student outcomes. The Great Recession led to the largest and most sustained decline in
national per-pupil spending in decades. The sheer magnitude of this historical episode allows for
a unique examination of the extent to which large-scale and persistent education budget cuts may
harm students in general, and poor children in particular.
    Making use of this episode, we exploit plausibly exogenous reductions in public school spend-
ing induced by the Great Recession and examine the effect of school spending cuts on student test
scores, and college-going rates. Overall, a $1000 decline in per-pupil spending reduced test scores
by about 0.045σ and reduced college-going rates by about 3 percentage points. Consistent with
these education cuts having disproportionate impact on the poor, states that had deeper recessionary
cuts saw a widening of the test score gap between high- and low-poverty districts. We also find
that while Latinx student outcomes were largely unaffected, test scores were lower for both Black
and White students. Consistent with this, we find that college going fell mainly in non-Minority
Serving colleges and universities, and in Black serving colleges and universities.
    Given the unique and historic nature of our variation, it is helpful to put our results in context
of existing work. Borrowing from data collected in Jackson (2018a), we summarize all papers that
rely on causal variation to identify school spending impacts on standardized tests. To focus on
general budget increases (as in our setting) we exclude studies that increase spending for a very
specific use (such as textbooks or new buildings). Figure V, presents the estimated impact of a
$1000 spending increase (that persists for 4 years) for each study of the 11 such studies.24 The
median effect across all studies of a $1000 spending change is 0.0595σ . Our estimated population
effect for the four-year moving average of spending is about 0.048σ (See Table A7)– well within
the range of estimates across these well-identified studies. Looking at college-going, our college-
going estimate of 3 percent per $1000 is virtually identical to that reported in Hyman (2017).
Overall, this suggests that the marginal effect of school spending increases (using school finance
reforms and other highly localized sources of variation) are largely similar to those based on large
school spending reductions. This speaks to questions regarding whether school spending effects are
symmetric. Importantly, we show that school districts respond to budget cuts by disproportionately
reducing non-core operational spending.
    Our results provide further evidence that money matters in education. Moreover they suggest
that school spending cuts do matter. Given that the education spending cuts that occurred at reces-
sion onset have yet to be fully restored the ill-effects of the recession on the affected youth (through
reduced public school spending) may be felt for years to come.


  24 We estimate four year spending impacts because many studies rely on spending changes that take a few years to
materialize.


                                                       21
References
Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat, Anna Gassman-Pines, Dania Francis, and Christina Gibson-Davis.
  Children Left Behind: The Effects of Statewide Job Loss on Student Achievement. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, 6 2011.
Lisa Barrow and Cecilia Elena Rouse. Using market valuation to assess public school spending.
  Journal of Public Economics, 88(9-10):1747–1769, 2004.
Christopher A. Candelaria and Kenneth A. Shores. Court-Ordered Finance Reforms in The Ade-
  quacy Era: Heterogeneous Causal Effects and Sensitivity. Education Finance and Policy, pages
  1–91, 6 2017.
David Card and A. Abigail Payne. School finance reform, the distribution of school spending, and
  the distribution of student test scores. Journal of Public Economics, 83(1):49–82, 10 2002.
Stephanie Riegg Cellini, Fernando Ferreira, and Jesse Rothstein. The Value of School Facility
  Investments: Evidence from a Dynamic Regression Discontinuity Design. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 125(1):215–261, 2 2010.
Rajashri Chakrabarti, Max Livingston, Elizabeth Setren, Jason Bram, Erica Groshen, Andrew
  Haughwout, James Orr, Joydeep Roy, Amy Ellen Schwartz, and Giorgio Topa. The Impact
  of the Great Recession on School District Finances: Evidence from New York. 2015.
William N. Evans, Robert M. Schwab, and Kathryn L. Wagner. The Great Recession and Public
 Education. Education Finance and Policy, pages 1–50, 9 2017.
Philip Gigliotti and Philip Gigliotti. Education Expenditures and Student Performance: Evidence
  from the Save Harmless Provision in New York State. 11 2017.
Craig Gundersen, Brent Kreider, and John Pepper. The Economics of Food Insecurity in the United
  States. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 33(3):281–303, 2011.
Randall G. Holcombe and Russell S. Sobel. The relative variability of state income and sales taxes
  over the revenue cycle. Atlantic Economic Journal, 23(2):97–112, jun 1995.
Penny L. Howell and Barbara B. Miller. Sources of Funding for Schools. The Future of Children,
  7(3):39, 1997.
Caroline Minter Hoxby. Are Efficiency and Equity in School Finance Substitutes or Complements?
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, (4):51–72, nov . ISSN 0895-3309.
Joshua Hyman. Does money matter in the long run? Effects of school spending on educational
  attainment. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(4):256–280, 11 2017.
C. Kirabo Jackson. Does School Spending Matter? The New Literature on an Old Question.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, dec 2018a.


                                               22
C Kirabo Jackson. Does School Spending Matter? The New Literature on an Old Question. Tech-
  nical report, 2018b.
C. Kirabo Jackson and Claire Mackevicius. School Resources, Student Outcomes, and Equality of
  Opportunity? An Examination of the New Literature. 2020.
C. Kirabo Jackson, Rucker Johnson, and Claudia Persico. The Effect of School Finance Reforms
  on the Distribution of Spending, Academic Achievement, and Adult Outcomes. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, may 2014.
C. Kirabo Jackson, Rucker C. Johnson, and Claudia Persico. Money Does Matter After All - Educa-
  tion Next : Education Next, 2015. URL https://www.educationnext.org/money-matter/.
C. Kirabo Jackson, Rucker C. Johnson, and Claudia Persico. The Effects of School Spending on
  Educational and Economic Outcomes: Evidence from School Finance Reforms. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 131(1):157–218, 2 2016.
Julien Lafortune, Jesse Rothstein, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. School Finance Reform
  and the Distribution of Student Achievement. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  0(0), 2018.
Jeff Larrimore, Richard Burkhauser, and Philip Armour. Accounting for Income Changes over
  the Great Recession (2007-2010) Relative to Previous Recessions: The Importance of Taxes and
  Transfers. National Tax Journal, 68(2):281–318, 2015.
Michael Leachman and Chris Mai. Most States Still Funding Schools Less Than Before the Re-
 cession. 2014.
Michael Leachman, Nick Albares, Kathleen Masterson, and Marlana Wallace. Most States Have
 Cut School Funding, and Some Continue Cutting. 2016.
Michael Leachman, Kathleen Masterson, and Eric Figueroa. A Punishing Decade for School
 Funding. Technical report, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, 2017. URL https:
 //www.cbpp.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/11-29-17sfp.pdf.
Susanna Loeb.   Low-Performing Students No Longer Making Gains on NAEP - Ed-
  ucation Next : Education Next, 2018.    URL https://www.educationnext.org/
  low-performing-students-no-longer-making-gains-naep/.
Byron Lutz, Raven Molloy, and Hui Shan. The Housing Crisis and State and Local Government
  Tax Revenue: Five Channels. Technical report, 2010. URL https://www.federalreserve.
  gov/pubs/feds/2010/201049/201049pap.pdf.
Byron F Lutz. The Connection Between House Price Appreciation and Property Tax Rev-
  enues. Technical report, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C., 2008. URL https:
  //www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2008/200848/200848pap.pdf.


                                              23
Daniel P. McMillen. Declining House Prices and Property Taxes in Illinois. Technical report, The
  Illinois Report, 2011. URL https://igpa.uillinois.edu/sites/igpa.uillinois.edu/
  files/reports/IR11-Ch3{_}HousePrices.pdf.
Corbin Miller. The Effect of Education Spending on Student Achievement: Evidence from Property
  Wealth and School Finance Rules. 2017.
Robert A Moffitt. The Great Recession and the Social Safety Net. The Annals of the American
  Academy of Political and Social Science, 650(1):143–166, nov 2013. ISSN 0002-7162.
NCES. Digest of Education Statistics, 2017. 2017. URL https://nces.ed.gov/programs/
 digest/d17/tables/dt17{_}236.55.asp?current=yes.
Philip Oreopoulos, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. The Intergenerational Effects of Worker
  Displacement. Journal of Labor Economics, 26(3):455–000, 7 2008.
Ivaylo D. Petev and Luigi. Pistaferri. Consumption in the Great Recession. Technical report,
  Stanford Center on Poverty and Inequality, 2012. URL https://inequality.stanford.edu/
  sites/default/files/Consumption{_}fact{_}sheet.pdf.
Michael J. Petrilli. NAEP 2017: America’s &quot;Lost Decade&quot; of educational progress
 — The Thomas B. Fordham Institute, 2018. URL https://edexcellence.net/articles/
 naep-2017-americas-lost-decade-of-educational-progress.
Russ K Saito. STATE OF HAWAII COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT FOR
  THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED. Technical report, 2008. URL https://ags.hawaii.gov/
  wp-content/uploads/2012/09/cafr2008.pdf.
Diane Schanzenbach and Bauer Lauren. Food Insecurity among Children in Massachusetts, 2017.
  URL http://brook.gs/2s6Xzkz.
Kenneth Shores and Matthew Steinberg. The Impact of the Great Recession on Student Achieve-
  ment: Evidence from Population Data. 8 2017.
Russell S. Sobel and Gary A. Wagner. Cyclical Variability in State Government Revenue: Can Tax
  Reform Reduce it? State Tax Notes, (8).
Ann Huff Stevens and Jessamyn Schaller. Short-run effects of parental job loss on children’s
  academic achievement. Economics of Education Review, 30(2):289–299, 2011.
Martin R. West.     A Disappointing National Report Card - Education Next
 :     Education  Next,   2018.       URL    https://www.educationnext.org/
 disappointing-national-report-card-2017-naep-results-editor-west/.
Danny Yagan. Employment Hysteresis from the Great Recession. 9 2017.




                                              24
Tables and Figures
                                               Figure 1. School Spending and NAEP Scores Over Time.




Notes: Left: This figure plots 4-year national averages of per-pupil spending in 2015 dollars (dotted line) and NAEP math (gray line) and reading (black line) scores
standardized to a base year of 2003, from the 2000 to 2017 school years. Right: This figure plots 4-year national averages of per-pupil spending in 2015 dollars
(dotted line) and the number of first-time college enrollees in thousands from the 2000 to 2017 school years.
                                        Figure 2. Source of Revenues for K12 Education after the recession.




Notes: Left: This figure plots the share of all state spending in each year that went to K12 public schools over time. The grey areas indicate recession periods. We
obtain state finance data from the U.S. Census Bureau Annual Survey of State and Local Finances (obtained through the Urban Institute-Brookings Institution State
Local Government Finance Data Query System) combined with Census F33 data on Local School District Finances. Right: This figure plots the change in national
aggregate revenue (summed over all available districts in the CCD data) for public schools relative to 2008 levels. The total revenue numbers are broken down by
the source of funding (federal, state, and local); changes in each of which is also shown separately. Due to the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(ARRA), which sought to temporarily offset for the loss in state funding, education spending from federal sources increased in 2010 and 2011 and then fell back to
pre-recession levels thereafter.
                        Figure 3. Fraction of K12 Revenue from State Sources: Spending Growth and Unemployment.




Notes: The left panel shows the percent change in state average (averaged across all districts in the state) K12 spending between 2007 and 2013 by the percent of
state K12 revenues that came from state sources. The right panel shows the percent change in the state unemployment rate between 2007 and 2013 by the percent
of state K12 revenues that came from state sources.
       Figure 4. Difference in Spending and Outcomes Between States with High and Low Reliance on State Revenues Over Time




Notes: The dashed connected lines depicts the coefficients on the individual calendar year indicators interacted with an indicator for hight reliance on state revenue
in 2008, lnΩs > 0.33. The solid lines represent the linear fit during the pre-recession period/cohorts (negative values of exposure) and post recession periods/cohorts
(non-negative values of exposure). The pattern for log per-pupil spending is presented in top-left panel; the pattern for test scores is presented in top-right panel; the
pattern for college-going is in the bottom-left; and the slope between the poverty rate and NAEP scores is shown in the bottom-right.
                                  Figure 5. Forrest Plot of Existing Studies




Notes: The Forrest plot comes from Jackson and Mackevicius (2020), an ongoing meta-analysis of school spending
studies being conducted by Kirabo Jackson and Claire Mackevicius. To facilitate comparison across studies we will
convert each study’s outcome into standardized units. Standardize the treatment: When the effect of spending is
reported, we record that estimate of the change in spending directly. However, some studies report the impacts of a
particular spending policy on outcomes. To allow for comparison across studies, we define each policy based on the
change in per-pupil spending (CPI adjusted to 2018 dollars) that results from that policy. Many studies measure student
outcomes some years after the policy change so that the duration of exposure needs to be standardized across studies.
To standardize both spending and duration of exposure to said spending, for each study, we compute the average change
in per-pupil spending for the four years preceding the observed outcome induced by the policy. Standardized Effect:
After standardizing both the outcome and the treatment, for each study, we compute the change in the standardized
outcome per $1000 policy-induced increase in school spending averaged over four years. We report this effect for the
full population in each study along with the 95% confidence interval. For some studies, the policy induced spending
change is very small so that the confidence intervals are very wide.
                       Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                    (1)    (2)       (3)
                                                     N    Mean       SD

                              School Spending
 Per-pupil spending (2015 dollars)                  459   13,355    3,841
 Share of revenue from state sources in 2008 (IV)   51    0.493    0.137
 Share of revenue from federal sources              459   0.0954   0.0334
 Share of revenue from state sources                459    0.487    0.139
 Share of revenue from local sources                459    0.417    0.144

            Per-Pupil Spending By Use (2015 dollars per pupil)
 Elementary/Secondary (Operations)                459 11,364        3,196
                                    Instructional 459    6,872      2,064
                                         Services 459    4,011      1,230
 Capital                                          458    1,280      806.3
                                    Construction 456     918.6      609.5
                              Non-Construction 459       331.7      175.0
 Other                                            459    481.3      106.3
 Salaries/Benefits
                           Instructional Salaries 459    4,548      1,189
                      Non-Instructional Salaries 459     2,208      560.2
                                         Benefits 459    2,140      875.5

                             Students Per Staff
 Teachers                                           446    15.42    2.526
 Aides                                              427    66.29    26.44
 Guidance Counselors                                440   446.67   146.15
 Library Staff                                      447    653.2   829.99

                    Demographics & Economic Indicators
 K12 Enrollment                                 459    943.6 1,113
 Total Population (thousands)                   459 5,868.8 6,613.7
 Child-Age Population (thousands)               459 1,025.5 1,186.9
 % Total Population in Poverty                  459    13.51 3.282
 % Child-Age Population in Poverty              459    17.00 5.240
 Unemployment Rate (Contemporaneous)            459    5.910 2.006
 Annual Average Employment (thousands)          459 2,610.7 2,830.6
 Zillow Home Value Index                        456 179,170 83,884

                                 Outcomes
 Average NAEP Score                              459       0.125    0.211
 Slope                                           390      -3.552    1.171
 College-Going Rate                              408       0.526   0.0926
                                  4-year schools 408       0.359   0.0800
                                   2-year school 408       0.152   0.0638

 Notes: All dollar amounts are CPI-adjusted to 2015. All variables are col-
lected for each state in 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, 2015, and
2017. 2017 data was not available for school spending so we use 2016 data
instead. College enrollment rates were not available for 2016 or 2017. The
Zillow Housing Value Index was not available for North Dakota in 2002, 2003,
or 2005. NAEP Scores are standardized to 2003 scores using restricted-use
individual-level data.
                                                                        Table 2: First Stage and Reduced Form
                                                        (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)           (10)        (11)       (12)

                                                                             First Stage                                                         Reduced Form

 Outcome                                                           Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)                           Average NAEP Score                    College-Going Rate

 Post                                                  0.828    -0.459                 1.529    -4.019                              0.372                                 -0.198
                                                      [0.494]   [1.847]               [0.439]   [4.830]                            [0.117]                               [0.0833]
 Post * IV                                            -1.802    -1.551   -1.741                                        -0.0233                                0.0266
                                                      [1.145]   [1.118] [1.222]                                        [0.0497]                              [0.0696]
 Post * Year * IV                                     -0.546    -0.344   -0.402                                        -0.0167                               -0.0348
                                                     [0.0690]   [0.285] [0.0991]                                      [0.00708]                             [0.00694]
 Post * (.33<IV<.66)                                                                  -1.551  -2.061      -1.551                   -0.0233  -0.0508                      -0.0522 -0.0328
                                                                                      [0.463] [1.280]     [0.467]                 [0.0262] [0.0404]                      [0.0465] [0.0283]
 Post * (IV>.66)                                                                      -2.909  -3.296      -2.909                  -0.00341   -0.024                       0.0211   0.0367
                                                                                      [1.056] [1.503]     [1.065]                 [0.0262] [0.0428]                      [0.0464] [0.0321]
 Post * Year * (IV<.33)                                                                 0.28   0.801                               -0.0144                                0.0267
                                                                                     [0.0929] [0.532]                             [0.0167]                               [0.0199]
 Post * Year * (.33<IV<.66)                                                           -0.273   0.291      -0.553                   -0.0435  -0.0269                       0.0064 -0.0231
                                                                                     [0.0388] [0.537]     [0.102]                 [0.0139] [0.00874]                     [0.0102] [0.0180]
 Post * Year* (IV>.66)                                                                -0.524  0.0373      -0.805                   -0.0506  -0.0341                      -0.0025   -0.031
                                                                                     [0.0575] [0.540]     [0.110]                 [0.0145] [0.00947]                     [0.0109] [0.0186]

 Observations                                           459       459        459       459        459       459          459         459         459            408        408        408
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat (intercept and slope)     31.33     1.717      20.84     28.71      16.51     22.77        3.056       8.087       7.638          27.18      4.046      5.157
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat (slope only)              62.66     1.455      16.41     47.18      22.74     26.73        5.539        7.2        6.531          25.11      1.374      2.059
 State Trends                                            X         X          X         X          X         X            X           X           X              X          X          X
 State FX                                                X         X          X         X          X         X            X           X           X              X          X          X
 Bartiks                                                           X          X                    X                                  X                                     X
 Year FX                                                                                                    X                                    X                                    X
 Model                                                Linear    Linear     Linear     Group     Group     Groups        Linear      Group      Groups         Linear      Group     Groups
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. The First Stage models regress 2015 per-pupil spending on a set of variables representing our IV, the share of spending from the
state in 2008. The Reduced Form results regress our main outcome variables of interest - standardized NAEP scores and College Enrollment Rate - on the same set of IV indicators. Post
is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the observation is after 2008. All models include data from 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. The First Stage and NAEP models also
include 2016/2017. See Table A3 for First Stage results excluding 2017. All models control for state fixed effects and state trends. We add additional controls (a post dummy variable, bartik
instruments, and/or year fixed effects) to account for additional trends in timing.
                                                    Table 3: Revenue Sources
                                       (1)        (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)           (7)       (8)       (9)

 Per-Pupil Revenue by Source:                  Federal                            State                             Local

 Post * IV                             161                            -969.7                             -2,179
                                     [383.0]                          [1,424]                            [1,017]
 Post * Year * IV                    -127.4                            -173                              -34.94
                                     [42.11]                          [81.72]                            [109.8]
 Post * (.33<IV<.66)                              -41    55.64                    -452.1    -409.7                  -1,173 -756.7
                                                [158.6] [234.4]                  [200.0]    [168.9]                [1,378] [687.5]
 Post * (IV>.66)                                 0.447   74.39                    -2,439    -2,408                  -1,319 -997.9
                                                [210.2] [256.9]                  [1,179]    [1,200]                [1,448] [920.7]
 Post * Year * (IV<.33)                           58.5                             165.2                              461
                                                [149.1]                          [132.4]                           [482.8]
 Post * Year * (.33<IV<.66)                      24.03 -41.88                      19.41    -152.9                   298.4 -197.8
                                                [119.5] [58.27]                  [131.9]    [74.97]                [419.9] [138.8]
 Post * Year * (IV>.66)                         -5.634 -70.56                    -457.4     -629.3                   561.1  67.73
                                                [134.2] [68.81]                  [226.8]    [196.8]                [436.2] [187.1]

 P(Post*Year*IV)                     0.00393                           0.0393                              0.752
 P(Low=High)                                     0.306       0.31                0.00287    0.00241                  0.527     0.719

 Observations                          459       459        459         459        459        459          459       459       459
 State Trends                           X         X          X           X          X          X            X         X         X
 State FX                               X         X          X           X          X          X            X         X         X
 Post*IV                                X         X          X           X          X          X            X         X         X
 Post                                             X                                 X                                 X
 Bartiks                                X         X                      X          X                       X         X
 Year FX                                                    X                                  X                                X
 Model                               Linear     Group     Group        Linear     Group      Group        Linear    Group     Group
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from the F33 School District Finance survey. All
models include state-by-year observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, 2015, and 2016. All models control for
state fixed effects and state trends. Models 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, and 8 also include a state-level bartik instrument and 3 year-lagged bartik
instruments to control for additional economic timing trends. Models 3, 6, and 9 include year fixed effects in place of the bartik
instruments. Post is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the observation is after 2008. For models using the linear IV, P(Post*Year*IV)
tests whether states with a higher reliance on state funds for K12 education in 2008 experienced a decline in the trend of each
revenue source in the years after the Great Recession. In the Group IV models, P(Low=High) tests whether states with the highest
reliance on state-funds experienced greater declines in each revenue source in the years post-Recession than the states with the
lowest reliance on state funds.
                                                                          Table 4: 2SLS Main Results
                                      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)            (7)         (8)           (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)

                                                           Average NAEP Score                                                         College Enrollment Rate

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)     0.0471      0.0698      0.0415      0.0502       0.0236      0.0441        0.0426       0.0574       0.0624      0.0384       0.026      0.0279
                                   [0.0103]    [0.0925]    [0.0190]    [0.00966]    [0.0106]    [0.0131]      [0.00693]    [0.0331]     [0.0159]    [0.00584]   [0.00856]   [0.0106]

 Pr(underid)                       3.82E-07      0.182      0.00103    8.10E-07     0.0907      0.0505        9.84E-08     0.0373        0.00184    3.21E-07      0.09       0.0794
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat         62.66       1.455       16.41       47.18      22.74       26.73           78.85      8.281          21.45       52.29      7.886       10.17
 Pr(Endog)                         5.63E-05       0.28       0.0597    1.03E-05      0.829      0.0708        2.91E-07      0.127         0.0027    2.45E-07     0.115        0.101

                                                           Predicted NAEP Score                                                   Predicted College Enrollment Rate

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)    0.0187      -0.00844     0.00752      0.016      0.00037    0.000704        0.0139   -0.000392        0.00723     0.0112      0.00113     0.00144
                                  [0.00405]    [0.0127]    [0.00637]   [0.00346]   [0.00348]   [0.00318]      [0.00307] [0.00794]       [0.00446]   [0.00287]   [0.00277]   [0.00354]

 Observations                        459          459         459         459         459         459            408         408           408        408         408         408

 State Trends                         X            X           X           X           X           X              X           X             X          X              X        X
 State FX                             X            X           X           X           X           X              X           X             X          X              X        X
 Post*IV                              X            X           X           X           X           X              X           X             X          X              X        X
 Post                                 X            X                       X           X                          X           X                        X              X
 Bartiks                                           X           X                       X                                      X             X                         X
 Year FX                                                                                          X                                                                            X
 Model                            Linear IV    Linear IV   Linear IV   Group IV    Group IV    Group IV       Linear IV   Linear IV     Linear IV   Group IV    Group IV    Group IV
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from the F33 School District Finance survey, IES NAEP results, and IPEDS. All models include state-by-
year observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. NAEP models also include 2016/2017. Post is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the observation is after 2008.
We instrument for per-pupil spending here using Post*Year*IV in Linear models (columns 1-3 and 7-9) and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models (columns 4-6 and 10-12). The top
panel presents our main results regressing Average NAEP Scores and College Enrollment Rates on instrumented per-pupil spending. The bottom panel regresses the same outcomes as
predicted by economic and demographic variables (see table A2) on instrumented spending to demonstrate that instrumented spending is not endogenous to economic and demographic
characteristics that are also correlated with academic outcomes.
                                                                          Table 5: Spending Categories
                                      (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)          (10)         (11)          (12)

 Overall Spending Category:                                 Total Expenditures                                           Capital Spending                     Elem/Sec Operating

 Subset Spending Category:                     Capital                            Elem/Sec Operating                       Construction                           Instructional

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      267.3       571.1       482.9         778.6        353.4      475.4          306.7       478.5        441.7        618.8        446.9         472.3
                                    [130.9]     [234.8]     [223.4]       [179.0]      [189.1]    [193.6]        [137.6]     [201.5]      [190.6]      [158.5]      [51.40]       [55.60]

 Mean(Dependent Var.)                1280        1280        1280          11364        11364     11364          918.6        918.6        918.6        6872         6872          6872
 Average Share                      0.0962      0.0962      0.0962         0.853        0.853     0.853          0.0691       0.0691       0.0691       0.515        0.515         0.515
 P(Average=Marginal)                 0.197      0.0485      0.0896         0.679        0.011     0.0566         0.0905       0.0475       0.0562       0.515        0.193         0.449
 Observations                         458         458         458           459          459       459             456          456          456         459          459           459

 State Trends                         X           X           X              X            X            X           X            X            X            X            X             X
 State FX                             X           X           X              X            X            X           X            X            X            X            X             X
 Post*IV                              X           X           X              X            X            X           X            X            X            X            X             X
 Post                                             X                                       X                                     X                                      X
 Bartiks                              X           X                          X            X                        X            X                         X            X
 Year FX                                                     X                                      X                                        X                                       X
 Model                            Linear IV    Group IV   Group IV       Linear IV    Group IV   Group IV      Linear IV    Group IV      Group IV    Linear IV    Group IV       Group IV
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from the F33 School District Finance survey. All models include state-by-year observations for 2002, 2003,
2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, 2015, and 2016. Post is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the observation is after 2008. We instrument for per-pupil spending using Post*Year*IV in Linear
models and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models. Coefficients on per-pupil spending can be interpreted as the amount of additional funds cut from each category for every one thousand
dollars in exogenous educational spending cuts. More spending categories are reported in table A8.
                                                                                 Table 6: Staffing (2SLS)
                                        (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)        (9)            (10)         (11)          (12)

                                                 Teachers                                   Aides                          Guidance Counselors                           Library Staff

                                                                                                         Outcome: Log(Staff)

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)       0.0763      0.0474       0.0407         0.092         0.0844       0.0587        0.0688         0.123      0.132         0.0669        0.033         0.102
                                     [0.0400]    [0.0121]    [0.00987]       [0.0655]      [0.0211]     [0.0347]      [0.0355]      [0.0363]   [0.0649]       [0.0426]     [0.0241]      [0.0474]

                                                                                        Outcome: Log(Staff), controlling for Log(Enrollment)

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)       0.0388      0.0152       0.0208         0.0551        0.0507       0.0307        0.0462        0.0893      0.116         0.0597       0.0137          0.1
                                     [0.0222]    [0.0186]     [0.0121]       [0.0448]      [0.0283]     [0.0250]      [0.0320]      [0.0393]   [0.0530]       [0.0400]     [0.0273]      [0.0443]

                                                                                                      Outcome: Students per Staff

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)        -0.5       -0.211       -0.292         -4.292       -2.443        -0.877         4.088       -66.41     -81.93         -22.16        -9.067       -66.23
                                     [0.302]      [0.280]      [0.206]        [4.571]      [1.469]       [1.637]       [21.55]      [32.64]    [39.65]        [34.14]       [21.76]      [34.96]

 Observations                          446          446         446             427          427          427            440          440        440            447          447           447

 State Trends                           X            X           X               X            X            X             X             X          X              X            X             X
 State FX                               X            X           X               X            X            X             X             X          X              X            X             X
 Post*IV                                X            X           X               X            X            X             X             X          X              X            X             X
 Post                                                X                                        X                                        X                                      X
 Bartiks                                X            X                           X            X                          X             X                         X            X
 Year FX                                                        X                                          X                                      X                                         X
 Model                              Linear IV    Group IV    Group IV        Linear IV    Group IV      Group IV      Linear IV     Group IV   Group IV      Linear IV     Group IV      Group IV
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from the F33 School District Finance survey and the NCES Common Core of Data LEA Universe Survey.
All models include state-by-year observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, 2015, and 2016/2017. Post is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the observation is after 2008.
We instrument for per-pupil spending using Post*Year*IV in Linear models and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models. For each staff category (teachers, aides, guidance counselors, and
library staff) we estimate three panels. The first and second panels regresses the log of the staff count on instrumented per-pupil spending. The second panel also controls for the log of K12
student enrollment. The third panel regresses the student:staff ratio on instrumented spending. For instance, the coefficient -.5 in column 1 panel 3 indicates that a $2,000 decline in per-pupil
spending increases class size by one student per teacher on average. Not all states reported staff counts for each category in every year, but all states and years are represented in the sample.
                                                                       Table 7: Race and Income (2SLS)
                                      (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)         (9)           (10)        (11)        (12)

                                                 Slope                                                           Average NAEP Score by Race

                                                                                       White                                  Black                                Hispanic

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      0.412       0.428       0.386         0.099       0.0446      0.0296         0.0159      0.0353      0.0353       0.000587     0.0223     -0.00574
                                    [0.240]     [0.158]     [0.151]       [0.0442]    [0.0201]   [0.00820]       [0.0299]    [0.0318]    [0.0151]      [0.0890]    [0.0252]    [0.0133]

 Observations                         390         390         390           452         452         452            392         392         392            402         402         402
 State Trends                          X           X           X             X           X           X              X           X           X              X           X           X
 State FX                              X           X           X             X           X           X              X           X           X              X           X           X
 Post*IV                               X           X           X             X           X           X              X           X           X              X           X           X
 Post                                              X                                     X                                      X                                      X
 Bartiks                               X           X                         X           X                          X           X                          X           X
 Year FX                                                      X                                     X                                      X                                      X
 Model                             Linear IV   Group IV    Group IV      Linear IV   Group IV    Group IV       Linear IV   Group IV    Group IV       Linear IV   Group IV    Group IV
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from the F33 School District Finance survey and the NCES Public and restricted-use NAEP Data. All models
include state-by-year observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. Average NAEP Score by race results also include 2016/2017. Average NAEP Scores by race
are not available in every year for every state, though most states are represented in each sub-sample. Exceptions are Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming (no reported scores for black students)
and Maine, Vermont, and West Virginia (no reported scores for hispanic students). The variable “Slope” is computed by regressing individual-level NAEP scores on the district poverty
rate (in 2007) for each year in each state. Post is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the observation is after 2008. We instrument for per-pupil spending using Post*Year*IV in Linear models
and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models. All models control for state fixed effects and state trends and include a subset of bartik instruments, year fixed effects, and/or a post dummy
indicator to control for additional economic characteristics correlated with years.
                                               Table 8: 2SLS: College Going by Institution Type
                                        (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)                 (6)              (7)          (8)             (9)

                                                    Overall                                      2-Year                                           4-Year

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)       0.056          0.026       0.0279         0.035       0.0068           0.0102             0.0207        0.0171          0.0159
                                     [0.0107]      [0.00856]    [0.0106]      [0.00656]    [0.00493]        [0.00482]          [0.00781]     [0.00997]       [0.0119]
 Average rate                                         0.526                                      0.152                                             0.359
 Effective % change                    0.106         0.0495     0.0531          0.231        0.0448          0.0673              0.0578        0.0476         0.0443

                                              Public (2 or 4 year)                        Private (2 or 4 year)                    More than 40% Part-Time (4 year)

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      0.0423         0.0191      0.0211         0.0134       0.00475          0.00499            0.00539       0.00326        0.00359
                                    [0.00834]      [0.00379]   [0.00355]      [0.00333]    [0.00567]        [0.00653]          [0.00199]     [0.00181]      [0.00199]
 Average rate                                         0.388                                      0.122                                            0.011
 Effective % change                    0.109         0.0493     0.0544          0.11         0.0388          0.0408              0.488         0.295           0.325

                                     Less than 40% Part-Time (4 year)              Selective/Most Selective (4 year)           Minority Serving Institution (2 or 4 year)

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      0.0131         0.0134      0.0117         0.00881      0.00993          0.00846            0.0163        0.0169         0.0171
                                    [0.00663]      [0.00806]   [0.00972]      [0.00555]    [0.00616]        [0.00733]          [0.00696]     [0.00672]      [0.00787]
 Average rate                                         0.333                                      0.294                                            0.0948
 Effective % change                   0.0394         0.0403     0.0351         0.0299        0.0337          0.0287              0.172         0.178           0.18

                                             Non-MSI (2 or 4 year)            Hispanic-Serving Institutions (2 or 4 year)                Non-HSI MSI (2 or 4 year)

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)       0.0397        0.00915     0.0109         0.0045       0.0016           0.00206            0.0118        0.0153          0.015
                                     [0.0104]      [0.00399]   [0.00568]      [0.00323]    [0.00270]        [0.00293]          [0.00638]     [0.00590]      [0.00702]
 Average rate                                         0.431                                      0.0205                                           0.0743
 Effective % change                    0.092         0.0212     0.0252          0.219        0.0781               0.1            0.159         0.206           0.202

 Observations                           408           408            408         408          408                 408             408           408             408
 State Trends                            X             X              X           X            X                   X               X             X               X
 State FX                                X             X              X           X            X                   X               X             X               X
 Post*IV                                 X             X              X           X            X                   X               X             X               X
 Post                                                  X                                       X                                                 X
 Bartiks                                 X             X                          X            X                                   X             X
 Year FX                                                          X                                            X                                               X
 Model                              Linear IV      Group IV    Group IV       Linear IV    Group IV         Group IV           Linear IV     Group IV       Group IV
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from the F33 School District Finance survey, IPEDS, IPUMS, and the Carnegie
Foundation. All models include state-by-year observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. Enrollment rates are calculated from the number
of first time enrollees at institutions meeting the stated criteria (e.g. public or 4-year) that graduated from high school in the past year, by which state the students
lived at the time of application (IPEDS), divided by the number of 17 year-olds 2 years prior to the enrollment year (IPUMS). We report the average enrollment rate
at each type of institution over all states and years to scale the effects to be respective to each institution type’s representation in overall enrollment rates. Post is a
dummy variable equal to 1 if the observation is after 2008. We instrument for per-pupil spending using Post*Year*IV in Linear models and Post*Year*[IV Group] in
Group models. All models control for state fixed effects and state trends and include a subset of bartik instruments, year fixed effects, and/or a post dummy indicator
to control for additional economic characteristics correlated with years. Minority Serving Institutions and Hispanic-Serving Institutions are defined according to IES
definitions (page V) using 2005 undergraduate enrollment data from IPEDS. Selective/Most Selective schools are those 4-year institutions that enroll fewer than 40%
part-time students and admissions test scores are in the 40th to 100th percentile of selectivity. We use the Carnegie Classifications from 2005 for all institutions.
Additional results by college type are reported in table A15.
Appendix
A      Data on School Spending and Resources
     The data on district level school finances is collected from the Census website.25 The underlying data comes from
the Common Core of Data (CCD) School District Finance Survey (F-33). It consists of data submitted annually to the
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) by state education agencies (SEAs) in the 50 states and the District
of Columbia. The purpose of the survey is to provide finance data for all local education agencies (LEAs) that provide
free public elementary and secondary education in the United States. Both NCES and the Governments Division of the
U.S. Census Bureau collect public school system finance data, and they collaborate in their efforts to gather these data.
The F-33 data provides information on revenues, expenditures, and the number of students enrolled. Expenditures
are reported in a number of categories including instructional spending, capital outlays, and administrative spending.
Revenues are reported in several fine categories and aggregated to local, state, and federal sources. We CPI-adjust all
spending variables to be in 2015 dollars and divide by district enrollment in the given year to obtain per-pupil spending
variables.
     The surveys are administered annually from 1992 onward. The last year for which data is available is the 2015-
2016 academic year. We link together multiple years of data to create a balanced state-year panel (summarizing first
across school districts). In constructing the data set, we found that the financial data contained some extremely large
and small values. These values could be valid, but it is more likely that some districts incorrectly reported enrollments
or expenditures. We therefore censored the data by winsorizing extreme values. First, we calculated the (unweighted)
99th and 1st percentile district in total per-pupil current expenditures for each state and year. We then capped values
of districts with per-pupil expenditures at greater than 200 per-cent of the 99th percentile of per-pupil revenues or less
than 50 percent of the 1st percentile.
     For school spending categories (such as capital or instructional salaries), we replace values with missing where
the CPI-adjusted per-student categorical spending value is more than twice the 99th percentile. We follow a similar
strategy for reported staffing categories, which come from the NCES Common Core of Data LEA Universe surveys
(CCD), replacing staffing values with missing if the total staffing variable or the staffing per student (or students per
staff) is more than twice the 99th percentile. Note that not all states report staffing data in every year, and so our
state-by-year analytic sample for staffing estimates is not balanced.


B      Recession Intensity & Employment Data
     Important to our identification strategy is controlling for the direct effect of broader recessionary economic condi-
tions. For this purpose, we construct an index of recession severity and exposure. We exploit the fact that the impact of
recession varied on basis of local industrial compositions and create a shift-share instrument, along the lines of Bartik
(1991), which captures changes in economic conditions attributable to the onset of the recession.
    To do so, we follow the steps broadly outlined in Yagan (2017). We retrieve average annual county-level em-
ployment data from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW).26 Each state’s time-varying shift-share
   25 For instance, data for the school year 2015-2016 is available at https://www.census.gov/data/tables/

2015/econ/school-finances/secondary-education-finance.html and data for the other years can be re-
trieved by modifying the appropriate part of the url.
   26 The QCEW program publishes an annual count of employment and wages reported by employers covering 98 per-

cent of U.S. jobs, available at the county, MSA, state and national levels by industry. Average annual data were down-
loaded from the Bureau of Labor Statistics for each county and year from https://www.bls.gov/cew/datatoc.
shock is computed as the projected unemployment in each year, based on the interaction between the 2007 (pre-
recession) employment composition by two-digit NAICS industry categories and the nationwide unemployment by the
same groupings in that year. Formally, in state s during year t the instrument equals:
                                                                                                     
                                                          E js2007
                         Bartik Predictorst = ∑                         × National Unemployment jst                   (8)
                                                j       ∑ j0 E j0 s2007

    where j denotes a two-digit industry, E js2007 denotes total employment in industry j in state s in 2007, and
National Unemployment jt is the nationwide unemployment rate in industry j in state s in year t.
    From the same dataset (QCEW) above, we also compile the annual total employment number in each county as an
additional measure of economic status. As an additional economic indicator, we obtain state-level estimates of housing
values from Zillow and use the January index for each year as an annual indicator of home prices.


C      NAEP Data
    For our main analyses, we use publicly available state-level NAEP test score data from the National Center for
Education Statistics. The NAEP is administered every other year to a population-weighted sample of schools and
students. Schools are selected from 94 geographic areas, 22 of which are always the same major metropolitan areas.
Students are selected randomly within the selected schools to complete the assessments. Note that our main results are
invariant to the use of sampling weights.
     We use restricted-use individual-level for three purposes: 1) to compute average private school scores, 2) to com-
pute the relationship between district poverty rates and NAEP scores, and 3) to compute the mean and standard devi-
ation of all scores in 2003 for standardization. We infix the raw files to Stata, including all plausible score values per
student, and restricting the sample to the NAEP reporting sample and public private school students (for 2 and 3) or
private school students (for 1). The restriction to the reporting sample and public school students corresponds directly
to the sample used to calculate state averages as reported publicly by NCES.
     Our dependent variable in all public-school NAEP estimations is the average of all publicly available scores per
state, year, grade, and subject, standardized to the base year of 2003 (determined from the restricted-use individual-
level scores). We also use publicly available scores by race in the same way. We restrict our analyses to the years 2002
and later, as NAEP sampling increased dramatically after 2001 and testing years became more consistent at this time.


D      College Enrollment Data
     Our college-going data are obtained from the the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). These
data report surveys submitted at the aggregate-level from postsecondary institutions. These data do not have student-
level information. Institutions report on the number of first-time college freshman from each state in each year who
graduated high school in the past 12 months. By aggregating these data to the state of origin level, we obtain counts
for the number of first-time freshmen from each state in each year. We drop years where the survey was optional,
and match each year of college enrollment to spending data from the year prior (when enrolling students would have
graduated high school). To compute college-going rates for these years, we obtain population counts by age in each
state in each year from the American Community Surveys (ACS) from 2000 to 2016. Our college-going measure is
the number of first-time college enrollees divided by the number of 17-year-olds in the state two years prior to the year
of enrollment. We use this lagged cohort measure instead of 18-year olds in the year prior to minimize measurement
error from counting individuals who had already enrolled in college or moved away from home.

htm
     Using information on postsecondary institutions from IPEDS and the Carnegie Foundation, we are able to compute
enrollments by college type (2-year vs 4-year), selectivity level, and other characteristics about populations served. We
use information on institution characteristics from Carnegie in 2005. Given that some institutional classifications are
based on the populations served, which may be endogenously affected by the recession and K12 spending cuts, we
classify institutions based on their 2005 categories for every year in our data. The Carnegie data provides information
from IPEDS on the level served (2 or 4 year) and control (public or private), as well as its own selectivity and part-
time enrollment categories. Per their definitions, Inclusive 4-year institutions are those for whom test score data was
not available or otherwise indicated that admissions were offered inclusively. Selective 4-year institutions were those
with test scores that placed them between the 40th and 80th percentiles in selectivity, and More/Most Selective 4-year
institutions were those with thest scores that placed them between the 80th and 100th percentiles in selectivity.
     The Carnegie data also includes IPEDS categories to note Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU’s)
and Tribal Colleges. However, we use 2005 IPEDS fall enrollment data by race to define categories for Minority
Serving Institutions, Hispanic Serving Institutions, and Black Serving Institutions using IES definitions (page V of
this document). We define these categories ourselves because exact definitions for 2005 were not available and the
data reported by Carnegie did not seem to match any known definitions precisely (for example, not all HBCU’s were
designated as MSI’s).
                                   Table A1: NAEP Availability

          4th Grade    8th Grade    4th Grade     8th Grade     Tested
 Year       Math         Math        Reading       Reading     Students
 2015         X            X            X             X        430438
 2014
 2013         X            X            X             X         575298
 2012
 2011         X            X            X             X         619789
 2010
 2009         X            X            X             X         571308
 2008
 2007         X            X            X             X         620220
 2006
 2005         X            X            X             X         589458
 2004
 2003         X            X            X             X         642244
 2002                                   X             X         240228
 2001
 2000         X            X            X                        22246
 1999
 1998                                   X             X          15391
 1997
 1996         X            X                                     10805
 1995
 1994                                   X                        6030
 1993
 1992         X            X            X                        16719
 Notes: This table reports the availability of NAEP scores by year, grade,
and subject using restricted-use individual NAEP data.
                  Table A2: Predicted Outcomes

                                          (1)             (2)
              Outcome                 Average        College
                                      NAEP Score     Enrollment
                                                     Rate

 Unemployment Rate (4yr)                  0.0163        -0.00753
                                       [0.00451]       [0.00405]
 Unemployment Rate (1yr)                  0.0064       -0.000171
                                       [0.00195]       [0.00272]
 % Total Population in Poverty          0.00572            0.013
                                       [0.00980]       [0.00751]
 % Child Population in Poverty           -0.0166        -0.00601
                                       [0.00919]       [0.00928]
 Log (Child Population)                   -0.525          -0.512
                                         [0.222]         [0.261]
 Log (Total Population)                    0.364         -0.0499
                                         [0.411]         [0.376]
 Log (Child Population in Poverty)         0.176           0.109
                                         [0.102]         [0.133]
 Annual Average Employment              5.08E-08        4.68E-08
                                       [1.82e-08]      [2.63e-08]
 Constant                                 -0.461            6.7
                                         [5.301]         [4.758]

 Observations                              459            408
 R-squared                                0.963          0.839
 Within R-Squared                         0.211         0.0853
 State FX                                   X              X
 State Trends                               X              X
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. We
regress outcomes on economic and demographic covariates, state
fixed effects, and state trends and create linear predictions of the
outcomes based on the model. The samples here include state by
year observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013,
and 2015. Column 1 also includes data from 2017. Predicted out-
comes are used as placebo outcome measures in our main results
reported in table A17.
                    Table A3: First Stage, College-Going Sample (No 2017)
                                                (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)

                                                           Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)

 Post                                          0.309      0.136               1.103      -5.62
                                              [0.603]    [1.483]             [0.263]    [4.554]
 Post * IV                                     -0.56     -0.417 -0.373
                                              [1.297]    [1.279] [1.081]
 Post * Year * IV                             -0.677     -0.576 -0.558
                                             [0.0763]    [0.200] [0.120]
 Post * (.33<IV<.66)                                                          -0.992     -1.67    -0.992
                                                                              [0.297]   [0.969]   [0.300]
 Post * (IV>.66)                                                              -2.312    -2.811    -2.312
                                                                              [1.009]   [1.291]   [1.018]
 Post * Year * (IV<.33)                                                        0.493     1.143
                                                                              [0.316]   [0.614]
 Post * Year * (.33<IV<.66)                                                   -0.339     0.395    -0.833
                                                                             [0.0427]   [0.481]   [0.322]
 Post * Year* (IV>.66)                                                         -0.61     0.107    -1.103
                                                                             [0.0638]   [0.481]   [0.326]

 Observations                                   408        408      408        408        408       408
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat (all)             40.58      4.163    17.52      32.26      6.914     9.891
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat (slope only)      78.85      8.281    21.45      52.29      7.886     10.17
 State Trends                                    X          X        X          X          X         X
 State FX                                        X          X        X          X          X         X
 Bartiks                                                    X        X          X          X
 Year FX                                                                                            X
 Instrument                                   Linear     Linear    Linear    Groups     Groups    Groups
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. This table replicates the first stage panel of
table 2 dropping 2017 in order to correspond to the college-going sample. These results can be interpreted
as the first stage for the 2SLS models when we examine the outcome College Enrollment Rate.
                                              Table A4: OLS Models
                                        (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)

                                              Average NAEP Score                  College Enrollment Rate

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      0.0109        0.00795     0.00465        0.0112       0.0124       0.00868
                                    [0.00364]     [0.00359]   [0.00314]      [0.00268]    [0.00294]    [0.00439]

 Observations                           459          459         459             408         408          408
 State Trends                            X            X           X               X           X            X
 State FX                                X            X           X               X           X            X
 Bartiks                                              X                                       X
 Year FX                                                           X                                       X
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. State-by-year observations include all states in years
2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. Models predicting NAEP scores also include 2016/2017.
For each column, we regress the outcome (Average NAEP Score or College Enrollment Rate) on per-pupil
spending, state fixed effects, and state trends. Models 2 and 5 also control for a series of bartik instruments,
and models 3 and 6 include year fixed effects.
  Table A5: 2SLS Models with Year Fixed Effects and Linear IV

                                           (1)              (2)

                                     Average           College
                                     NAEP Score        Enrollment
                                                       Rate

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)         0.00146           0.0374
                                        [0.0357]         [0.0102]

 Observations                             459               408
 Pr(underid)                            0.0759             0.129
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat             8.495             5.332
 Pr(Endog)                                0.92             0.135
 State Trends                              X                 X
 State FX                                  X                 X
 Post*IV                                   X                 X
 Year FX                                   X                 X
 Model                                 Linear IV         Linear IV
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. State-
by-year observations include all states in years 2002, 2003, 2005,
2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. Models predicting NAEP scores
also include 2016/2017. Each column reports 2SLS results for the
effect of instrumented per-pupil spending on outcomes, using our
linear instrument for spending (share of state spending in 2008).
The excluded instrument in these models is Post*Year*IV. Models
here include state fixed effects, state trends, and year fixed effects.
The Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat reports the first stage F-statistic
for each model.
                                                          Table A6: 2SLS Main Effects, Log Specification
                                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)        (10)         (11)       (12)

                                                       Average NAEP Score                                                        College Enrollment Rate

 Log (Per-Pupil Spending)        0.567       0.691       0.436       0.621       0.505       0.618        0.513        0.727        0.758      0.494        0.437      0.444
                                [0.128]     [0.697]     [0.191]     [0.126]     [0.187]     [0.215]      [0.0804]     [0.422]      [0.181]    [0.0757]     [0.204]    [0.221]

 Pr(underid)                   2.99E-07     0.0583     0.000329    4.45E-07      0.133      0.0674       6.49E-08     0.0329      0.000598    1.64E-07      0.137      0.0843
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat     67.61      3.749        28.3        31.79       17.46      28.56          90.41      8.548         30.82       35.93       11.73      10.58
 Pr(Endog)                     5.33E-05     0.276       0.0755     5.68E-06      0.393      0.0634       8.31E-07     0.117        0.00213    1.94E-07      0.0705     0.0767

                                                       Predicted NAEP Score                                               Predicted College Enrollment Rate

 Log (Per-Pupil Spending)        0.225      -0.0836      0.0791      0.205     0.00095     0.00682        0.167      -0.00497      0.0879      0.152        0.0166     0.0217
                                [0.0480]    [0.107]     [0.0665]   [0.0431]    [0.0496]    [0.0463]      [0.0361]     [0.101]     [0.0529]    [0.0350]     [0.0475]   [0.0568]

 Observations                     459         459         459         459         459        459            408        408           408        408          408        408

 State Trends                      X           X           X           X          X           X              X          X             X          X            X          X
 State FX                          X           X           X           X          X           X              X          X             X          X            X          X
 Post*IV                           X           X           X           X          X           X              X          X             X          X            X          X
 Post                              X           X                       X          X                          X          X                        X            X
 Bartiks                                       X           X                      X                                     X             X                       X
 Year FX                                                                                     X                                                                           X
 Model                         Linear IV   Linear IV   Linear IV   Group IV    Group IV   Group IV       Linear IV   Linear IV    Linear IV   Group IV     Group IV   Group IV
 Notes: This table replicates table A17 using the Log of Per-Pupil Spending (2015 dollars) instead of Per-Pupil Spending (2015 thousands of dollars). Robust standard errors in
brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from the F33 School District Finance survey, IES NAEP results, and IPEDS. All models include state-by-year observations for 2002,
2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. NAEP models also include 2016/2017. We instrument for the log of per-pupil spending here using Post*Year*IV in Linear models
(columns 1-3 and 7-9) and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models (columns 4-6 and 10-12). The top panel presents our main results regressing Average NAEP Scores and College
Enrollment Rates on instrumented log spending. The bottom panel regresses the same outcomes as predicted by economic and demographic variables (see table A2) on instrumented
log spending to demonstrate that instrumented spending is not endogenous to economic and demographic characteristics that are also correlated with academic outcomes.
                                                              Table A7: 2SLS Main Effects, 4-Year Spending
                                         (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)            (7)         (8)          (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)

                                                               Average NAEP Score                                                      College Enrollment Rate

 4yr Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)     0.043      0.0541       0.0296      0.0465      0.0538     0.0489        0.045       0.0549       0.0523      0.0421      0.0347      0.0353
                                      [0.00835]   [0.0486]     [0.0108]    [0.00811]   [0.0181]   [0.0166]     [0.00722]    [0.0321]     [0.0120]    [0.00682]   [0.0173]    [0.0174]

 Pr(underid)                          2.46E-08     0.0299      3.77E-05    3.67E-08     0.0875     0.0706       5.06E-08     0.0197      0.000183    5.72E-08     0.066       0.0991
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat            98.55      4.763         57.43       46.12      10.07      13.76          84.86       9.32         46.66       39.17      7.269       6.782
 Pr(Endog)                             0.0281       0.458        0.464      0.0153       0.505      0.308       0.000422      0.153       0.0061     0.000372     0.228        0.199

                                                               Predicted NAEP Score                                                Predicted College Enrollment Rate

 4yr Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)    0.0171     -0.00654      0.00536     0.0156     -0.00114 -0.000532       0.0147   -0.000375        0.00606     0.0128     0.000917     0.00149
                                      [0.00309]   [0.00893]    [0.00415]   [0.00281]   [0.00424] [0.00423]     [0.00323] [0.00761]       [0.00360]   [0.00296]   [0.00369]   [0.00425]

 Observations                           459         459          459         459         459        459           408         408           408        408         408         408

 State Trends                            X           X            X           X           X          X             X           X             X          X              X        X
 State FX                                X           X            X           X           X          X             X           X             X          X              X        X
 Post*IV                                 X           X            X           X           X          X             X           X             X          X              X        X
 Post                                    X           X                        X           X                        X           X                        X              X
 Bartiks                                             X            X                       X                                    X             X                         X
 Year FX                                                                                             X                                                                          X
 Model                                Linear IV   Linear IV    Linear IV   Group IV    Group IV   Group IV     Linear IV   Linear IV     Linear IV   Group IV    Group IV    Group IV
Notes: This table replicates table A17 using a 4-year moving average of Per-Pupil Spending (2015 dollars) instead of contemporaneous Per-Pupil Spending (2015 thousands of dollars).
Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from the F33 School District Finance survey, IES NAEP results, and IPEDS. All models include state-by-year
observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. NAEP models also include 2016/2017. We instrument for 4-year per-pupil spending here using Post*Year*IV in Linear
models (columns 1-3 and 7-9) and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models (columns 4-6 and 10-12). The top panel presents our main results regressing Average NAEP Scores and College
Enrollment Rates on instrumented 4-year spending. The bottom panel regresses the same outcomes as predicted by economic and demographic variables (see table A2) on instrumented
4-year spending to demonstrate that instrumented spending is not endogenous to economic and demographic characteristics that are also correlated with academic outcomes.
                                                                            Table A8: 2SLS: Additional Spending Categories
                                      (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)           (10)         (11)         (12)         (13)        (14)        (15)

 Overall Spending Category:                Elem/Sec Operating                                                                              Salaries & Benefits

 Subset Spending Category:                    Support Services                    Instructional Salaries            Non-Instructional Salaries                 Instructional Benefits             Non-Instructional Benefits

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      166.6        -93.45         -3.721      228.7        243.4       282.9        113.5      -32.08      -0.191          312.5         196        228.2         119.4      -33.98      -43.37
                                    [110.9]       [161.2]        [162.2]    [78.59]      [55.23]     [85.64]      [49.88]     [61.48]     [58.74]        [101.2]      [65.84]     [96.78]       [104.4]     [82.68]     [93.84]

 Mean(Dependent Var.)                4011          4011           4011      4548          4548        4548         2208        2208        2208           1408         1408        1408         732.3        732.3       732.3
 Average Share                        0.3           0.3            0.3      0.344        0.344        0.344        0.168       0.168       0.168         0.105         0.105       0.105        0.055        0.055       0.055
 P(Average=Marginal)                 0.233        0.0181         0.0666     0.149        0.0745       0.479        0.281      0.00205     0.00615        0.0457        0.173       0.209         0.54        0.287        0.3
 Observations                         459           459            459       459           459         459          459         459         459            459          459         459          459          459         459

 State Trends                          X             X             X          X             X              X         X           X           X             X             X              X         X           X            X
 State FX                              X             X             X          X             X              X         X           X           X             X             X              X         X           X            X
 Post*IV                               X             X             X          X             X              X         X           X           X             X             X              X         X           X            X
 Post                                                X                                      X                                    X                                       X                                    X
 Bartiks                               X             X                        X             X                        X           X                         X             X                        X           X
 Year FX                                                        X                                      X                                    X                                       X                                     X
 Model                             Linear IV     Group IV    Group IV      Linear IV    Group IV    Group IV     Linear IV   Group IV    Group IV      Linear IV     Group IV    Group IV     Linear IV    Group IV    Group IV
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from the F33 School District Finance survey. All models include state-by-year observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, 2015, and
2016. We instrument for per-pupil spending using Post*Year*IV in Linear models and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models. Coefficients on per-pupil spending can be interpreted as the amount of additional funds cut from
each category for every one thousand dollars in exogenous educational spending cuts. More spending categories are reported in table 5.
                Table A9: Private School NAEP Scores (2SLS)

                                         (1)         (2)        (3)

                                        Private School NAEP Score

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)       -0.134      -0.0111      0.0429
                                      [0.116]     [0.0394]    [0.0343]

 Observations                           388         388         388

 State Trends                            X           X           X
 State FX                                X           X           X
 Post*IV                                 X           X           X
 Post                                                X
 Bartiks                                 X           X
 Year FX                                                         X
 Model                               Linear IV   Group IV     Group IV
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Spending
data come from the F33 School District Finance survey. We calcu-
late private school NAEP scores using the restricted-use NAEP data.
We calculate NAEP scores for private school students, standardizing
to 2003 private school NAEP scores. We take the mean for each state
and year, weighting by the ORIGWT sampling weight. We are not
able to calculate a mean private school NAEP score for every state and
year, but all states and years are represented in the sample. All models
include state-by-year observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009,
2011, 2013, and 2015. We instrument for per-pupil spending here us-
ing Post*Year*IV in the Linear model (column 1) and Post*Year*[IV
Group] in Group models (columns 2 and 3).
                        Table A10: Exogeneity Test of Instrument (2SLS)
                                       (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)

                                       Unemployment Rate (1yr)                 Unemployment Rate (4yr)

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)       0.179       -0.0111       0.0607      -0.0729       -0.0267    -0.0476
                                     [0.496]      [0.166]       [0.187]     [0.267]       [0.146]    [0.155]

                                        Child Poverty Population            Log(Child Poverty Population)

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      -9,471       -1,789        -4,645      0.0112       -0.00872    -0.0162
                                     [7,689]      [4,197]       [5,139]    [0.0311]      [0.0291]    [0.0373]

                                      Annual Average Employment                     Employment Ratio*

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      50,695        12,664        15,640      0.0244      -0.00441     0.00429
                                    [56,942]      [15,134]      [13,721]   [0.00976]     [0.00781]   [0.00883]

                                               K12 Enrollment                       Log(K12 Enrollment)

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      15,732       -54.94        -3,537       0.042        0.0328      0.0221
                                     [8,236]      [8,158]       [9,379]    [0.0353]      [0.0178]    [0.0215]

                                             White Population                        Black Population

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)       7,988        595.3         3,557      316,019      -53,132       5,954
                                     [6,144]      [5,211]       [5,668]    [214,896]     [87,864]    [93,591]

 Observations                         459           459           459         459          459          459

 State Trends                          X             X             X           X            X             X
 State FX                              X             X             X           X            X             X
 Post*IV                               X             X             X           X            X             X
 Post                                                X                                      X
 Bartiks                               X             X                         X            X
 Year FX                                                        X                                       X
 Model                             Linear IV     Group IV    Group IV      Linear IV     Group IV    Group IV
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Spending data are collected from the F33 School
District Finance survey. Other data sources include BLS, SAIPE, NCES CCD, Zillow, and ACS. All mod-
els include state-by-year observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, 2015, and 2016/2017.
We instrument for per-pupil spending here using Post*Year*IV in Linear models (columns 1 and 4) and
Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models (columns 2-3 and 5-6). We regress each economic of demographic
variable on instrumented per-pupil spending. All models include state fixed effects and state trends. Columns
1, 2, 4, and 5 also control for a series of lagged bartik instruments. Columns 3 and 6 instead control for year
fixed effects.
 *Employment ratio = Log(Annual Average Employment) - Log(Total Population)
                                                                        Table A11: Saturated Models (2SLS)
                                      (1)         (2)             (3)       (4)          (5)         (6)             (7)     (8)           (9)         (10)       (11)        (12)

                                                        Model 1                                            Model 2                                          Model 3

                                                                                                  Average NAEP Score

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)     0.0415      0.0463        0.0691       0.106       0.0236       0.0331      0.00688     0.0036       0.0441      0.0568      0.0648      0.0607
                                   [0.0190]    [0.0200]      [0.0356]     [0.0649]    [0.0106]     [0.0156]     [0.0160]   [0.0157]     [0.0131]    [0.0310]    [0.0296]    [0.0249]

 Observations                        459          459          459          456         459          459          459        456           459         459         459         456

                                                                                                 College Enrollment Rate

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)     0.0624      0.0659        0.0867       0.0617      0.026        0.0273       0.0268     0.0273       0.0279      0.0296      0.0297      0.0279
                                   [0.0159]    [0.0172]      [0.0310]     [0.0329]   [0.00856]     [0.0139]     [0.0125]   [0.0127]     [0.0106]    [0.0173]    [0.0160]    [0.0154]

 Observations                        408          408          408          405         408          408          408        405           408         408         408         405

 State Trends & State FX              X            X              X          X           X            X              X        X             X           X             X         X
 Post*IV                              X            X              X          X           X            X              X        X             X           X             X         X
 Post                                                                                    X            X              X        X
 Bartiks                              X            X              X          X           X            X              X        X
 Year FX                                                                                                                                    X           X             X        X
 Population Controls                               X              X         X                         X              X        X                         X             X        X
 Economic Controls                                                X         X                                        X        X                                       X        X
 Housing Values                                                             X                                                 X                                                X
 Model                            Linear IV    Linear IV    Linear IV    Linear IV   Group IV     Group IV     Group IV    Group IV     Group IV    Group IV    Group IV    Group IV
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. All models include state-by-year observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. NAEP models also
include 2016/2017. We instrument for per-pupil spending here using Post*Year*IV in Linear models (columns 1-3 and 7-9) and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models (columns 4-6
and 10-12). The top and bottom panels present results regressing Average NAEP Scores or College Enrollment rates on instrumented per-pupil spending. Each set of models builds on
a preferred specification from our main results in table A17. Column (1) directly replicates the results presented in columns (3) and (9) from table A17. Column (2) adds population
controls (total population and child population), column (3) adds economic controls (1 and 4 year unemployment rates, child poverty rate, total poverty rate, and log(employment)), and
column (4) adds a control for the housing value index (not available for North Dakota in 2002, 2003, or 2005). COlumn (5) replicates the model from columns (5) and (11) from table
A17. Column (9) here replicates models from columns (6) and (12) from A17. We add additional population and economic controls to each of these preferred specficications following
the same progression as in columns (1) through (4).
                                                        Table A12: 2SLS Main Results: Alternative IV for California
                                       (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)            (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)         (11)        (12)

                                                            Average NAEP Score                                                           College Enrollment Rate

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      0.047       0.0706       0.0413       0.0503      0.0221       0.0441         0.0427      0.0598       0.0638      0.0387       0.0265      0.0285
                                    [0.0103]     [0.103]     [0.0194]    [0.00987]    [0.0116]     [0.0139]      [0.00689]    [0.0343]     [0.0160]   [0.00587]    [0.00849]    [0.0106]

 Observations                          459         459         459          459          459         459            408          408          408         408        408           408
 Pr(underid)                        3.54E-07      0.234      0.00135     8.27E-07       0.126      0.0713        9.32E-08      0.0396      0.00166     3.30E-07     0.0854       0.0779
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat          60.63       1.133       13.35        29.43        16.69      19.17           78.72       7.098        18.63        42.09      6.726          7.4
 Pr(Endog)                          5.47E-05      0.319      0.0689      1.07E-05       0.558      0.129         2.73E-07       0.113       0.0017     2.14E-07     0.0836       0.0706

 State Trends                           X           X            X           X            X           X              X           X            X           X            X           X
 State FX                               X           X            X           X            X           X              X           X            X           X            X           X
 Post*IV                                X           X            X           X            X           X              X           X            X           X            X           X
 Post                                   X           X                        X            X                          X           X                        X            X
 Bartiks                                            X            X                        X                                      X            X                        X
 Year FX                                                                                             X                                                                            X
 Model                              Linear IV   Linear IV    Linear IV   Group IV     Group IV    Group IV       Linear IV   Linear IV    Linear IV   Group IV     Group IV    Group IV
 Notes: This table replicates the top panel of table A17 using an alternative specification of our instrument for California. The majority of school district property tax revenue in
California is collected and redistributed by the State. In our main models, we classify this revenue as ”local.” In results presented here, we re-classify property tax revenue reported by
independent school districts as ”state” revenue instead. This causes our instrument for California (share of 2008 education revenues from state sources) to increase from .58 to .78.
 Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from the F33 School District Finance survey, IES NAEP results, and IPEDS. All models include state-by-year
observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. NAEP models also include 2016/2017. We instrument for per-pupil spending here using Post*Year*IV in Linear
models (columns 1-3 and 7-9) and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models (columns 4-6 and 10-12). We regress Average NAEP Scores and College Enrollment Rates on instrumented
spending.
                                                            Table A13: 2SLS Main Results: Dropping States
                                       (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)            (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)         (11)        (12)

                                                             Average NAEP Score                                                          College Enrollment Rate

                                                                                                       Dropping DC

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      0.0471       0.0181       0.0374       0.05        0.055      0.0368          0.0426      0.0339       0.0688      0.0399      0.0164       0.015
                                    [0.0103]     [0.0319]     [0.0178]   [0.00991]    [0.0202]    [0.0166]       [0.00693]    [0.0264]     [0.0199]   [0.00619]    [0.0102]    [0.00903]

 Observations                          450         450          450         450         450          450            400          400         400          400         400          400
 Pr(underid)                        3.82E-07       0.04      0.000827    1.25E-06     0.0874       0.0758        9.84E-08      0.0646      0.00148     4.20E-07      0.132       0.0787
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat          62.63       6.352        23.08       45.59       14.55       20.84           78.81       5.407        23.36        51.92       10.94       15.62
 Pr(Endog)                          5.66E-05      0.691        0.101     1.89E-05     0.00303       0.111        2.96E-07       0.21       0.00583     3.39E-07      0.311        0.316

                                                                                                        Dropping CA

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      0.0474       0.0696       0.0411      0.0505      0.0232      0.0442          0.0422      0.0551       0.0613      0.0381       0.0263      0.0279
                                    [0.0105]     [0.0902]     [0.0189]   [0.00979]    [0.0106]    [0.0131]       [0.00705]    [0.0325]     [0.0159]   [0.00590]    [0.00854]    [0.0106]

 Observations                          450         450          450         450          450         450            400          400         400          400        400           400
 Pr(underid)                        5.18E-07      0.168      0.000809    1.08E-06      0.0922      0.0509        1.55E-07      0.0356      0.00169     4.94E-07     0.0892       0.0796
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat          61.5        1.543        17.08       46.74       22.76       26.69           75.21       8.517        21.67        51.25      7.886        10.12
 Pr(Endog)                          6.80E-05      0.272       0.0591     1.30E-05       0.828      0.0713        4.96E-07       0.142      0.00314     3.95E-07     0.107        0.0992

                                                                                                          Dropping HI

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      0.0489       0.103        0.0413      0.0522      0.0189      0.0479          0.0423      0.0517       0.0572      0.0379       0.0243      0.0268
                                    [0.0110]     [0.176]      [0.0239]    [0.0103]    [0.0116]    [0.0138]       [0.00742]    [0.0448]     [0.0182]   [0.00622]    [0.00908]    [0.0116]

 Observations                          450         450          450         450          450         450            400          400         400          400         400         400
 Pr(underid)                        4.53E-07      0.353       0.00156    1.31E-06       0.136      0.0792        8.80E-08      0.0576      0.00292     5.06E-07      0.111        0.12
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat          55.24       0.628        10.27       35.78        20.13      22.22           70.11       4.453        14.88        52.14       11.05       8.57
 Pr(Endog)                          8.90E-05       0.3         0.106     1.47E-05       0.453      0.0492        4.26E-07       0.251      0.00397     4.03E-07      0.229       0.224


 State Trends                           X           X            X           X            X           X              X           X            X           X            X           X
 State FX                               X           X            X           X            X           X              X           X            X           X            X           X
 Post*IV                                X           X            X           X            X           X              X           X            X           X            X           X
 Post                                   X           X                        X            X                          X           X                        X            X
 Bartiks                                            X            X                        X                                      X            X                        X
 Year FX                                                                                             X                                                                            X
 Model                              Linear IV   Linear IV    Linear IV   Group IV     Group IV    Group IV       Linear IV   Linear IV    Linear IV   Group IV     Group IV    Group IV
 Notes: This table replicates the top panel of table A17 dropping individual states from the analysis. Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from the F33
School District Finance survey, IES NAEP results, and IPEDS. All models include state-by-year observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. NAEP models
also include 2016/2017. We instrument for per-pupil spending here using Post*Year*IV in Linear models (columns 1-3 and 7-9) and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models (columns
4-6 and 10-12). We regress Average NAEP Scores and College Enrollment Rates on instrumented spending, dropping either DC, California, or Hawaii from the sample to demonstrate
the robustness of the main findings.
                                                                       Table A14: Main Results (Weighted)
                                       1            2           3           4           5           6              7            8           9           10          11          12

                                                            Average NAEP Score                                                           College Going Rate

                                                                                                Weight = K12 Enrollment
 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      0.0603     -0.00329     0.0537       0.0565      0.0469      0.0255       0.0412   0.0218           0.054        0.0349     0.00332     0.00537
                                    [0.0163]    [0.0481]    [0.0187]     [0.0153]    [0.0199]   [0.00884]    [0.00746] [0.0436]         [0.0284]    [0.00680]   [0.00768]   [0.00511]

 Pr(underid)                       7.26E-05      0.314       0.0278      0.000368     0.129       0.191        0.000105      0.228      0.00252     0.000315      0.183        0.183
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat         27.27       0.99        3.349         47.46      48.16       68.54          56.97       1.529       6.459        60.48       48.01        73.3
 Pr(Endog)                         0.00325       0.714       0.0386       0.0285     0.00414       0.15        0.000143      0.463      0.00601     2.40E-05      0.193         0.12

                                                                                                Weight = Total Population
 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)       0.06      0.00469      0.0566       0.0563      0.0479      0.0259         0.0405   0.0195         0.0504       0.0344     0.00356     0.00667
                                    [0.0151]    [0.0469]    [0.0189]     [0.0142]    [0.0206]   [0.00887]      [0.00757] [0.0416]       [0.0262]    [0.00688]   [0.00747]   [0.00648]

 Pr(underid)                       9.30E-05      0.349        0.028      0.000503     0.141       0.183        9.13E-05      0.231      0.0021      0.000304      0.188       0.171
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat         25.27       0.852        3.49         48.3       49.84       70.79          51.03       1.524       7.184        56.91       44.37       67.13
 Pr(Endog)                         0.00144       0.867       0.0278       0.0125     0.00386      0.138        0.000116      0.497      0.00639     2.33E-05      0.164       0.0845

                                                                                            Weight = Child-Aged Population
 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)      0.0598     -0.00168     0.0526       0.0561      0.0467    0.0255         0.0411     0.0205         0.0529       0.0348     0.00324     0.00575
                                    [0.0158]    [0.0478]    [0.0181]     [0.0149]    [0.0199] [0.00872]      [0.00739] [0.0422]         [0.0273]    [0.00673]   [0.00753]   [0.00566]

 Pr(underid)                       6.90E-05      0.322       0.0261      0.000339     0.138       0.187        9.04E-05      0.223      0.00199     0.000265      0.188        0.177
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat         27.55       0.962       3.466         49.16      50.37       71.6           57.02       1.582       6.879        60.27       47.47        72.15
 Pr(Endog)                         0.00253       0.748       0.0401       0.0231     0.00409      0.153        0.000124      0.478      0.00585     2.31E-05      0.184        0.105

 Observations                         459         459          459         459         459         459            408         408          408         408         408         408
 State Trends                          X           X            X           X           X           X              X           X            X           X           X           X
 State FX                              X           X            X           X           X           X              X           X            X           X           X           X
 Post*IV                               X           X            X           X           X           X              X           X            X           X           X           X
 Post                                  X           X                        X           X                          X           X                        X           X
 Bartiks                                           X            X                       X                                      X            X                       X
 Year FX                                                                                           X                                                                            X
 Model                             Linear IV   Linear IV    Linear IV    Group IV   Group IV    Group IV       Linear IV   Linear IV    Linear IV   Group IV    Group IV     Group IV
 Notes: This table replicates the top panel of table A17, weighting the regressions by population measures. Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from
the F33 School District Finance survey, IES NAEP results, and IPEDS. All models include state-by-year observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. NAEP
models also include 2016/2017. We instrument for per-pupil spending here using Post*Year*IV in Linear models (columns 1-3 and 7-9) and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models
(columns 4-6 and 10-12). We regress Average NAEP Scores and College Enrollment Rates on instrumented spending, weighting by either K12 enrollment, total population, or child
population in the state-year.
                   Table A15: 2SLS: College Going by Institution Type, Continued
                                        (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)

                                          Black-Serving Institution                     Inclusive (4-year)

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)       0.00617       0.00845     0.00792        0.00431       0.00349     0.00321
                                     [0.00209]     [0.00431]   [0.00497]      [0.00182]     [0.00204]   [0.00247]
 Average rate                                        0.047                                    0.0385
 Effective % change                    0.131          0.18          0.168       0.112         0.0906     0.0834

                                               Selective (4-year)                   Most Selective (4-year)

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)       0.0109        0.00428     0.00435       -0.00212       0.00564     0.00411
                                     [0.00452]     [0.00413]   [0.00472]      [0.00232]     [0.00229]   [0.00281]
 Average rate                                         0.184                                    0.11
 Effective % change                   0.0594         0.0233         0.0236     -0.0192        0.0512     0.0373


 Observations                           408           408            408         408           408           408
 State Trends                            X             X              X           X             X             X
 State FX                                X             X              X           X             X             X
 Post*IV                                 X             X              X           X             X             X
 Post                                                  X                                        X
 Bartiks                                 X             X                          X             X
 Year FX                                                          X                                        X
 Model                               Linear IV     Group IV    Group IV       Linear IV     Group IV    Group IV
 Notes: This table is a continuation of table 8. Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are col-
lected from the F33 School District Finance survey, IPEDS, IPUMS, and the Carnegie Foundation. All models
include state-by-year observations for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. Enrollment rates
are calculated from the number of first time enrollees at institutions meeting the stated criteria (e.g. inclusive)
that graduated from high school in the past year, by which state the students lived at the time of application
(IPEDS), divided by the number of 17 year-olds 2 years prior to the enrollment year (IPUMS). We report the
average enrollment rate at each type of institution over all states and years to scale the effects to be respective
to each institution type’s representation in overall enrollment rates. We instrument for per-pupil spending using
Post*Year*IV in Linear models and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models. All models control for state fixed
effects and state trends and include a subset of bartik instruments, year fixed effects, and/or a post indicator
to control for additional economic characteristics correlated with years. Black-Serving Institutions are defined
according to IES definitions (page V) using 2005 undergraduate enrollment data from IPEDS. BSI’s include
Historically Black Colleges and Universities or institutions where undergraduate enrollment is at least 25%
black, and no other minority group makes up more than 25% of the undergraduate student body. Inclusive,
Selective, and Most Selective schools are defined by Carnegie Classifications from 2005 for all institutions. In-
clusive institutions are those for whom test scores are not available or suggests that admission is offered broadly.
Selective institutions are those whose incoming test scores classify the institutions between the 40th and 80th
percentile of selectivity. Most Selective institutions fall between the 80th and 100th percentile in selectivity.
                            Table A16: NAEP by Grade and Subject (2SLS)
                                       (1)          (2)         (3)             (4)         (5)          (6)

                                                              Average NAEP Score

                                                   Math                                  Reading

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)       0.201       0.0017        0.063        -0.0258       0.0067      0.0169
                                     [0.0452]    [0.0228]     [0.0280]       [0.0181]    [0.00537]   [0.00421]

 Observations                          408          408         408            454          454         454

                                                4th Grade                               8th Grade

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)       0.0818       0.025       0.0511         0.0194      0.0209       0.0368
                                     [0.0224]    [0.0152]     [0.0187]       [0.0175]    [0.0110]     [0.0108]


 Observations                          454          454         454            453          453         453

 State Trends                          X             X           X              X            X           X
 State FX                              X             X           X              X            X           X
 Post*IV                               X             X           X              X            X           X
 Post                                                X                                       X
 Bartiks                               X             X                          X            X
 Year FX                                                        X                                       X
 Model                              Linear IV    Group IV    Group IV       Linear IV    Group IV    Group IV
 Robust standard errors in brackets
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from the F33 School District
Finance survey and the NCES Public NAEP Data. All models include state-by-year observations for 2002,
2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, 2015, and 2016/2017. There was no Math NAEP test in 2002 (see table
A1. Not all NAEP by grade/subject scores were available for every state in 2002 (AK, CO, NH, NJ, and SD do
not have any grade/subject specific scores for 2002, Iowa does not report 8th grade specific scores for 2002). We
instrument for per-pupil spending using Post*Year*IV in Linear models and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group
models. All models control for state fixed effects and state trends and include a subset of bartik instruments,
year fixed effects, and/or a post dummy indicator to control for additional economic characteristics correlated
with years.
                                                 Table A17: 2SLS Main Results, Controlling for Predicted Outcomes
                                      (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)            (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)        (12)

                                                            Average NAEP Score                                                         College Enrollment Rate

 Per-Pupil Spending (thousands)     0.0283       0.0733      0.0382      0.0336       0.0234      0.0437        0.0372       0.0575      0.0608      0.0341       0.0259      0.028
                                   [0.00901]    [0.0909]    [0.0192]    [0.00924]    [0.0109]    [0.0136]      [0.00756]    [0.0328]    [0.0152]    [0.00633]    [0.00859]   [0.0107]

 Pr(underid)                       6.20E-06      0.162      0.00212     4.78E-07      0.0993      0.0594       4.73E-06      0.0376     0.000603    7.56E-07      0.0894      0.0787
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat         42.86       1.649       11.98        42.32         23        26.58          47.85       8.207        29.57       45.53        7.95       9.958
 Pr(Endog)                          0.0118       0.264       0.081      0.00239        0.749      0.0601       3.39E-05       0.126      0.00279    3.19E-05       0.125       0.102


 Observations                         459         459          459         459         459         459            408         408          408         408         408          408

 State Trends                          X           X            X           X           X           X              X           X            X           X           X            X
 State FX                              X           X            X           X           X           X              X           X            X           X           X            X
 Predicted Outcome                     X           X            X           X           X           X              X           X            X           X           X            X
 Post-2008*IV                          X           X            X           X           X           X              X           X            X           X           X            X
 Post-2008                             X           X                        X           X                          X           X                        X           X
 Bartiks                                           X            X                       X                                      X            X                       X
 Year FX                                                                                           X                                                                            X
 Model                             Linear IV   Linear IV    Linear IV   Group IV    Group IV    Group IV       Linear IV   Linear IV    Linear IV   Group IV     Group IV    Group IV
 Notes: This table replicates the top panel of table A17, including additional controls for the predicted outcomes (predicted NAEP scores or predicted college enrollment). Robust
standard errors in brackets cluster by state. Data are collected from the F33 School District Finance survey, IES NAEP results, and IPEDS. All models include state-by-year observations
for 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015. NAEP models also include 2016/2017. We instrument for per-pupil spending here using Post*Year*IV in Linear models
(columns 1-3 and 7-9) and Post*Year*[IV Group] in Group models (columns 4-6 and 10-12). We regress Average NAEP Scores and College Enrollment Rates on instrumented spending.
                                                     Figure A1 Predicted Scores Versus Actual Scores.




Notes: The two figures are binned scatter plots of the actual annual standardized NAEP test scores and actual college enrollment rates on the predicted annual NAEP
scores and college enrollment rates respectively. To construct these binned scatter plots, we first predict the x-axis variable using measures of state-level population,
poverty, and (un)employment. We next residualize all variables with respect to state trends. We then divide the predicted outcomes into fifty equal-sized groups and
plot the means of the y-variable residuals within each bin against the mean value of the predicted outcome within each bin.
                                                  Figure A2 Outcome Impacts under Permutation Test.




Notes: This density plot depict the distribution of estimated impacts while dropping states. The dashed black line depicts the distribution of estimated coefficient of
log spending on NAEP scores if one drops any single state in the main model. The dashed gray line depicts the distribution of estimated coefficient of log spending
on NAEP scores if one drops any two states in the main model. The solid black line depicts the distribution of estimated coefficient of log spending on NAEP scores
if one drops any three states in the main model. Finally, the solid gray line depicts the distribution of estimated coefficients of log spending on NAEP scores if one
drops any three states in the conservative model.
                           Figure A3. Fraction of Education Revenue from State Sources




Notes: This map shows the extent of variation in (%)States across the United States.
                                                              Figure A4. Bartik Predictors Over Time




Notes: To create this Bartik predictor, we compute the proportion of all workers in each industry in each state in 2007. We multiply these 2007 industry proportions
by the national unemployment rate in that industry for each year. For each state, we sum these products across all industries in each year. See the data appendix for
further detail. Using this approach we predicted unemployment in year t, through t − 3 to account for dynamic impacts of unemployment.
