                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     STATISTICAL DISCRIMINATION AND DURATION DEPENDENCE IN THE JOB
                              FINDING RATE

                                        Gregor Jarosch
                                        Laura Pilossoph

                                      Working Paper 24200
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24200


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2018




We thank Sushant Acharya, Adrien Auclert, Steven Davis, Peter Diamond, Michael Elsby,
Loukas Karabarbounis, Fabian Lange, Matthew Notowidigdo, Richard Rogerson, Robert Shimer,
Isaac Sorkin, Shu Lin Wee, and the audiences at various seminars and conferences for their
thoughts and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Gregor Jarosch and Laura Pilossoph. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Statistical Discrimination and Duration Dependence in the Job Finding Rate
Gregor Jarosch and Laura Pilossoph
NBER Working Paper No. 24200
January 2018
JEL No. E24,J64

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper models a frictional labor market where employers endogenously discriminate against
the long term unemployed. The estimated model replicates recent experimental evidence which
documents that interview invitations for observationally equivalent workers fall sharply as
unemployment duration progresses. We use the model to quantitatively assess the consequences
of such employer behavior for job finding rates and long term unemployment and find only
modest effects given the large decline in callbacks. Interviews lost to duration impact individual
job-finding rates solely if they would have led to jobs. We show that such instances are rare when
firms discriminate in anticipation of an ultimately unsuccessful application. Discrimination in
callbacks is thus largely a response to dynamic selection, with limited consequences for structural
duration dependence and long term unemployment.


Gregor Jarosch
Department of Economics
Princeton University
195 Julis Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
gregorjarosch@gmail.com

Laura Pilossoph
Macroeconomics and Monetary Studies Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
pilossoph@gmail.com
1     Introduction
Recent experimental work shows that employers are reluctant to interview long term un-
employed workers. For example, using a large-scale resume audit study, Kroft et al. (2013)
document that callback rates in response to job applications decline substantially with un-
employment duration. All else equal, they find that a worker unemployed for 8 months is
45 percent less likely to receive a callback for an interview than an observationally equiv-
alent newly unemployed worker. Farber et al. (2016), Eriksson and Rooth (2014), Ghayad
(2013), and Oberholzer-Gee (2008) also study, via the same experimental approach, how
unemployment duration affects a worker’s chances of receiving an interview.
    In this paper, we develop a tractable model of the hiring process to quantify the con-
sequences of such employer behavior for job finding rates and long term unemployment.
We do so motivated by the simple observation that not all interviews lost to unemploy-
ment duration translate into lost jobs. That is, discrimination against unemployment du-
ration matters for employment outcomes to the extent that it alters who receives and who
is denied a job. Therefore, quantifying the implications of the experimental evidence for
the labor market requires taking a stance on the details of the interviewing and hiring
process.1
    To this end, we model a frictional labor market with a two-stage hiring process which
lends itself tightly to the experimental evidence, connecting callbacks with job finding
rates. Firms receive applications from workers who differ in ways that matter to employ-
ers, yet are unobservable on a resume. They then decide on whether or not to follow
up with an interview. If they do so, they call back the worker for a costly interview in
which they can learn more about the applicant. Because more qualified workers are more
likely to get hired upon completing an interview, low ability workers are more likely to
be long term unemployed and duration contains information about a worker’s ability.2
As a result, employers react to this information by conditioning their callback decisions
on unemployment duration; they statistically discriminate against workers with higher
unemployment duration.3
    The two key metrics we use to gauge the impact of discrimination on the labor market
    1 Eriksson and Rooth (2014) describe that, “a limitation of [the field experiment] approach is that [it]
studie[s] only the early stages of the hiring process since we do not know whom the employers eventually
decide to hire.” Similarly, Kroft et al. (2013) recognize that their field experiment “can only shed light on
negative duration dependence in callback rates.” See Heckman (1998) for similar arguments.
   2 This selection into long term unemployment is known as dynamic selection.
   3 We note that discrimination may well extend into later stages of the hiring process. However, our

focus is on discrimination at the callback stage since this is the focus of the experimental literature. Thus,
throughout the paper, we use the term discrimination in reference to discrimination against unemployment
duration at the interview or callback stage.


                                                      1
are (i) the incidence of long term unemployment and (ii) structural duration dependence
in the job finding rate generated by discrimination. The former is simply the fraction
of the population which is unemployed for more than 6 months. The latter, sometimes
referred to as “true” duration dependence, is the component of duration dependence in
the job finding rate which is a direct consequence of duration and not driven simply by
composition changes—the fact that types with lower exit rates stay unemployed longer,
mechanically lowering the average job finding rate as duration increases.
     To quantify those metrics we estimate our framework, targeting the decline in average
job finding rates in the Current Population Survey (CPS) as well as the duration depen-
dence in callbacks identified in Kroft et al. (2013). Our framework gives rise to an exact
counterpart to the experimental evidence, namely a callback rate for interviews that may
vary with the unemployment rate.4
     We show that the estimated model economy closely captures our empirical targets. We
reproduce how the empirical exit rate from unemployment varies with unemployment
duration. More importantly, the model closely replicates the experimentally measured
decay in the interview rate. That is, if one were to conduct a resume audit study in our
model economy, one would detect the same degree of discrimination as found in Kroft et
al. (2013).
     We further show that firms discriminate substantially less in our model if the labor
market has slack because dynamic selection weakens when workers meet firms less fre-
quently, quantitatively consistent with evidence in Kroft et al. (2013). A model of taste-
based discrimination, such as Blanchard and Diamond (1994), cannot immediately ac-
count for this fact.5
     In line with the evidence, the model generates a rapid and large decline in the inter-
view rate with unemployment duration: long term unemployed workers receive around
50% less interviews compared to a newly unemployed worker with an equivalent resume.
Given the size of these effects, one may thus suspect, prima facie, that discrimination in
   4 Most  other models of employer discrimination feature discrimination at the hiring stage. For example,
Vishwanath (1989) and Lockwood (1991) study stylized models in which employers endogenously inter-
pret the results of a test or signal in light of an applicant’s unemployment duration. Hiring is conditioned
on the result of the test and in the equilibrium with testing all firms interview their applicants. Doppelt
(2016) studies the impact of unemployment stigma generated by a worker’s entire labor market history on
labor market outcomes. Job interviews get interpreted in light of such stigma, but are always conducted.
In Fernandez-Blanco and Preugschat (2017), firms interview multiple applicants for suitability and endoge-
nously hire the suitable candidate with the lowest duration.
   5 In Blanchard and Diamond (1994) firms rank applicants according to unemployment duration without

having any reason to do so. In Coate and Loury (1993), discrimination is a feature of an equilibrium where
employer beliefs are self-fulfilled through worker investment behavior. In a setup like ours, where the
underlying dynamic selection that leads to group differences is mechanical, there is no equilibrium in which
firms do not discriminate under plausible assumptions on the production technology spelled out below.


                                                     2
callbacks is an important contributor to structural duration dependence in the job finding
rate and the incidence of long term unemployment.6
    However, our findings suggest that the impact of discrimination on our key metrics is
very moderate. In a first exercise, we contrast the labor market in our equilibrium with
a counterfactual that eliminates all discrimination. We show that, while the medium and
long term unemployed receive almost twice as many interviews in the counterfactual,
their job finding rate increases by a mere 3%. This suggests a limited role of employer
discrimination as a driver of structural duration dependence in the job finding rate. As a
consequence, we find that eliminating all discrimination leads to a modest decline in the
incidence of long term unemployment of less than 8%.
    Our second exercise directly decomposes duration dependence in the job finding rate
into a compositional and structural component, the latter fully driven by statistical dis-
crimination. Our results complement the findings from the counterfactual analysis: The
bulk of the decline in the job finding rate is purely compositional, with the structural
component accounting for less than 10% of the observed decline at all durations.
    The reason behind these findings is that the share of false negatives—incidents in which
firms deny interviews to workers who would have otherwise been hired—is low and thus
few of the interviews lost to discrimination would have led to jobs. Therefore, our find-
ings suggest that statistical discrimination is largely a response to compositional changes
rather than an important driver of structural duration dependence and long term unem-
ployment.
    We use the simplicity of our baseline setup to provide a theoretically guided explana-
tion for this result and show that firms, when making a callback decision, compare two
key objects: The cost of calling back a worker who ultimately turns out to be a bad match,
and the benefits of locating a suitable candidate. The reason false negatives are rare is
then that the benefits of forming a viable employment relationship far exceed the cost of
an interview. In this case, firms only discriminate, passing on interview opportunities,
when they are fairly certain those interviews will not turn into hires. This in turn implies
that few of the interviews lost to duration are lost jobs.7
   6 Examples of work making such a connection in a quantitative fashion include Altonji et al. (2016), Bos et

al. (2016), Sharone et al. (2015), and Torgovitsky (2016). Others that equate a lost interview (as detected by an
audit study) with a lost job include Barnichon and Figura (2015), Haltiwanger et al. (2015), and Kekre (2017).
Similarly, various policy items, such as the presidential memorandum in White-House (2014b), the US
Department of Labor USDOL (2014), and anti-discrimination measures that were implemented at the state
level in New York (Law-2013-014 (2013)), New Jersey (Public-Law-2011 (2011)), Oregon (Senate-Bill-1548
(2012)), and Washington D.C. (Code-32-162 (2012)) reference the audit study evidence at multiple occasions
to motivate policy interventions aimed at battling the “negative cycle of long term unemployment” (White-
House (2014a)).
    7 With this tradeoff in mind, we choose a deliberately conservative empirical strategy with regard to the



                                                       3
    While highly qualified workers are sharply affected by the decline in callbacks at
longer unemployment durations, they usually exit unemployment quickly—which is pre-
cisely the reason some firms abstain from interviewing those with high duration. Never-
theless, we stress that our aggregate results mask considerable heterogeneity in the im-
pact of discrimination: High types which “fall through the cracks” and become long term
unemployed suffer from a large decline in their chances to escape unemployment because
of the decline in callbacks they experience.
    The final section of the paper extends our basic environment to allow for coordination
frictions in the search process and human capital decay during non-employment. Both
features have the potential to amplify the consequences of discrimination. First, multiple
workers may apply for the same job; if firms rank applicants according to unemployment
duration, those with high duration are crowded out by other applicants. And second,
workers who experience a rejection at the interview stage may subsequently loose skill,
further hampering their job finding rate.
    We re-estimate this richer environment and rely on the same metrics to assess the im-
pact of the decline in callbacks. Absent any discrimination, monthly job finding rates
rise by 8% at some durations; these changes accumulate and lower the incidence of long
term unemployment by around 20%, in line with the notion that the added components
amplify the results. Nevertheless, this impact is surprisingly small if one considers that
eliminating discrimination almost doubles the monthly interview rate for the medium
and long term unemployed. That is, the medium and long term unemployed experi-
ence an increase in monthly callbacks between 50% and 100%, yet their job finding rate
increases by an order of magnitude less. This again reflects that most of the additional
interviews fail to convert into jobs. These results confirm the basic findings from the
baseline setup and highlight the importance of guiding the quantitative inference from
the purely experimental evidence to actual labor outcomes with a theory of the hiring
process.
    Our model-based approach can be viewed as an alternative to the statistical approaches
taken in the micro-empirical literature that attempt to separately identify structural dura-
tion dependence from dynamic selection (e.g. Heckman and Singer (1984) and Van den
Berg (2001)). More recently, Alvarez et al. (2016) revived this strand of work by showing
how one can use information on workers with multiple non-employment spells to sort
out structural duration dependence in the job finding rate from composition dynamics.
They find little evidence for a structural decline in the job finding rate during the first year
objects determining these objects. We discuss this in detail in the empirical section.




                                                      4
of unemployment.8 The key difference between our paper and this body of work is that it
lumps all potential mechanisms generating structural duration dependence whereas ours
aims at isolating the quantitative contribution of discrimination.9
    More broadly, our results offer an important qualification for the audit-study approach
to the labor market. Insofar as the observable the experimenter varies—in our case unem-
ployment duration—is correlated with unobservables that matter for employers’ hiring
decisions, the strength of the connection between documented callbacks and job find-
ing rates is not clear. We thus view modeling discrimination as an endogenous out-
come—with a quantitative theory that is disciplined by the experimental evidence—as
a promising way to conceptualize and quantify the causal impact of discrimination on
labor market outcomes of interest.10
    The paper proceeds as follows. The next section introduces the model. In Section
3, we estimate the model using indirect inference. In Section 4 we use the estimated
model to quantify the effects of discrimination structural duration dependence and long
term unemployment. In section 5, we present the analysis of the extended model before
concluding in section 6.


2      Model

2.1        Environment
We next introduce a simple search and matching model of the labor market that endoge-
nously gives rise to employer discrimination.
    Time is discrete and runs forever. All agents discount the future at rate β, have linear
preferences, and produce and consume a single homogeneous good. There is a unit mass
of infinitely lived workers indexed by their time-invariant type x ∈ X = ( x, x̄ ).11 The
exogenous and time-invariant distribution of worker types is given by l ( x ). For conve-
    8 Forsimilar results, see Ahn and Hamilton (2017).
    9 Inour baseline environment, the sole driver of structural duration dependence is statistical discrimi-
nation. There are many candidate drivers of structural duration dependence in job finding rates such as
skill loss or stock flow matching, but we are interested in quantifying the impact of one particular driver,
namely discrimination in callbacks. We allow for an interaction between discrimination and skill loss in the
extended environment.
  10 We believe that modeling employer discrimination as entirely statistical—as opposed to taste based—is

warranted in our setting. A similar approach could be used to analyze the evidence on discrimination in
callbacks based on other observables. In such settings, modeling taste-biases is likely more important.
  11 When we use the model for quantitative purposes we also study an extension of this basic framework.

In the extension we let workers’ human capital depreciate during times of non-employment, relaxing the
assumption of time-invariant types x.



                                                     5
nience, we assume full support on X. Workers are either employed or unemployed with
current duration τ ∈ [0, 1, 2, ..).12 Unemployed workers receive flow utility b per period.

Production On the other side of the labor market is a continuum of heterogeneous firms
indexed by their type y ∈ Y = (y, ȳ). The output of a firm-worker match is governed by
the firm’s type y and the worker’s type x, p ( x, y). We make two assumptions on the
production function. First we assume that p( x, y) is nondecreasing in x, and second, we
assume that for all firms y there exists a finite xy such that

                                       p ( x, y) ≥ b       if x ≥ xy
                                       p ( x, y) < b       otherwise.                                     (1)

Thus, there are firm-specific minimum skill requirements. If a worker fails to satisfy firm
y’s skill requirement xy the pair cannot produce enough output to cover the flow value of
unemployment.13
    These assumptions are at the core of our setup and will generate two important im-
plications: First, higher worker types x will exit unemployment faster since they have
positive (net) output with a larger fraction of firms y. Second, a larger fraction of firms
y will follow up on an application if the worker behind that application is likely to have
high x.14

The Hiring Process At any point in time, unemployed workers face an exogenous dis-
tribution of job openings F (y) with full support on Y. Workers are unemployed because
the process that pairs them with job openings is subject to search frictions. Specifically,
search is random and an unemployed worker’s resume makes contact with a vacancy at
an exogenous rate λ.15 Upon receiving a resume, firms cannot observe the worker’s type
x, but can readily observe the worker’s current unemployment duration τ.16 The firm
can then follow up on the application by calling back the worker and inviting her for an
  12 Throughout,   we adopt the convention that τ = 0 corresponds to the first period of unemployment,
such that τ = t corresponds to those with unemployment duration between t and t + 1 periods.
   13 We further discuss the production function and its empirical relevance in the quantitative section where

we impose additional structure.
   14 These implications of the production function are subject to an assumption on wage setting which we

introduce and discuss below.
   15 Here, we assume one-on-one matching where firms consider applications in isolation. This is the sec-

ond key assumption we relax in the extension studied below: There, we allow for coordination frictions
where multiple workers might apply to the same job.
   16 As in Arrow (1973), let x thus capture “more subtle types of personal deprivation and deferment of

gratification which lead to the habits and action of thought that favor good performance in skilled jobs,
steadiness, punctuality, responsiveness, and initiative.”

                                                       6
interview which costs the firm κ. The interview fully reveals the worker’s type x. We de-
note by I (τ ) the set of firms y that interview workers with duration τ. Since the interview
is costly, firms may want to condition their callback decision on the available information
τ. We assume that the only information on a resume potentially relevant to an employer
is current unemployment duration τ.17
    In light of the interview, the firm then decides whether or not to consummate the
match. We denote by H ( x, τ ) the set of firms willing to hire a worker with current unem-
ployment duration τ after having observed her type x.
    Finally, firms and workers separate at exogenous rate δH . In this case, the void job
simply disappears. For the worker, we distinguish between two separate events. In the
first, the worker becomes unemployed, occurring at rate δL < δH . In the second event, oc-
curring at rate δH − δL , she exogenously transitions to another, identical employer. Jointly,
these assumptions allow us to accommodate a high rate of job separation from the per-
spective of an employer without explicitly modeling on-the-job search or inflating the
unemployment rate.18


2.2    Workers
Denote by U ( x, τ ) the value of being unemployed to a worker of type x with current
duration τ. Denote by W ( x, y, τ ) the value of a job to a type x worker who exited unem-
ployment after τ periods and is currently employed at firm y. We can write the value of
unemployment as
                                          ˆ                                                             !
  U ( x, τ ) = b + β U ( x, τ + 1) + λ                               (W ( x, y, τ ) − U ( x, τ + 1)) dF (y) . (2)
                                              y∈ I (τ )∩ H ( x,τ )


A worker exits unemployment if she contacts a firm that is both willing to grant her an
interview and hire her. Otherwise, she remains unemployed with her duration increasing
to τ + 1.
    Employed workers receive a wage w( x, y, τ ) which may generally depend upon their
   17 This assumption allows our framework to directly connect with the resume audit studies which iso-

late the role of current unemployment duration by orthogonalizing all other information on the fictitious
resumes.
   18 As we describe below, this allows us to pursue a conservative empirical strategy with respect to the

consequences of discrimination in a simple and tractable fashion.




                                                         7
spell length when exiting unemployment. Thus,
                                                                                            !
               W ( x, y, τ ) = w ( x, y, τ ) + β   (1 − δL ) W ( x, y, τ ) + δL U ( x, 0)               (3)


which reflects that the worker becomes newly unemployed at exogenous rate δL .


2.2.1   Wage Setting

We assume throughout that wages are Nash-bargained and fixed for the duration of a
match. We further assume that firms have all the bargaining power. The worker’s value
functions and wages are then independent of unemployment duration τ and employer
type y, U ( x, τ ) = U = W ( x, y, τ ) = W = 1−b β , where w( x, y, τ ) = b ∀ x, y, τ.19
     While this assumption enormously simplifies the solution of the model, the implied
degenerate wage distribution is, of course, empirically implausible which warrants some
discussion. With respect to the objectives of this paper the assumption matters for two
reasons. First, the assumption importantly implies that workers in our framework cannot
escape a potential “unemployment trap” by reducing their reservation wages. However,
we argue that there is scant empirical evidence suggesting that this is indeed a first-order
driving force of the data.20 Furthermore, we highlight that allowing for such a margin
would lead us to find a smaller impact of discrimination on labor market flows since
those workers who would fear adverse consequences could avoid them through reduced
reservation wages.
     Second, and more importantly, the assumption also inflates the value of a filled job
to a firm, since employers extract all the surplus. As we discuss in detail below (Section
4.3), the value of the filled job to the firm relative to interview costs is critical for our
quantitative findings. Clearly, the value of the job to the firm depends not only on the
bargaining power of the firm, but also on the flow value of unemployment b since w = b
in all matches. We are hence careful to choose a value of b high enough such that the
value of a filled job to an employer connects closely to standard values in the literature,
despite giving firms all the bargaining power. We thus argue that the assumption on
wages, properly adjusted for in the calibration of the joint surplus through the choice of
b, is innocuous for the consequences of discrimination for the job finding rate which is the
focus of our analysis.
  19 Thiscan readily be verified using equations (2) and (3). Once firms receive the full net surplus in any
employment relationship the wage becomes independent of the worker’s ability to find another job.
  20 Using longitudinal panel data on unemployed workers in New Jersey, Krueger and Mueller (2016)

show that reservation wages decline, if at all, only modestly over an unemployment spell.


                                                     8
2.3       Firms - Interviewing and Hiring
Let J ( x, y) denote the value a type-y employer derives from hiring a worker of type x.
Since firms hold workers to their outside option, this is simply given by the present value
of (net) output,
                                                 p( x, y) − b
                                   J ( x, y) =                  .                        (4)
                                               1 − β (1 − δ H )
We note that δH is the rate at which the match separates from the perspective of the em-
ployer.
    After a firm has interviewed a worker and learned about x, it decides whether or not
to hire the worker. We assume that an unfilled vacancy has no continuation value. As a
consequence, a vacancy that meets a worker will never be held open due to option value
considerations. It follows that the set of firms willing to hire a worker of type x is such
that
                                 y ∈ H ( x ) iff p( x, y) ≥ b.                           (5)

where the hiring set H (·) no longer depends on duration due to the wage setting assump-
tion.
    The joint distribution of unemployed workers of skill x and duration τ depends on
the hiring and interview decisions of firms. Taking into account the relationship between
duration and skill, firms form expectations about x, conditional on a worker’s unem-
ployment duration τ. Denote by µ ( x |τ ) the conditional density of types x at duration τ.
The set of firms following up on an application by a worker with current unemployment
duration τ can be characterized as follows:
                                           ˆ
                          y ∈ I (τ ) iff       max{ J ( x, y), 0}µ( x |τ )dx ≥ κ.                       (6)

The firm calls back if the expected value of doing so covers the interview cost κ.21 Oth-
erwise the firm simply discards the application. Then, the pace at which the set I (τ )
shrinks as duration progresses will determine the slope of the model-generated callback
rate.
    The next assumption on the distribution of firm types will guarantee that the set I (τ )
indeed shrinks with duration. First, we assume that for all firms y ∈ Y
  21 Ingeneral, there might be cases where it is optimal for firms to skip the interview and hire the worker
directly. We rule this out by assumption. To micro-found this, one can assume the existence of a zero
measure of agents that cause employers losses sufficiently large for them to avoid hiring an unscreened
worker.




                                                     9
                              ˆ
                                  max { J ( x, y) , 0} l ( x ) dx > κ.                         (7)

In words, all firms find it worthwhile interviewing when faced with the population dis-
tribution of workers. Next, we assume that firms with y such that

                                           J (x, y) < κ                                        (8)

account for a strictly positive fraction of vacancies. That is, there exist some job openings
which do not follow up on an application if they are certain that it is associated with a
worker of the lowest type. These two assumptions are sufficient to rule out cases where
either no firm interviews and the economy has no employment, and cases where all firms
always interview, irrespective of duration.
    We highlight that, just like in the experimental settings, job applicants are observa-
tionally equivalent and differ only in their current unemployment duration τ. Yet hiring
decisions depend on worker characteristics beyond what is recognizable on a resume. It
follows that the pool of unemployed workers changes its composition along dimensions
relevant to employers as duration progresses and firms project these dynamics on τ; there
is information inherent in τ which firms naturally use in the hiring process. Thus, any in-
terpretation of the experimental evidence on the basis of an all-else-equal notion fails to
recognize the very process that gives rise to declining callbacks in the first place.


2.4   Steady State Stocks
To compute the conditional density µ ( x |τ ) firms need to know the distribution of x
among the unemployed. To characterize the latter, denote by e ( x ) the employment rate
of type x workers. In turn, denote by u ( x, τ ) the fraction of type x workers unemployed
with duration τ such that ∑∞     τ =0 u ( x, τ ) is the unemployment rate among type x workers.
In steady state, u ( x, τ ) satisfies
                          
                          δ e( x )                                                if τ = 0
                            L
                          u( x, τ − 1)(1 − λ ´
              u( x, τ ) =                                                                      (9)
                                                  y∈ I (τ −1)∩ H ( x ) dF ( y ))   if τ > 0.

Employed workers become unemployed with duration τ = 0 at rate δL . The unemployed
who do not find work increase their duration by one period. In turn, the fraction of
employed workers of type x is given by the sum of non-separating incumbents and those


                                                10
newly hired from unemployment,

                                                        ∞           ˆ
                     e ( x ) = (1 − δL ) e ( x ) + λ   ∑ u(x, τ )       I (τ )∩ H ( x )
                                                                                          dF (y) .   (10)
                                                       τ =0

Finally, to pin the levels, u ( x, τ ) and e ( x ) have to satisfy the adding up constraint

                                                            ∞
                                        e (x) = 1 −         ∑ u(x, τ ).                              (11)
                                                         τ =0


2.5    Equilibrium
A steady state equilibrium of this economy is a triple { H, I, u} where the hiring set H
satisfies (5), the interview set I satisfies (6), and the allocation satisfies (9)-(11).


2.6    Characterization
To formally characterize the key features of equilibrium we begin by defining discrimina-
tion.

Definition 1. The equilibrium features discrimination against unemployment duration
iff I (τ + 1) ⊆ I (τ ) for all unemployment durations τ ≥ 0 and there exists a τ ? ≥ 0 such
that I (τ ? + 1) ⊂ I (τ ? ).

    In words, an equilibrium with discrimination is one where the callback rate as mea-
sured through the lens of an audit study never increases with duration and strictly de-
clines sooner or later.22
    We next formally characterize the equilibrium.

Proposition 1. The hiring decision for a firm y is a cutoff rule in which it hires only workers
whose type x exceeds a firm-specific skill threshold. Firms use cutoff strategies for interviews,
interviewing only workers whose unemployment duration falls below a firm-specific threshold.
The equilibrium exhibits discrimination.

Proof. See Appendix.

   Our framework gives rise to discrimination against unemployment duration as a sim-
ple consequence of dynamic selection. Given our assumptions on production, higher
  22 Thisdefinition allows for cases where all firms interview workers up to a duration threshold where
some firms no longer call back.



                                                       11
types x are more desirable to a larger fraction of employers.23 Coupled with the assump-
tion on wage setting, this implies that they also exit unemployment more quickly, giving
rise to dynamic selection on unobservables as unemployment duration progresses. As
a consequence, the fraction of employers following up on an application declines with
unemployment duration and the economy features discrimination.


The Consequences of Discrimination

An immediate corollary of Proposition 1 is that the job finding rate, for a given type
x, follows a similar pattern as the callback rate: It never increases with unemployment
duration and it may fall in cases where a firm with skill requirement x y ≤ x ceases to call
back.
    More formally, to map the hiring practice characterized in Proposition 1 into its con-
sequences for the job finding rate, it is important to note that for a worker ( x, τ ) to exit
unemployment she needs to meet a firm y which is both in her interview set I (τ ) and in
her hiring set H ( x ). As an unemployed worker’s duration increases she receives fewer
interviews since firms discriminate. A key observation is that a worker x experiences a
decline in her chances of finding a job between τ and τ + 1 only if the firms that with-
draw from interviewing are in her hiring set. The share of firms y ∈ I (τ ) ∩ I (τ + 1)c
constitutes the decline in the callback rate between τ and τ + 1. The share of firms
y ∈ I (τ ) ∩ I (τ + 1)c ∩ H ( x ) constitutes the associated decline in the job finding rate
for a worker of type x. This implies that some workers may not actually experience any
decline in their job finding rate between τ and τ + 1, despite receiving fewer callbacks.
At the same time, workers who are qualified for jobs that discriminate in callbacks will
indeed experience a decline in their job finding rates.
    In sum, interviews lost to discrimination reduce the job finding rate, but only if they
would have led to jobs. Only false negatives - cases where a firm does not call back a
worker who happens to be qualified for the job - will impact individual job finding rates.
All other lost interviews simply move the timing of rejection from after the interview has
been conducted to the callback stage. Thus, the remainder of the paper is an effort to
quantify the frequency at which the refusal of firms to interview workers beyond some
unemployment duration indeed constitutes a false negative.
  23 As  we discuss below, Lise and Robin (2017) offer recent evidence in support of the assumption that the
set of feasible matches is smaller for low-productivity types.




                                                    12
3       Estimation
For the quantitative section, we modify Albrecht and Vroman (2002) and specify a pro-
duction function that takes the following form:
                                               
                                                x + y,   if x ≥ y
                                  p( x, y) =                                                         (12)
                                               0,        otherwise.

Beyond satisfying our assumptions on production, this particular functional form ensures
that the model generates positive assortative matching since it is the highly productive
firms which are the most selective. It also has the appealing interpretation that a worker
is qualified for a job if x ≥ y and allows for a very clean mapping of discrimination into the
job finding rate: Discrimination in callbacks affects a worker’s job finding rate if and only
if it comes from jobs she is qualified for.24 Further, the production function implies that,
absent discrimination, a worker’s job finding rate is given by F ( x ), the share of vacancies
with y ≤ x. Finally, conditional on meeting qualified workers, a firm strictly prefers types
with higher x.25
     We assume one model period to be a month to match available US data from the
merged basic monthly CPS files.26 In general we construct empirical targets correspond-
ing to the years 2011-2012 since our main experimental benchmark, the audit study by
Kroft et al. (2013), was conducted over the course of those two years.
     We fix some parameters exogenously. In doing so, we are guided by an insight that
we return to below, namely that the consequences of discrimination will endogenously
depend on the relation between the interview cost and the value of a filled job to an em-
ployer. We thus select values which are conservative with regards to the model-generated
gains from finding a qualified worker.
     To begin with, we set the discount rate to .992, consistent with an annual interest rate of
more than 9%, implying that employers apply a substantial discount to future revenues.
This is markedly above commonly used values in the literature such as the 5% annual
discount used in Davis and von Wachter (2011) accounting for the observation that many
US employers faced heightened credit constraints in the years 2011-2012 (Duygan-Bump
et al. (2015)).
    24 Lise
          and Robin (2017) estimate a flexible production function for a rich model with two-sided hetero-
geneity. They obtain evidence which supports our simple specification. Specifically, they find that lower
worker types find it increasingly infeasible to match with high firm types.
  25 While this is inconsequential for the baseline setup it will matter in the extended environment with

multiple applications per vacancy.
  26 For details on how we construct moments from the CPS data, see Appendix B.




                                                     13
     Next, we need to calibrate the two separation rates. We set δL to 3.8% to match a
monthly separation rate into non-employment (EN) calculated from the CPS during the
years 2011-2012.27 The second one, δH , governs the flow of workers out of a job (including
job-to-job transitions) and is hence the relevant separation rate from the perspective of
an employer who computes the value of a filled job using equation (4). To calibrate it,
we compute a 1.6% monthly probability of making an employer switch (EE) in the CPS
following Fallick and Fleischman (2004). Therefore, the relevant separation rate from
the perspective of an employer is 5.4% monthly. Jointly, this generates the empirically
observed short duration of a match without inflating the unemployment rate.
     As discussed previously, our choice for the value of leisure b is guided by the specific
objective of delivering job values (to employers) that compare with those in the litera-
ture.28 To that end, we compute the value of a filled job to an employer, expressed as
a fraction of monthly output, in three leading calibrations of the Diamond-Mortensen-
Pissarides (DMP) model. First, it follows from the calibration in Shimer (2005a) that the
value of a filled job to an employer corresponds to 57% of monthly output. For Hagedorn
and Manovskii (2008) we obtain a value of 33%. For Gertler and Trigari (2009), we obtain
a value of 97% of monthly output.29
     With those targets in mind, we choose b so as to correspond to 96% of the average
monthly output in the cross-sectional distribution. To achieve this, we proceed as follows:
We approximate the distributions of both worker and firm types X and Y on 50 grid
points on the unit interval, with distributions to be specified in the next subsection. We
then add an arbitrarily large constant to output for viable matches—that is, to those with
                                       b
x ≥ y—which allows us to obtain p( x,y   )
                                           ≈ .96 for all x ≥ y for a scalar b.30 Finally, we
note that we have not yet chosen a unit of normalization so we report all relevant values
relative to the average monthly output in the cross section.
     With this normalization in mind, one can readily verify, using the expression for
J ( x, y) in (4) and our calibrated values for β and δH , that setting b = .96 amounts to
  27 The  separation rate into unemployment (EU)–rather than non-employment (EN)—is substantially
lower. We again chose to work with the broader definition so as to generate a conservative value for ex-
pected match duration.
  28 In particular, we again point out that choosing b appropriately—in the sense that it delivers a plausible

job value—renders the assumption that workers have no bargaining power innocuous with respect to the
value of a job.
  29 These objects are straightforward to compute in Shimer (2005a) and Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008)

using the flow value of leisure relative to output, along with the bargaining power of the worker and the
separation and discount rates. Gertler and Trigari (2009) directly report their value of J which we contrast
with monthly output per worker using their calibrated values for the labor share, the separation rate, labor
adjustment costs, and the flow value of unemployment.
  30 We thus highlight that worker heterogeneity in our environment is largely about the “extensive mar-

gin”, namely about whether a worker is qualified for a job. In practice, we shift output by a value of 200.


                                                     14
                                   Table 1: Calibrated Parameters



 Parameter                        Value                            Target
 Discount factor β                0.992                            9 % annual interest rate
 Separation rate δL               0.038                            Monthly EN rate CPS.
 Separation rate δH               0.054                            Monthly EN+EE rate CPS.
 Interview cost κ                 0.10                             Hiring costs in Silva and Toledo
                                                                   (2009), Barron et al. (1997)
 Unemployment value b             0.96                             Job value in Shimer (2005a),
                                                                   Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008),
                                                                   Gertler and Trigari (2009)
 Notes: We use the low value for δL when constructing EU flows as given by equations (9) and (10). We
use the high value for δH when constructing the gains from filling a vacant job, J ( x, y) in (4). κ and b are
expressed relative to mean output, which corresponds to the cross-sectional average monthly output under
the steady state distribution of workers across jobs.




J ≈ .65. This implies that all employers value a filled job at around 65% of monthly out-
put. We thus conclude that, by choosing an appropriate value for b, our framework gives
rise to plausible values of a job to an employer, despite the assumption that workers are
held to their outside option.
    Perhaps the newest parameter relative to standard models of search in the labor mar-
ket is the cost of an interview. We appeal to Silva and Toledo (2009) who, using the Small
Business Administration Survey, document that employers spend on average 16 hours
per hire. Assuming 40 hours of weekly work this corresponds to 10% of monthly output.
We thus set the cost per interview κ = .1. This is a very conservative upper bound since
the interview constitutes only a fraction of the overall costs involved in hiring; more im-
portantly, only a fraction of the interviews conducted lead to jobs implying that the cost
per hire exceeds the cost per interview.31
    The set of externally calibrated parameters is summarized in Table 1.
  31 Barronet al. (1997) report the findings from several other surveys attempting to measure screening
costs. The largest value we can find, which was originally reported in Barron and Bishop (1985), corre-
sponds to an average of 10 hours spent on evaluating candidates with a standard deviation of 17. These
measures again correspond to the overall time evaluating applicants rather than the interview cost per
applicant which is why they constitute upper bounds for κ.




                                                     15
3.1       Estimated Parameters and Targets
The remaining parameters govern the efficiency of the matching function, λ, the distribu-
tion of unobserved heterogeneity among workers, l ( x ), and the distribution of job open-
ings, F (y). We estimate these fully parametrically using Simulated Method of Moments.
    We assume that unobserved ability is distributed x ∼ beta( A, B) with support on the
unit interval, where A and B are to be estimated. We assume that vacancies are uniformly
distributed across the unit interval, but we allow for one additional degree of freedom:
we allow for a strictly positive fraction of job openings to have no skill requirements, that
is F (y) = F (0) + y (1 − F (0)) where F (0) ≥ 0 is a parameter to be estimated.32
    We target moments which are informative about these parameters: the aggregate un-
employment rate, along with the empirical job finding rate and the experimentally mea-
sured callback rate at various durations τ. To guide the search over the parameter space,
we employ Markov Chain Monte Carlo following Chernozhukov and Hong (2003) to
minimize the log deviations of model-generated moments from their empirical counter-
parts. We use an identity weighting matrix and report the parameters pertaining to the
mean of the converged Markov Chain. 33 We next discuss how we construct these mo-
ments and how they inform the parameters of interest.
    Clearly, there is a direct and monotone mapping between the unemployment rate and
the contact rate λ. Our empirical target for the aggregate unemployment rate is 8.5%,
again computed using the average unemployment rate in the merged monthly CPS files
for 2011 and 2012.
    Next, A and B jointly govern the variance and skewness of the distribution of unob-
served heterogeneity. We make a heuristic argument about how these higher moments
affect the shape of both the unconditional job finding rate and the callback rate. Increas-
ing heterogeneity increases the slope of both job finding and callback rate against un-
employment duration since dynamic selection becomes more pronounced. In turn, the
skewness of the underlying distribution of heterogeneity governs the convexity of both
the job finding and the callback rate as a function of unemployment duration. To see this,
note that a distribution with positive skew has few very high x workers and many low x
ones. In that case, we should see a sharp initial decline in both hazards and a subsequent
flattening. The opposite occurs for a distribution with negative skew. We confirm the
  32 We  argue, though we have not proven, that the uniformity of F (y) for y > 0 is a normalization since
what matters for the shape of the hazards is the distribution of job openings relative to the distribution of
ability. We discuss the motivation for the additional parameter F (0) and how we discipline it quantitatively
below.
  33 The remaining details of our implementation follow the descriptions in Lamadon (2016), Jarosch (2015)

and Lise et al. (2016).


                                                     16
validity of these conjectured relationships using the large number of model simulations
from constructing the Markov Chains.
    Finally, we argue that the long-run callback rate informs F (0). To see why, note that
the pool of unemployed workers becomes completely dominated by the lowest types in
the population as duration grows large. It follows that the callback rate in response to an
application by a worker with (very) high τ corresponds to the fraction of vacancies that
are open to employ those with the lowest type x. Combined with the assumption that
all firms call back duration τ = 0 workers, this implies that the long-run decline in the
callback rate pins down F (0).
    To construct an empirical target for the unconditional job finding rate, we follow Kroft
et al. (2015) and estimate the negative exponential relationship between the empirical
job finding probability and unemployment duration (in months) in the CPS via weighted
nonlinear least squares. That is, we estimate the following functional form for the average
job finding probability at duration τ relative to the average job finding probability of
workers who have been unemployed one month or less:

                                 D (τ ) = b1 + (1 − b1 ) exp(−b2 · τ )                                (13)

We use exactly the same functional form when fitting the decline in the callback rate.
    Figure 1 plots the raw data (relative to their level in the first month) along with the
fitted curve implied by specification (13). Since our model does not speak to dynamic
selection on observables we strip out the effects of a variety of observables.34 Even doing
so, the job finding probability declines by around 50% during the first year of unemploy-
ment. Our empirical estimates are b̂1 = .49 and b̂2 = .36. We do not directly target, in
an indirect inference sense, the empirical coefficients b̂1 and b̂2 . Instead, we have found it
more informative to target equally weighted values of D (τ ) as obtained through equation
(13) at durations τ ∈ [0, 25] months.35
    Our target for the callback rate is taken directly from Kroft et al. (2015) who fit the non-
linear specification (13) to the experimental evidence in Kroft et al. (2013). Their reported
estimates are .425 for the intercept parameter b1 and .199 for the slope parameter b2 . Our
framework generates an exact counterpart to the empirical callback rate as tracked in the
audit studies: We track the fraction of job openings which follow up on an application
  34 This has an important consequence for the incidence of long term unemployment in our model. In
particular, our setup will generate too little long term unemployment since it ignores dynamic selection
along observables as a force towards duration dependence in the job finding rate. We revisit this issue in
the discussion of our quantitative results.
  35 The reason is that “minimizing the distance” between model generated and empirical coefficients is not

equivalent to minimizing the distance between the implied job finding rates.


                                                    17
         Figure 1: Relative job finding Probabilities by Unemployment Duration
                                          1
                         relative job finding probability*
                           .2       .4    0  .6       .8




                                                             0   5            10            15            20        25
                                                                              duration (months)

                                                                     no controls                  controls
                                                                     no controls, fitted          controls fitted


Notes: We use pooled CPS data from 2011-2012. For the curve without controls for observables,
we regress the job finding rate on duration dummies as well as year and month dummies. We
then take the average job finding rate at duration zero, and compute implied job finding rates at
durations τ > 0 by adding the coefficients on the duration dummies to the job finding rate at
duration τ = 0. We then normalize the job finding rates by the job finding rate at duration τ = 0.
For the curve which controls for observable characteristics, we run the same regression, but add
additional controls which include: gender dummies, age group dummies (16-24,25–34,35-44,45-
54, and 55-64), three race dummies (white/black/other), five education category dummies (less
than high school, high school graduate, some college, college graduate, and other), and gender
interacted with all these covariates. We then subtract the new coefficients on duration from the
same mean as before and calculate the normalized job finding rate. For more details, see Appendix
B.




                                                                                  18
                                                           Figure 2: Heterogeneity and Selection
                                                      1

                                                     0.9

                                                     0.8




                           cumulative distribution
                                                     0.7

                                                     0.6

                                                     0.5

                                                     0.4

                                                     0.3

                                                     0.2
                                                                                                      population
                                                     0.1                                              newly unemployed
                                                                                                      long-term unemployed
                                                      0
                                                           0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7    0.8      0.9
                                                                                  worker type x




Notes: The solid line plots l ( x ), the distribution of ability in the population. The dotted line plots
the corresponding object among newly unemployed workers with τ = 0. The dashed line does so
for long term unemployed workers with τ ≥ 6.


with an interview invitation, depending on current duration τ. Again, our targets corre-
spond to the actual relative callback rates at months τ ∈ [0, 25].36


3.2    Estimation Results and Model Fit
Our parameter estimates governing the population distribution of ability are Â = .1150
and B̂ = .0630. Jointly, those estimates imply a distribution of heterogeneity that is close
to bimodal with most workers either qualified for most jobs or only qualified for jobs
with little, if any, skill requirement. This can as can be seen in figure 2 which plots the
cumulative distribution of the fraction of jobs a worker is qualified for. The figure implies
that around one quarter of the workforce is solely qualified for the fraction F (0) of jobs
that have effectively no skill requirements.37 In turn, roughly one half of the population is
qualified for all jobs they apply for. Effectively, this arises due to the sharp initial drop-off
followed by a subsequent flattening in both targets.
    Figure 2 also plots the skill composition separately for the newly and long term unem-
  36 That  is, we target the decline in the callback rate, not its level. The model does not capture the level
since all firms in our framework call back workers with duration τ = 0. We argue that the slope captures
the degree of dynamic selection and statistical discrimination and hence the key object of interest.
  37 We estimate F̂ (0) = .3979 as discussed below. The both ends of the distribution arises because we

approximate the distribution on a grid.


                                                                                       19
ployed. Since all jobs are equally likely to get destroyed, skills among the newly unem-
ployed equal those of the employed which is why they first order stochastically dominate
the population distribution. Finally, the long term unemployed are largely selected from
low-x types, reflecting the dynamic selection process leading to the declining job finding
and callback rates we turn to next.
    The model closely captures the normalized decline in the job finding rate we measure
in the CPS and target in the estimation. Figure 3 plots the estimated decline in the job
finding rate in the model against the empirical target.

                        Figure 3: The Decline in the Job Finding Rate

                                                                        jfr-CPS (fitted)
                                       1                                jfr-model (fitted)




                                      0.8
                       relative jfr




                                      0.6




                                      0.4




                                      0.2




                                       0
                                            0   5    10          15     20                   25
                                                    duration (months)




Notes: Average job finding rates (normalized to duration τ = 0) as approximated by equation (13),
in both the model and the data as described in Figure 1.


    The framework generates an aggregate unemployment rate of 8.43% which is only
very slightly below our empirical target of 8.5%. The associated parameter estimate for
the contact rate is λ̂ = .6071.
    We next turn to the empirical fit of the model-generated callback rate which is likewise
targeted. As we show in figure 4, the model closely captures the duration dependence in
callbacks as reported in Kroft et al. (2015). We highlight that the long-run stabilization of
the normalized callback rate slightly above 40% is what disciplines a parameter estimate
of F̂ (0) ≈ .4. In words, our model generates a long-run relative callback rate of 40% by
associating a similar fraction of jobs with no skill requirements.




                                                          20
                                      Figure 4: The Decline in the Callback Rate
                                       1
                                                                          cbr-Kroft et al. (2013) (fitted)
                                      0.9                                 cbr-model (fitted)


                                      0.8

                                      0.7

                                      0.6


                       relative cbr
                                      0.5

                                      0.4

                                      0.3

                                      0.2

                                      0.1

                                       0
                                            0   5      10          15                  20                    25
                                                      duration (months)




Notes: Average callback rates (normalized to duration τ = 0) as approximated by equation (13) in
both the model and the experimental data as reported in Kroft et al. (2015).


The Robustness of the Experimental Evidence

    The external validity of the evidence in Kroft et al. (2013) is far from established so
we contrast it with several other audit studies on the relation between unemployment
duration and the likelihood of a callback which follow a similar approach.
    First, the audit studies in Ghayad (2013) and Oberholzer-Gee (2008) both find large
and monotonic declines in the probability of a callback as unemployment duration in-
creases. Oberholzer-Gee (2008) reports a 31% decline in callbacks as unemployment du-
ration increases from 6 to 18 months in a study conducted in Switzerland. In the US,
Ghayad (2013) reports a decline of roughly 46% as unemployment duration decreases
from 1 to 6 months, closely connecting with our benchmark evidence in Kroft et al. (2013).
Importantly, Ghayad (2013) shows that for resumes with no relevant industry experience
the decline in callbacks over the same horizon more than twice exceeds the decline for
resumes with experience. In Sweden, Eriksson and Rooth (2014) find large drops in call-
backs after 9 months of unemployment for medium and low skill jobs, but not for high
skilled jobs.
    Most recently, Farber et al. (2016) find no evidence of duration dependence in call-
backs. However, Kroft et al. (2013) work with relatively low-skilled young workers whereas
Farber et al. (2016) construct resumes of college educated older workers with more work
experience.


                                                            21
    We thus argue that a common picture emerges that can be interpreted in the context of
our theory: The larger the dispersion of unobservables, the larger the impact of correlated
observables (such as unemployment duration) on the callback decision, as there is less
reason to condition the interview on unemployment duration once a resume contains a
large amount of other information.38
    The experimental evidence, which is the starting point for our exercise, thus paints a
broadly consistent picture when viewed through the lens of our environment. It docu-
ments substantially declining callback rates in various different years and countries; and
the impact of unemployment duration on callbacks weakens once employers have more
additional information available, consistent with our modeling strategy of mapping the
dynamic evolution of unobservables on the observable unemployment duration, τ.

The Callback Rate and Aggregate Conditions
We conclude this section by comparing the implications of local labor market conditions
in our framework against the empirical evidence in the spirit of an over-identification
test. Kroft et al. (2013) find a substantially lower slope for the callback rate when the local
unemployment rate is high. That is, if the labor market has slack, duration carries less
of a signal about unobserved quality and firms discriminate less against the long term
unemployed. The same qualitative logic holds in our model. Here, we check whether our
framework also captures the quantitative impact of local labor market conditions.
    To this end, we hold all estimated parameters fixed and adjust the contact rate λ so
as to capture (in steady state) the average unemployment rate in the high-unemployment
MSA sample studied separately in Kroft et al. (2013). We again compare the normal-
ized and fitted callback rate in our model against the callback rate reported in Kroft et al.
(2015). As Figure 5 shows, our framework broadly captures the response of discrimina-
tion to a slackening of the labor market.39
    The variation by labor market conditions is a key empirical object that supports our
framework’s mechanism: discrimination is an endogenous response to dynamic sorting
along unobservables, a force that becomes much weaker when the labor market has slack.
That our framework quantitatively captures this evidence without targeting it in the esti-
mation is thus reassuring for our approach.
  38 This immediately relates to the variation of the evidence by experience. To see how it relates to educa-
tion, note that the log earnings variance patterns documented in Meghir and Pistaferri (2004) are declining
in educational achievement which suggests larger residual variation in unobservables for the low skilled.
   39 The model-generated callback rate falls too much relative to the empirical evidence, but this is by con-

struction: since the share of low firms F (0) is unchanged, the callback rate must fall to the same long-run
rate as in the baseline following the identification arguments made earlier.


                                                     22
                           Figure 5: Varying Labor Market Conditions
                                       1


                                      0.9


                                      0.8


                                      0.7


                                      0.6
                       relative cbr




                                      0.5


                                      0.4


                                      0.3


                                      0.2
                                                baseline - model
                                                baseline - data
                                      0.1
                                                high u subsample - model
                                                high u subsample - data
                                       0
                                            0           5                   10          15     20   25
                                                                           duration (months)




Notes: The baseline replicates Figure 4. The high unemployment subsample adjusts λ so as to
capture the unemployment rate in the High Unemployment MSAs listed in Kroft et al. (2013). Using
the Bureau of Labor Statistics Local Area Unemployment Statistics, we compute a (population
weighted) average unemployment rate of 17.6% in the respective MSAs over the time period of
August 2011 to July 2012. We then plot the model generated callback rate (normalized, fitted)
under the high-unemployment steady state to the empirical counterpart reported in Kroft et al.
(2015).




                                                                                 23
    In sum, the estimated model environment gives rise to same, quantitatively large ex-
tent of duration dependence in callbacks documented in our benchmark experiment and
various other audit studies. In other words, if one were to conduct a resume audit study
in the labor market modeled here, the results would closely resemble the ones reported
in the experimental literature.


4      The Effects of Discrimination on the job finding Rate
In this section, we use the estimated model to quantify the contribution of statistical dis-
crimination to duration dependence in job finding rates and to the incidence of long term
unemployment.


4.1         Main Results
To quantitatively gauge the impact of discrimination on key labor market outcomes, we
contrast duration dependence in the job finding rate and the incidence of long term unem-
ployment in our full model with an alternative allocation that displays no discrimination.
Specifically, we study a labor market where interviews are free and all employers hence
interview and learn about applicants of all durations τ. To do so, we set κ = 0 while
holding all other parameters fixed according to the previous section and contrast sev-
eral steady state features from this counterfactual, “full information” economy with our
benchmark model that has positive interview costs. The resulting allocation is equivalent
to one where a worker exits unemployment whenever she is qualified for a job.40 Table 2
contrasts the no-discrimination environment with our baseline case.
    If interviews are free, there is no more statistical discrimination at the callback stage
and workers who apply to a job they are qualified for exit unemployment with certainty.
The first three columns of Table 2 report the unconditional job finding rate at various
unemployment durations for the two environments. The first column reports the aver-
age job finding rate for the short-term unemployed workers (with duration less than 3
months), the second does so for those with medium-term duration (with duration 3-5
    40 Wehave also experimented with an alternative counterfactual where all active firms must interview
all applicants, independent of their unemployment duration, in the spirit of some of the policy initiatives
that were introduced to combat long term unemployment (UADA (2012)). Such a counterfactual, of course,
makes the overall hiring process more expensive and, as a consequence, causes some firms to opt out
from interviewing altogether. We thus only report results for the free-interview scenario which can be
thought of as an upper bound relative to other, more costly, policy interventions. We also highlight that
our counterfactual gives rise to the same allocation as an alternative first best benchmark where interviews
remain costly, but are conducted on all qualified applicants.


                                                    24
                         Table 2: The Consequences of Discrimination


                                       jfr0−2 jfr3−5  jfr6+  ltu
                      baseline         45.328 30.837 25.341 0.846
                      full information 45.335 31.819 25.979 0.784


Notes: All results are expressed in percent and correspond to steady states. First row: Baseline
model with discrimination. Second row: Counterfactual with free interviews. First column: Aver-
age monthly job finding rate of workers with unemployment duration τ = 0 − 2 months. Second
Column: τ = 3 − 5 months. Third Column: τ ≥ 6 months. Fourth column: Fraction of the
population in long term unemployment, that is with τ ≥ 6.


months), while the third reports the equivalent for the long term unemployed (with du-
ration exceeding 6 months).
    The most important aspect about the contrast between the job finding rate under full
information and in our baseline environment is that the differences are small. Under full
information, firms call back at all durations implying very large increases in callbacks:
The long term unemployed get interviewed more than twice as often and even those
with medium-term duration receive almost 60% more callbacks. Yet the rate at which
the unemployed find a job increases only by around 3% for those with medium and high
duration.
    The final column of the table contrasts our baseline with the no-discrimination bench-
mark in terms of the incidence of long term unemployment.41 The benchmark with no
discrimination has higher job finding rates at all durations and consequently less long
term unemployed workers. However, the difference in the incidence of long term un-
employment amounts to less than 8%, substantially less than one might suspect from
the experimental observation that monthly callbacks decline by over 50% by the time a
worker enters long term unemployment.
    As pointed out above, our model generates substantially too little long term unem-
ployment: The share of unemployed workers with duration exceeding half a year in our
model is only slightly more than 10% while, in the data, this ratio was closer to 20%
prior to the Great Recession and increased to over 40% at the peak of the recession (Kroft
et al. (2015)). As we have argued above this discrepancy largely follows from eliminat-
ing dynamic selection along observables when constructing our target for unconditional
  41 Ascan be inferred from the last column, our baseline model generates a rate of long term unemploy-
ment significantly below what the rate of long term unemployed was in the U.S. during our sample frame.
We return to this observation below.


                                                  25
duration dependence in the job finding rate as depicted in figure 1. We have chosen to
focus on the residual degree of duration dependence since that is the component which
reflects unobservables and hence drives discrimination. It is thus also natural to quantify
the extent to which discrimination generates the type of long term unemployment that is
associated with dynamic selection in unobservables. Nevertheless, we have repeated the
exercise of removing the interview cost for the high-unemployment calibration studied in
figure 5. There, 34.75% of all unemployed have been out of a job for more than 6 months,
close to the incidence of long term unemployment during the great recession. Yet when
we again set interview costs to zero and remove all discrimination the counterfactual
share changes only slightly, falling to 34.57%.42
    To lead up to the next subsection, we briefly discuss how the impact of discrimina-
tion differs across workers. To that end, we report the increase in the job finding rate in
our counterfactual experiment for different worker types, all of them unemployed for 6
months: A worker at the bottom of the skill distribution has exactly the same job finding
rate, with or without discrimination. As can readily be seen from figure 2 those workers
constitute the vast majority of the long term unemployed. In turn, a worker at the top
of the skill distribution experiences a very large increase in the unemployment exit rate
of 92.0%. Even a worker who is only qualified for 70% of all vacancies experiences an
increase of 35.4%.43
    This highlights that our aggregate results mask substantial heterogeneity: High types
suffer substantially from discrimination if they “fall through the cracks” and become long
term unemployed. In contrast, low types do not experience any increase in their job find-
ing rate which is in the background of our moderate findings for the aggregate labor
market. The reason is that low types are not qualified for the job openings that opt not
to interview the long term unemployed. In turn, the high types that suffer the most from
discrimination are rarely long term unemployed which is both the reason for why firms
discriminate and why that discrimination is without adverse consequences for the major-
ity of workers constituting the long term unemployed. Nonetheless, statistical discrimi-
nation can have drastically negative consequences for the part of the workforce that tends
to exit unemployment quickly.
  42 As  will become clear in section 4.3, the reason behind these findings is that the key force that generates
false negatives operates independently of the level of the job finding rate.
   43 Both the highest worker type as well as the worker who is qualified for 70% of jobs have a job finding

rate of 31.6% at duration τ = 6 in the baseline model. The lowest type worker has a job finding rate of 24.2%
in the baseline at duration τ = 6, and experiences no change in their job finding rate in the full information
counterfactual.




                                                      26
4.2    Decomposing Duration Dependence
Before turning to a discussion of why our counterfactual suggests only modest conse-
quences of discrimination we discuss a complementary way of gauging the causal impact
of statistical discrimination—that is, the decline in callbacks—on the job finding rate. In
particular, we offer an organized decomposition of duration dependence in the job find-
ing rate into a purely compositional and a structural component, the latter fully driven
by statistical discrimination.
    To do so, we note that the job finding rate of an ( x, τ ) worker is given by f ( x, τ ) =
  ´                                                                ´
λ y∈ I (τ )∩ H ( x) dF (y). We can then let f¯τ (t) ≡ ´ u( x,τ
                                                           1
                                                               )dx
                                                                     f ( x, t) u ( x, τ ) dx denote the aver-
age job finding rate at duration t when skills are distributed according to the population
of unemployed workers at duration τ. Duration dependence in the job finding rate as
measured in the data is then given by

                                                      f¯τ (τ )
                                             D (τ ) ≡ ¯        .                                        (14)
                                                       f 0 (0)
Of course, D (τ ) reflects two forces, namely that the distribution of types changes as τ
progresses, but also that the callback rate declines with τ. In order to isolate the respective
contribution of these forces to D (τ ), note that we can expand D (τ ) into

                                                  f¯τ (τ ) f¯τ (0)
                                         D (τ ) = ¯                .                                    (15)
                                                  f τ (0) f¯0 (0)

    These two objects separate D (τ ) into a structural and a compositional component.
The first fraction quantifies how the average duration τ job finding rate of a representative
duration τ cohort compares to their own average job finding rate at the beginning of the
unemployment spell. It thus purely isolates the force duration exerts on the job finding
rate of the relevant workers at duration τ. On the other hand, the second fraction isolates
purely compositional changes. It reports the decline in the job finding rate from duration
0 to τ which is attributable to compositional changes only, holding the individual job
finding rates constant at their duration 0 level. Thus, equation (15) allows us to exactly
decompose duration dependence in the job finding rate into its two drivers.
    This decomposition is complementary to the exercise in the previous subsection, as the
distribution of types in unemployment itself reflects structural forces, that is discrimina-
tion. The decomposition in (15) fixes the evolution of the distribution of types according
to the equilibrium with discrimination. On the other hand, the counterfactual exercise in
the previous section takes the full equilibrium response of the distribution into account.
    Figure 6 offers the decomposition delivered by Equation (15). To plot it, we proceed as

                                                     27
           Figure 6: Duration Dependence - A Partial Equilibrium Decomposition
                                                    1

                                                   0.9
                                                                              Composition
                                                   0.8

                                                   0.7




                                  normalized jfp
                                                   0.6
                                                                              Structural
                                                   0.5

                                                   0.4

                                                   0.3

                                                   0.2

                                                   0.1

                                                    0
                                                         5     10        15                20   25
                                                             duration (months)
                                                                                                     f¯τ (0)
   Notes: The lower envelope plots D (τ ). The line separating the two shaded areas plots            f¯0 (0)
                                                                                                             .



follows. The lower envelope plots the normalized job finding rate, D (τ ), the object to be
                              f¯ (0)
decomposed. We next plot f¯τ (0) , that is the purely compositional component only. As is
                                0
readily visible from equation (15), doing so decomposes the overall decline in D (τ ) into
a compositional (upper area) and structural (lower area) component.
    The results are consistent with our results in the previous subsection. While statistical
discrimination indeed introduces a negative structural component into the average job
finding rate, the contribution is modest and most of the declines are driven by composi-
tional changes.
                                  f¯ (τ )
    The structural component f¯τ (0) is above .9 at all horizons which can be quantitatively
                                    τ
interpreted as follows: Workers unemployed at duration τ experience, on average, less
than a 10% decline in their chances of finding a job relative to duration 0 as a result of
duration per se.44 As a consequence, the bulk of the decline in D (τ ) is due purely to
compositional changes as is evidenced in figure 6.

    To conclude this section, Figure 7 tracks the evolution of the distribution of worker
types and the cutoff firm as duration progresses. Due to dynamic selection the expected
worker type deteriorates as τ increases. As an endogenous response, less and less firms
are willing to follow up on an application. What is key, however, is that the contraction
of the interview set—that is, the decline in the callback rate—only affects those that are
actually qualified for firms with skill requirement above the cutoff firm. That is, only
  44 This stands in sharp contrast to what one may infer by studying f¯0 (τ ) .
                                                                           Such a measure isolates the force
                                                                     f¯0 (0)
duration exerts on the job finding rates of a representative short-term unemployed worker. Indeed, this
measure declines by almost as much as D (τ ) in our calculations and quantifies the experience of represen-
tative types “falling through the cracks”. But it is not a suitable measure to quantify the consequences of
statistical discrimination because it ignores its root cause, namely dynamic selection.

                                                                    28
                                    Figure 7: Duration Dependence
                          1

                                                                              τ = 0 months
                         0.5



                          0
                               0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7     0.8      0.9   1

                          1

                                                                              τ = 6 months
                         0.5



                          0
                               0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7     0.8      0.9   1

                          1

                                                                              τ = 18 months
                         0.5



                          0
                               0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7     0.8      0.9   1
                                                            x
Notes: Cumulative distribution of worker types x in the population of unemployed workers at
various durations τ. The red bar indicates the productivity y of the threshold firm which is in-
different about interviewing workers with duration τ. Firms with productivity exceeding that of
the cutoff firm do not call back. Note that firms with no skill requirements account for a strictly
positive fraction of job openings which is not visible in the figure.


those with skill to the right of the cutoff firm are adversely affected by the disappearing
callbacks. As is evident from Figure 7, those are few while the vast majority of the long
term unemployed are entirely unaffected, despite experiencing a large drop-off in their
callback rate.
    To summarize, these results imply that the decline in the job finding rate in our model
is largely a result of dynamic sorting along unobservables. Statistical discrimination is
primarily a response to dynamic (adverse) selection rather than a cause of structural dura-
tion dependence. For the relevant group of unemployed workers, discrimination has only
a modest impact on job finding rates, despite the very large decline in callbacks diagnosed
in the experimental literature. The firms that begin to discriminate do so because there
are few workers they can form viable relationships with left in the pool of unemployed.
In turn, this implies that the incidence of false negatives - no-callback events that prevent
a worker from being hired - is much smaller than the incidence of no-callback events as
tracked by an audit study. However, Figure 7 also highlights that discrimination indeed
has very painful consequences for high x types which are qualified for a wide range of
jobs and fail to find a job early in a spell.




                                                           29
4.3    Intuition
This section offers a simple formal argument that exactly shows the tradeoffs firms face
when deciding on a callback. We use that tradeoff to shed light on why our quantitative
results point to a limited impact of discrimination on labor market flows.
   To that end, let ȳ(τ ) denote the threshold firm which is indifferent about interviewing
workers of duration τ. From (6), the indifference condition can be expressed as
                       h             i  p( x, ȳ(τ )) − b                  
                     P x > xȳ(τ ) |τ E                    | x > xȳ(τ ) , τ = κ.                    (16)
                                        (1 − β[1 − δH ])

In words, a firm is indifferent about a callback if interview costs equal their expected gains
given by the probability of finding a qualified candidate times the conditional expected
payoff. Equation (16) implies that, if interview costs are low relative to the value of viable
employment relationships, a firm only discriminates against duration τ workers if it is
unlikely to find a qualified match among them.
   We next use this expression to establish quantitative bounds on the fraction of workers
that are adversely affected by discrimination. To do so, note that xȳ(τ ) = ȳ (τ ) under our
production function. This implies that the term in squared brackets in equation (16) cor-
responds to the fraction of unemployed duration τ workers that are qualified for at least
some of the jobs that dismiss duration τ workers for interviews. Using our calibration,
we can establish the following numerical bounds for this object, 45

                                    P [ x ≥ ȳ(τ )|τ ] ∈ [.137, .176].                               (17)

    In words, a firm starts discriminating once the chances of finding a suitable worker
drop below around 15%. In turn, this implies that at all durations durations τ, the vast
majority of workers do not experience any discrimination that has adverse consequences
for the chances of finding a job. 46
    Taken together, the quantitative analysis of equation (16) highlights the key tradeoff
and why it generates only modest consequences of discrimination: The present value of
a viable employment relationship (the term in brackets) largely exceeds the cost of an
interview κ. This makes missed opportunities of forming a viable match—a false nega-
tive—costly relative to an interview that does not lead to a hire. Consequently, firms try
to avoid false negatives and only discriminate if the chances of finding a qualified candi-
  45 Forsimplicity, we use the global limits for p ( x, y) in establishing the bounds.
  46 Even those who are adversely affected suffer from false negatives only when applying to a job-opening
with y such that ȳ (τ ) ≤ x ≤ y, which limits the extent to which their job finding rate deteriorates.



                                                   30
date are slim. This implies that few interviews lost to discrimination would have turned
into job.
    Our calibration choices were deliberately conservative with regard to this particular
tradeoff: As can be seen from equation (17), the value the firm derives from a viable
employment relationship is only about 6-7 times the cost of an interview. From (16), this
reflects that we have chosen a low discount factor β, a high separation rate δH , and a
low flow payoff to the firm, p ( x, y) − b. The equation also highlights in which type of
labor markets one may expect discrimination to have particularly adverse consequences
for workers: In those with short-lived jobs, and in those where interview costs are large
relative to the flow value generated by a qualified worker.
    To conclude, the relation between the costs of an interview and the net present value
of filled jobs to a firm suggests that firms who are not interviewing do so because they
are unlikely to find a suitable partner. It follows that the incidence of false negatives
is limited and the decline in callbacks causes a decline in the job finding rate to only a
modest extent.


5    Extended Quantitative Model
In this section, we extend the basic model along two important dimensions of the job
search process which are likely to generate more drastic consequences of discrimination.
We re-estimate the framework and revisit consequences of discrimination in the richer
environment.
    We first extend the model by allowing for general human capital to depreciate during
unemployment and appreciate during times of employment. As before, a false negative
may subject workers to longer unemployment spells. However, if human capital deterio-
rates, the false negative may also lower a worker’s future employment rate, which again
feeds back into the evolution of her abilities. The inclusion of human capital dynamics
may therefore generate a forceful multiplier through which discrimination at the inter-
view stage may affect the cross-sectional distribution of ability and job finding rates, and
hence the incidence of long term unemployment.
    Second, we allow firms to receive multiple applications per job opening, and workers’
applications can potentially crowd each other out. This environment may well give rise to
a much larger impact of firms’ interviewing decisions on structural duration dependence.
In our baseline model, a firm discriminates based on duration only if it is quite certain
that the worker is not qualified. With multiple applications, a firm discriminates against
a worker it might be perfectly willing to interview otherwise, as soon as it has another

                                            31
applicant that is even more likely to be qualified, but has shorter duration. It follows that
potentially many more workers that would have been hired ex post are not invited for an
interview, solely as a consequence of their unemployment duration.47
    We maintain the assumption that workers have no bargaining power and homoge-
neous outside option b. For exactly the same logic as in the baseline model, firms thus
continue to pay workers a wage w ( x, y, τ ) = b and the value of a job to a firm is given by

                       J ( x, y, τ ) = p( x, y) − b + β(1 − δH )E x0 | x,e J ( x 0 , y, τ ).          (18)

The expectations operator accounts for the stochastic evolution of ability that depends on
a workers employment status, e in this case. We also maintain the assumption that p ( x, y)
is additively separable for x ≥ y as assumed in equation (12).
    As before, an unemployed worker’s resume makes contact with a job opening at rate
λ. There are V such job openings at any point in time, distributed according to F (y).
However, now a single job opening may receive multiple applications due to coordination
frictions. As before, the only relevant information on a resume is the applicant’s current
unemployment duration τ. In case a job opening receives more than one application,
the firm can interview multiple workers, paying κ for each interview. As a consequence,
being qualified for a job and receiving an interview are no longer sufficient for a worker
to exit unemployment; she also needs to be the most able candidate of those who receive
an interview.
    The firm’s optimal interviewing strategy is the key object which determines equilib-
rium job finding rates in this environment, and we therefore describe this strategy in some
detail. The firm begins by deciding whether to interview any of its applicants. It does so
as long as it receives at least one application such that expected surplus covers the inter-
view cost, as given in inequality (6). Dynamic selection of worker types in unemployment
again implies that expected surplus declines with unemployment duration. Thus, firms
y that receive only one single application continue to follow a cutoff rule and call back an
applicant if duration τ falls below a duration cutoff τ̄y , defined as the highest τ such that
                                   ˆ
                                       max{ J ( x, y), 0}µ( x |τ̄y )dx ≥ κ.                           (19)

As another consequence of dynamic selection, if the firm receives more than one appli-
  47 Any extension that allows workers to actively respond to potentially adverse consequences from dis-
crimination would lead us to find less of an impact of discrimination. This pertains to cases with endoge-
nous search intensity and reservation wages, the latter subject to the empirical caveat discussed above. In
either, workers actively avoid “falling through the cracks”; as a consequence, removing discrimination has
a smaller effect and may even result in an increase in long term employment.


                                                       32
cant it is optimal for the firm to rank them according to duration. That is, if it receives
more than one application with duration less or equal than τ̄y , the firm interviews the
lowest duration worker first. After having learned that applicant’s ability x the firm can
proceed to evaluate the next applicant in the ranking. We make the assumption that by
interviewing another candidate the firm does not lose the option of hiring any of the pre-
viously interviewed candidates. Thus, the firm hires the interviewee with the highest
joint surplus J ( x, y), as long as at least one is qualified, x ≥ y.
    To characterize firm behavior, let x̂ denote the ability of the highest x worker a firm
has already interviewed for a given job opening. The firm then proceeds to interview the
next worker in the queue with duration τ iff
                         ˆ
                                 max { J ( x, y) − J ( x̂, y), 0} µ( x |τ )dx ≥ κ.          (20)
                             x
Firm y, whose best candidate thus far has skill x̂, calls back another worker with duration
τ if the expected net gains from doing so exceed the cost. If the inequality is not satisfied
for any worker left in the queue the firm stops interviewing and hires x̂ if x̂ ≥ y. Note
that for sufficiently high x̂ it may well be that the above inequality does not hold for any
τ ≥ 0, so the firm stops interviewing.
    In a slight abuse of notation, let u denote the measure of unemployed workers and
hence λuV the measure of applications. If the economy displays coordination frictions
and workers randomly apply to vacancies a standard argument implies             that
                                                                                   any given
job opening receives exactly zero applications with probability exp − λu       V    (see Shimer
(2005b)). Let z ( x, y, τ ) be the measure of unemployed workers which, if they apply for
the same job y, prevent a worker ( x, τ ) from being hired by firm y. They may do so for
several reasons: They may have lower duration and ability high enough such that the firm
does not interview duration τ applicants. Or, if both get interviewed, they may crowd out
worker ( x, τ ) because they have more skills. We delegate the exact derivation of z ( x, y, τ )
to appendix C. Importantly, the probability    that any given job opening receives exactly
                                                  λz( x,y,τ )
zero such applications is then given by exp − V               . As a consequence, the job finding
rate for a worker with ability x and duration τ can be written as
                                      ˆ                                    
                                                             z( x, y, τ )
                    f ( x, τ ) = λ                    exp −λ                    dF (y) .    (21)
                                   y∈ I (τ )∩ H ( x )            V
In words, a worker makes contact with some job opening y at rate λ. A necessary con-
dition for unemployment exit is that the worker is qualified for the job and the firm is
generally willing to interview her, y ∈ I (τ ) ∩ H ( x ). But this is no longer sufficient since
the firm may receive other applications which crowd out worker ( x, τ ). Consequently,

                                                      33
conditional on applying to a firm y, a worker only exits if there are no other applications
from such competitors, which is captured by z( x, y, τ ).
   We also report the corresponding value functions for both employed and unemployed
workers, the flow balance equations governing the steady state distribution of worker
types across jobs, and the extended definition of equilibrium in appendix C.


5.1    Quantitative Implementation
We fully re-estimate the extended model using the same empirical targets and the same
estimation strategy we detail in Section 3. For the quantitative implementation, we again
approximate the distributions of both worker and firm types on a grid, but we reduce
the number of grid points to 10, due to computational reasons.48 We maintain the same
support as in the baseline, and thus do not alter our calibrated values for interview costs
and leisure, κ and b. We also do not alter the calibrated values for β, δL , δH .
    We follow Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998) in assuming that, if workers have ability x ∈
{x, ..., x̄ }, then while employed their ability increases from x to min { x + 1, x̄ } with prob-
ability φe . Similarly, while unemployed, their ability decreases from x to max { x − 1, x }
with probability φu . Of course, this implies that there is no longer any permanent compo-
nent to worker productivity.
    The parameters to be estimated are now {φe , φu , λ, F (0) , V }. To do so, we target the
same empirical targets as previously, namely the decline in the job finding rate, the de-
cline in the callback rate as measured in Kroft et al. (2013), and the overall unemployment
rate.49 Our arguments linking the parameters to these targets remain largely unchanged.
For instance, the level at which call-back and job finding rates settle as duration grows
large still informs the fraction of job-openings all workers are qualified for, F (0). Like-
wise, the aggregate unemployment rate informs the contact rate between workers and job
openings, λ.
    We next argue that the parameters φe , φu , and V are jointly pinned down by the shape
of both the job finding and the callback rate against duration. To see why, note first that
φe and φu determine the endogenous distribution of ability in the population, effectively
replacing the parameters governing the exogenous Beta distribution in the baseline case.
Thus, the argument linking the distribution of ability to our empirical targets made in
the baseline carries over directly to this extended environment. However, we still need to
  48 The main culprit for the increased computational complexity is that the ergodic distribution of skills in

the population endogenously depends on the hiring strategies of the employers.
  49 Of course, this does not imply that the estimation is under-identified since we target the job finding

and callback rates at multiple durations.


                                                     34
determine V. To see how V is identified separately from the contact rate λ, note that V has
a limited impact on those workers whose chances of finding a job are insensitive to the
queue length, that is those with low duration and high ability. In turn, V matters sharply
for those workers with large values z ( x, y, τ ). Thus, while λ scales the contact rate for all
workers, less congestion (higher V) disproportionately benefits those that tend to end up
at the end of the queue. We thus argue that V, along with φe and φu , can be disciplined
by the information on relative job finding and callback rates we have previously used.
    Our estimates for the parameters governing skill loss and skill growth are φ̂u = .0848
and φ̂e = .0044, respectively, giving rise to a steady state distribution of skill which has
most mass at the corners, similar to the baseline.50 Our estimates which govern tightness
in the labor market are λ̂ = .6653 and V̂ = .0927 while we estimate F (0) = .6391. 51
    The model fits the empirical targets very tightly: It delivers an unemployment rate of
8.31% and completely captures the hazards in both the job finding and the callback rate
as is evident in figure 8.
    With the estimated model in hand, we employ the same counterfactual strategy to
gauge the consequences of statistical discrimination. That is, we again contrast key mo-
ments with their counterpart in an environment with full information.52 Table 3—cor-
responding to table 2 for our baseline model—offers our main results for the extended
model.
    It follows from the first three columns that the extended environment gives rise to
a substantially larger impact of duration on job finding rates compared to our baseline
case. Nevertheless, note that table 2 implies that moving to a full-information environ-
ment increases the monthly rate at which medium- and long term unemployed workers
  50 Our  estimated human capital dynamics are very slow. The reason is that dynamic selection along with
the ranking mechanism already generate large amounts of duration dependence both in callback and job
finding rates, leaving little room for additional human capital dynamics. This is consistent with recent
empirical work by Autor et al. (2015) and Schmieder et al. (2016) who find only small effects of additional
time in unemployment on future productivity and wages. It is likewise consistent with the result in Kroft et
al. (2013) that discrimination weakens in slack labor markets which would be hard to explain if skill decay
was of first order force in the data.
   51 The latter may imply a surprisingly large fraction of job-openings that have few skill requirements.

Note, however, that the context is the experimental setting in Kroft et al. (2013) which covers sales, customer
service, administrative support, and clerical jobs (and constructs corresponding resumes). Thus, the finding
that many jobs can be carried out by any applicant seems plausible.
   52 Under the counterfactual, the highest x applicant gets hired, if qualified. This seems the most natural

exercise and, in particular, compares most directly to the counterfactual in the baseline environment. How-
ever, there exists an alternative counterfactual where employers are banned from ranking on duration yet
continue to interview in a sequential—but now random—fashion. Such an environment generates even
less dynamic selection—because lower types get crowded out less frequently by high types—and hence is
a counterfactual with even less duration dependence in the job finding rate. At the same time, it makes the
overall hiring process more costly leading some firms to opt out of interviewing altogether which increases
the incidence of long term unemployment.


                                                      35
                                                Figure 8: Extended Model Fit
                                       1                                                   jfr-CPS (fitted)
                                                                                           jfr-model (fitted)
                                      0.8



                       relative jfr
                                      0.6

                                      0.4

                                      0.2

                                       0
                                            0      5      10          15                  20                    25
                                                         duration (months)
                                       1
                                                                             cbr-Kroft et al. (2013) (fitted)
                                      0.8                                    cbr-model (fitted)
                       relative cbr




                                      0.6

                                      0.4

                                      0.2

                                       0
                                            0      5      10          15                  20                    25
                                                         duration (months)




Notes: Average callback and job finding rates (normalized to duration τ = 0) as approximated by
equation (13) in the extended model versus data reported in Kroft et al. (2015).




          Table 3: The Consequences of Discrimination in the Extended Model


                                      jfr0−2 jfr3−5  jfr6+  ltu
                     baseline         44.465 31.458 26.720 0.828
                     full information 43.771 34.010 28.548 0.682


Notes: All results are expressed in percent and correspond to steady states. First row: Baseline
model with discrimination. Second row: Counterfactual with free interviews. First column: Aver-
age monthly job finding rate of workers with unemployment duration τ = 0 − 2 months. Second
Column: τ = 3 − 5 months. Third Column: τ ≥ 6 months. Fourth column: Fraction of the
population in long term unemployment, that is with τ ≥ 6.




                                                               36
exit unemployment by 7 − 8%. While this constitutes a more sizable reduction in the exit
rate from unemployment attributable to statistical discrimination, it still contrasts sharply
with the increase in the callback rate induced by the counterfactual: the long term unem-
ployed experience an approximately two-fold increase in their evaluation opportunities
for a job-opening, as is evident from the lower panel in figure 8. This implies that the
increase in the interview rate for the medium and long term unemployed exceeds the
associated increase in the job finding rate by more than an order of magnitude.
    Importantly, and as opposed to the benchmark without multiple applications, this re-
sponse comes at the cost of the short-term unemployed who, on average, benefit from
the ranking practice and hence see a decline of their job finding rates by almost 2%.53
Taken together, the mild increases in the monthly job finding rates accumulate to a de-
cline in the incidence of long term unemployment from .83% to .68%. Thus, under the
extended model, a modest fraction of long term unemployment can indeed be attributed
to statistical discrimination as detected by the experimental evidence.
    To sum up, allowing for human capital decay during unemployment and ranking due
to coordination frictions amplifies the role of statistical discrimination in callbacks for du-
ration dependence in the job finding rate and long term unemployment. Nonetheless,
few of the interviews the long term unemployed lose to duration constitute jobs lost to
duration: Eliminating discrimination increases monthly callbacks by around 100% for
those who are a long time out of work; yet their job finding rates increase by only around
7 − 8%. We thus conclude that, even in the extended environment and under a conser-
vative empirical strategy, statistical discrimination in callbacks is largely a response to
dynamic composition changes and much less a cause of duration dependence in the job
finding rate or a cause of long term unemployment.


6       Conclusion
In this paper we develop an equilibrium search model in which employers endogenously
discriminate against unemployment duration at the interview, or callback stage. The
quantitative model closely captures empirical evidence on statistical discrimination in
callbacks as documented in Kroft et al. (2013). We use the model to quantify the conse-
    53 For
         this reason, we do not include the decomposition exercise from section 4.2 here as it is ill-suited
for the extended model: In particular, ranking according to unemployment duration puts the short term
unemployed in an advantage which artificially inflates their job finding rate. That is, not only do the
long term unemployed suffer, the short term unemployed benefit from discrimination. As a consequence,
tracing out the purely compositional implications based on fixed τ = 0 job finding rates leads to misleading
conclusions about the role of discrimination in generating duration dependence in the job finding rate.


                                                    37
quences of such employer behavior for structural duration dependence in the job finding
rate and the incidence of long term unemployment in the aggregate labor market. Our
findings suggest that most interviews diagnosed as lost to duration in an audit study do
not actually constitute lost jobs. As a consequence, employer discrimination in callbacks
is largely a response to dynamic selection rather than a major force causing structural de-
clines in the unemployment exit rate. We point to the key tradeoff driving these findings:
If the foregone gains to the employer from filling a job far exceed the cost of pursuing
an application, then false negatives in interviews - episodes where employers do not call
back a qualified candidate - will be endogenously rare.
    Our paper provides the first attempt to link the evidence from the experimental lit-
erature regarding discrimination in callbacks to real outcomes in the labor market in a
quantitatively serious fashion. The approach builds on a structural model which lends
itself closely to the experimental setting, uses the experimental evidence to discipline the
structure, and finally uses the structure to draw inference from the experimental data. In
sum, the experimental literature helps to inform our structural model and the same model
helps to interpret the experimental evidence. We believe that such an approach can be
fruitfully used to map novel experimental evidence to outcomes of interest in many other
settings.


References
Ahn, Hie Joo and James D. Hamilton, “Heterogeneity and Unemployment Dynamics,”
  December 2017.
Albrecht, James and Susan Vroman, “A Matching Model with Endogenous Skill Re-
  quirements,” International Economic Review, 2002, 43 (1), pp. 283–305.
Altonji, Joseph G., Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer, “Cashier or Consultant? Entry La-
  bor Market Conditions, Field of Study, and Career Success,” Journal of Labor Economics,
  2016, 34 (S1), S361–S401.
Alvarez, Fernando, Katarina Borovickova, and Robert Shimer, “Decomposing Duration
  Dependence in a Stopping Time Model,” 2016.
Arrow, Kenneth, “The theory of discrimination,” 1973.
Autor, David H., Nicole Maestas, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand, “Does
  Delay Cause Decay? The Effect of Administrative Decision Time on the Labor Force
  Participation and Earnings of Disability Applicants,” Working Paper 20840, National
  Bureau of Economic Research January 2015.



                                            38
Barnichon, Regis and Andrew Figura, “Labor Market Heterogeneity and the Aggregate
  Matching Function,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, October 2015, 7 (4),
  222–49.
Barron, John and John Bishop, “Extensive Search, Intensive Search, and Hiring Costs:
  New Evidence on Employer Hiring Activity,” Economic Inquiry, 1985, 23 (3), 363–82.
Barron, John M, Mark C Berger, and Dan A Black, “Employer Search, Training, and
  Vacancy Duration,” Economic Inquiry, January 1997, 35 (1), 167–92.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Peter A Diamond, “Ranking, Unemployment Duration, and
  Wages,” Review of Economic Studies, July 1994, 61 (3), 417–34.
Bos, Marieke, Emily Breza, and Andres Liberman, “The Labor Market Effects of Credit
  Market Information,” Working Paper 22436, National Bureau of Economic Research
  July 2016.
Chernozhukov, Victor and Han Hong, “An MCMC approach to classical estimation,”
  Journal of Econometrics, 2003, 115 (2), 293 – 346.
Coate, Stephen and Glenn C Loury, “Will Affirmative-Action Policies Eliminate Nega-
  tive Stereotypes?,” American Economic Review, December 1993, 83 (5), 1220–40.
Code-32-162, “Washington D.C.. Prohibition on Discrimination against the Unemployed.
  Code Â§ 32-1362 (2012),” 2012.
Davis, Steven J and Till von Wachter, “Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss.,” Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 2011, (2).
den Berg, Gerard J. Van, “Duration models: specification, identification and multiple
  durations,” in J.J. Heckman and E.E. Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 5 of
  Handbook of Econometrics, Elsevier, January 2001, chapter 55, pp. 3381–3460.
Doppelt, Ross, “The Hazards of Unemployment,” 2016.
Duygan-Bump, Burcu, Alexey Levkov, and Judit Montoriol-Garriga, “Financing con-
  straints and unemployment: Evidence from the Great Recession,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 2015, 75, 89 – 105.
Eriksson, Stefan and Dan-Olof Rooth, “Do Employers Use Unemployment as a Sorting
  Criterion When Hiring? Evidence from a Field Experiment,” American Economic Review,
  2014, 104 (3), 1014–39.
Fallick, Bruce C. and Charles A. Fleischman, “Employer-to-employer flows in the U.S.
  labor market: the complete picture of gross worker flows,” 2004.
Farber, Henry S., Dan Silverman, and Till von Wachter, “Determinants of Callbacks to
  Job Applications: An Audit Study,” American Economic Review, May 2016, 106 (5), 314–
  18.



                                          39
Fernandez-Blanco, Javier and Edgar Preugschat, “On the Effects of Ranking by Unem-
  ployment Duration,” 2017.
Gertler, Mark and Antonella Trigari, “Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash
  Wage Bargaining,” Journal of Political Economy, 2009, 117 (1), 38–86.
Ghayad, Rand, “The Jobless Trap,” 2013.
Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unem-
  ployment and Vacancies Revisited,” American Economic Review, September 2008, 98 (4),
  1692–1706.
Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, and Erika McEntarfer, “Cyclical Reallocation of Work-
  ers Across Employers by Firm Size and Firm Wage,” Working Paper 21235, National
  Bureau of Economic Research June 2015.
Heckman, James and Burton Singer, “A Method for Minimizing the Impact of Distri-
  butional Assumptions in Econometric Models for Duration Data,” Econometrica, March
  1984, 52 (2), 271–320.
Heckman, James J., “Detecting Discrimination,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1998, 12
  (2), 101–116.
Jarosch, Gregor, “Searching for Job Security and the Consequences of Job Loss,” 2015.
Kekre, Rohan, “Unemployment Insurance In Macroeconomic Stabilization,” 2017.
Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, “Duration Dependence and
  Labor Market Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2013, 128 (3), 1123–1167.
  , , , and Lawrence F. Katz, “Long-Term Unemployment and the Great Recession:
  The Role of Composition, Duration Dependence and Non-Participation,” Journal of La-
  bor Economics, 2015.
Krueger, Alan B. and Andreas I. Mueller, “A Contribution to the Empirics of Reservation
  Wages,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2016, 8 (1), 142–179.
Lamadon, Thibaut, “Productivity Shocks, Long-Term Contracts and Earnings Dynam-
  ics,” January 2016.
Law-2013-014, “Committee on Civil Rights. Prohibiting discrimination based on an indi-
  vidualâs unemployment. Law number 2013/014.,” 2013.
Lise, Jeremy and Jean-Marc Robin, “The Macrodynamics of Sorting between Workers
  and Firms,” American Economic Review, April 2017, 107 (4), 1104–35.
  , Costas Meghir, and Jean-Marc Robin, “Matching, sorting and wages,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Dynamics, 2016, 19 (Supplement C), 63 – 87.
Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent, “The European Unemployment Dilemma,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 1998, 106 (3), 514–550.


                                           40
Lockwood, Ben, “Information Externalities in the Labour Market and the Duration of
  Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, July 1991, 58 (4), 733–53.
Meghir, Costas and Luigi Pistaferri, “Income Variance Dynamics and Heterogeneity,”
  Econometrica, 2004, 72 (1), 1–32.
Oberholzer-Gee, Felix, “Nonemployment stigma as rational herding: A field experi-
  ment,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, January 2008, 65 (1), 30–40.
Public-Law-2011, “Public Law 2011. , Chapter 40, N.J.S.A. 34:8B-1 - 34:8B-2,” 2011.
Schmieder, Johannes F., Till von Wachter, and Stefan Bender, “The Effect of Unemploy-
  ment Benefits and Nonemployment Durations on Wages,” American Economic Review,
  March 2016, 106 (3), 739–77.
Senate-Bill-1548, “Job Posting Restrictions. OR S 1548.,” 2012.
Sharone, Ofer, Rand Ghayad, Gokce Basbug, Alex Vasquez, and Michelle Rosin, “Sup-
  porting Experienced LTU Professionals,” in Carl Van Horn, Tammy Edwards, and Todd
  Greene, eds., Transforming U.S. Workforce Development Policies for the 21st Century, W.E.
  Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 2015.
Shimer, Robert, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
  American Economic Review, March 2005, 95 (1), 25–49.
  , “The Assignment of Workers to Jobs in an Economy with Coordination Frictions,”
  Journal of Political Economy, October 2005, 113 (5), 996–1025.
Silva, Jose Ignacio and Manuel Toledo, “Labor turnover cost and the cyclical behavior
  of vacancies and unemployment,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 5 2009, 13, 76–96.
Torgovitsky, Alexander, “Nonparametric Inference on State Dependence with Applica-
  tions to Employment Dynamics,” Technical Report 2016.
UADA, "The Unemployed Anti-Discrimination Act of 2012" , available at: https:
  //ohr.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ohr/publication/attachments/
  UADA-SignedAct.pdf (accessed 12/09/2017), 2012.
USDOL, “Training and Employment Notice,” October 2014.
Vishwanath, Tara, “Job Search, Stigma Effect, and Escape Rate from Unemployment,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, October 1989, 7 (4), 487–502.
White-House, “Addressing the Negative Cycle of Long Term Unemployment,” January
  2014.
  , “Enhancing Safeguards to Prevent the Undue Denial of Federal Employment Oppor-
  tunities to the Unemployed and Those Facing Financial Difficulty Through no Fault of
  Their Own.,” January 2014.




                                            41
A      Proof of Proposition 1
That firms use a threshold rule in their hiring decision follows immediately from equa-
tions (1) and (5).
    To prove the additional parts of the proposition, we first establish two helpful inter-
mediate results.

Lemma 1. Conditional on unemployment duration τ ≥ 0, the job finding probability is non-
decreasing in x.

    To see this, note that equation (6) implies that the callback rate is independent of x
and solely depends on τ. Since, by assumption, p is nondecreasing in x, it follows that
if p ( x2 , y) ≥ b and x1 > x2 then p ( x1 , y) ≥ b. Thus any application that leads to job
for worker x2 also leads to a job for worker x1 and it thus follows that the job finding
probability, given duration τ, is non-decreasing in x.

Lemma 2. All firms y ∈ Y call back newly unemployed workers with duration τ = 0.

     In (7) we assume that all firms call back when faced with the population distribution
of worker types. To show that this carries over to the distribution of newly unemployed,
denote by f¯ ( x ) the rate at which type x workers exit unemployment, averaged across
all durations. As a consequence of lemma 1, f¯ ( x ) is weakly increasing in x. A standard
inflow-outflow balance implies that steady-state type-specific employment rate is given
                 f¯( x )
by e ( x ) = δ + f¯( x) . Since f¯ ( x ) is weakly increasing it follows that the employment rate
               L
e ( x ) is weakly increasing in x.
     The probability of meeting a worker with x exceeding some threshold x̄y in the pop-
                         ´
ulation is given by x̄y l ( x 0 ) dx’, while the probability of meeting a worker exceeding the
                                                                         ´
same threshold among those employed is given by ´ e( x0 )1l ( x0 )dx x̄y e ( x 0 ) l ( x 0 ) dx 0 . The lat-
ter is weakly larger for all thresholds x̄y > x since the type-specific employment rates are
weakly increasing. As a consequence, the distribution of x among the employed weakly
first-order stochastically dominates the one of the population. Finally, since the separa-
tion rate is independent of types, the distribution of x among the newly unemployed,
µ ( x |τ = 0), is identical to that of the employed. Since equation (7) holds for all firms
y ∈ Y, we thus have that
                          ˆ
                              max J x 0 , y , 0 µ x 0 |τ = 0 dx 0 > 0
                                                          
                                                                              ∀y.

That is, all firms call back when receiving an application from a newly unemployed
worker.

                                                    42
    To prove proposition 1, we proceed by contradiction. Without loss of generality, order
firms according to their minimum skill requirement xy as defined in the production func-
tion (1). Assume then that the call-back rate never falls, that is all firms call back at all
durations implying that the economy does not feature discrimination. This immediately
implies that the job finding rate is independent of duration for all workers x.
    Now consider the firm y with the highest threshold xy > x such that 1 − F (y) > 0.
That such a firms exist is guaranteed by assumption (8). That the firm calls back is guar-
anteed by lemma 2. Since workers with x ≥ xy then have strictly higher job finding
rates than all other workers in the labor market and l ( x ) has full support, we have that
         ´
limτ →∞ x µ ( x 0 |τ ) dx = 0. As a consequence, inequality (6) cannot be satisfied for the
               y
firm with the highest threshold as τ grows large.54 This establishes a contradiction im-
plying that it cannot be that all firms call back at all durations.
    To show that the callback rate does not increase for any τ, we verify that firms follow
cutoff rules with respect to duration. Since we have shown that the job finding rate is
weakly increasing in x at all durations τ, the distribution of types x at τ weakly first order
stochastically dominates the one at τ + 1. Equations (1), (4), and (6) then imply that the
expected surplus from interviewing a duration τ worker must weakly exceed that from
interviewing a duration τ + 1 worker. Hence, if a firm does not call back workers with
duration τ it never calls back any workers with higher duration, establishing that firms’
interview decisions follow a cutoff rule. Thus, the call-back rate cannot be flat and cannot
ever increase, which implies the equilibrium features discrimination as defined in 1.


B        Job finding Rates, Separation Rates, and Duration De-
         pendence in the CPS
To construct estimates of monthly labor market flows, we match individuals between
months t and t + 1 in the basic monthly CPS files, where we can observe their employ-
ment status and their unemployment duration if currently unemployed as well as various
demographic characteristics. After dropping individuals with missing labor market sta-
tus in either month t or t + 1 and restricting the sample to individuals between the ages
of 16 and 64, we characterize an individual as having found a job between months t and
t + 1 if they are employed in month t + 1 and unemployed in month t. Similarly, to cal-
culate the monthly job-to-job transition probability in the CPS, we follow the procedure
outlined in Fallick and Fleischman (2004) who use the dependent interviewing methods
 54 It   is straightforward to verify that this is true for any firm with threshold xy > x.


                                                        43
which started in 1994 to identify workers who remain employed in month t + 1, but for a
different employer than during month t. We then measure the job-to-job transition proba-
bility as the share of employed workers in month t that are employed in t + 1 at a different
employer. Finally, we measure the separation probability into unemployment as the share
of individuals who are employed in month t and not employed in month t + 1.
    To estimate the unconditional duration dependence in the job finding rate which we
plot in Figure (1), we pool all the data from the monthly files for the relevant time period
and regress job finding dummies on dummies for unemployment duration and year and
month controls, and plot the coefficients we estimate on duration (normalized by the
mean job finding rate for duration τ = 0). To get conditional duration dependence in the
job finding rate, we add in controls to the same regression for, age, race education and
sex, as well as interactions between these variables and sex.


C         Details of the Extended Model

Deriving z ( x, y, τ )
Assume a firm has thus far interviewed at least one candidate and the ability of the most
productive applicant is again denoted by x̂. The firm then needs to decide whether it
wants to interview an additional applicant, guided by equation (20). We let τ̄y ( x̂ ) denote
the maximum duration of the next applicant in the ranking such that the firm proceeds to
grant another interview. That is, τ̄y ( x̂ ) is the highest duration τ such that equation (20)
holds.55
      Assume a worker with duration τ and ability x applies to firm y, with y ≤ x and
τ ≤ τ̄y , such that the worker is qualified and the firm is, in principle, willing to call back.
The worker will not get the job if the firm receives at least one application from a worker
(τ 0 , x 0 ) such that at least one of the following three cases holds

    a) τ 0 ≤ τ and τ̄y ( x 0 ) < τ : in this case the other applicant gets interviewed first due
       to ranking. Her ability is high enough such that the firm stops interviewing before
       getting to applicants with duration τ.56

    b) τ 0 ≤ τ and τ̄y ( x 0 ) ≥ τ but x 0 ≥ x: in this case the other applicant gets interviewed
       first due to ranking. Her ability is low enough such that the firm continuous to
  55 Ofcourse, equation (20) may not hold for any weakly positive τ.
  56 Whenever  the inequalities are weak we assume that the firm randomizes. As a consequence, appli-
cations from competitors with identical x or τ are down-weighted by 50% in the expression for z ( x, y, τ )
below.


                                                    44
        interview applicants with duration τ but x 0 is still preferred over x.

  c) τ ≤ τ 0 ≤ τ̄y ( x ) and x 0 ≥ x: in this case worker x gets interviewed but the firm pro-
     ceeds to interview worker τ 0 who turns out to be (at least weakly) more productive.

Let µ ( x, τ ) denote the joint distribution of skill and duration among the unemployed
types. The fraction of unemployed workers who crowd out an ( x, τ ) worker at firm y is
given by
                                                                                                    
    τ                   ˆ   x̄
   ∑
                                                                                       
         (Iτ 0 =τ .5)        τ̄y x < τ ∪ τ̄y x ≥ τ, x ≥ x  ×
                            I         0
                                                             0
                                                                            0          
   0
  τ =0                    x   |        {z          } |               {z               }
                              Case 1: not interviewd   Case 2: interviewed, not hired
                                                                      
                                       1 − I{τ̄y ( x0 )≥τ,x0 = x} .5 µ x 0 |τ 0 dx 0
                                                                                         
                                    |                {z                   }
                                                 Correction for indifference
                                         τ̄y ( x )                  ˆ   x̄
                                            ∑                                                       (1 − (I x0 =x .5)) µ x 0 |τ 0 dx 0 (22)
                                                                                                                                 
                                     +               (Iτ 0 =τ .5)                   I x0 ≥x
                                            0
                                         τ =τ                       x               | {z }
                                                                             Case 3: x’ preferred


Since z ( x, y, τ ) is defined as the measure of the corresponding type of workers this expres-
sion needs to be multiplied with the aggregate unemployment rate to obtain z ( x, y, τ ).


Worker Values
We write the value functions for the general case where the wage depends on both firm
and worker type and the worker’s duration at unemployment exit, w ( x, y, τ ). The value
of employment at firm y is then

         W ( x, y, τ ) = w ( x, y, τ ) + βE x0 | x,e W x 0 , y, τ + δL U x 0 , 0 − W x 0 , y, τ
                                                                                              


where the expectation operator accounts for the fact that skills evolve according to the
workers employment state, e in this case. Next, we can write the value of unemployment
to a type worker who is unemployed for τ months as as


  U ( x, τ ) = b + βE x0 | x,u U ( x 0 , τ + 1)+

                   ˆ                                                                                                                   !
                                                             z( x, y, τ )
                                                                                    W ( x 0 , y, τ + 1) − U ( x 0 , τ + 1) dF (y)
                                                                                                                                    
             +λ                             exp −λ
                       y∈ I (τ )∩ H ( x )                        V


                                                                               45
where the expectation operator accounts for the fact that skills evolve differently in un-
employment.


Steady State Stocks
For expositional purposes we discretize ability x which is also the case we numerically
implement. We do so on a grid of size n and assume that workers have some skill
x ∈ { x1 , ..., xn }. We also impose the particular transition matrix for skills we empirically
implement. Then, while a worker is unemployed, her type decreases to xmax{1,i−1} with
probability φu . Similarly, during employment, her type increases from xi to xmin{ xn ,xi+1 }
with probability φe . Denote by e ( xi ) the steady state measure of employed types xi . The
measure of types xi unemployed with duration τ satisfies
                      h                                                        i
                     
                     
                      δ L   e ( x i ) ( 1  −  φ   u ) + e   x min{i +1,n} φu
                     
                             h                                                    i
                       +        I          e ( x   )     − I          e ( x   )               if τ = 0
                     
                     
                     
                         δ L     { i =1}        i   φ u     {i = n }       i   φu
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
    u ( xi , τ ) =     u ( xi , τ − 1) (1 − f ( xi , τ − 1)) (1 − φu )                                    (23)
                     
                                                                                 
                                                 −        −                       −
                     
                     
                     
                     
                      + u     x min{i +1,n} , τ   1    1   f   x min{i +1,n} , τ   1    φu
                     
                     
                       +I{i=1} u ( xi , τ − 1) (1 − f ( xi , τ − 1)) φu
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                       −I{i=n} u ( xi , τ − 1) (1 − f ( xi , τ − 1)) φu                       if τ > 0.
                     


In turn,


                          n                                                o
e( xi ) = (1 − δL ) e ( xi ) (1 − φe ) + e xmax{i−1,1} φe                                            (24)
             ∞             n                                                                      o
          + ∑ u ( xi , τ ) u ( xi , τ ) f ( xi , τ ) (1 − φe ) + u xmax{i−1,1} , τ f xmax{i−1,1} , τ φe
              τ =0
                          (                                                  )
           − I { i =1}        e ( xi ) φe + ∑ u ( xi , τ ) f ( xi , τ ) φe
                                             τ
                          (                                                  )
           + I {i = n }       e ( xi ) φe + ∑ u ( xi , τ ) f ( xi , τ ) φe
                                             τ


while the adding-up constraint is

                                                 n            n    ∞
                                              ∑ e ( xi ) + ∑      ∑ u ( xi , τ ) = 1                      (25)
                                              i =1           i =1 τ =0

                                                                  46
Equilibrium
A steady state equilibrium of the economy with multiple applications and human capital
depreciation is a quadruple { H, I, u, e} where the hiring set H satisfies (5), the interview
set I satisfies (6), and the allocation {u, e} satisfies (23)-(25).




                                             47
