NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPORT COMPETITION AND THE
STOCK MARKET RETURN TO CAPITAL

Gene M. Grossman

James A. Levinsohn

Working Paper No. 2420

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1987

We are very grateful to the following individuals for their helpful comments and
suggestions: Ben Bernanke, David Card, Angus Deaton, Avinash Dixit, Jim Hines,
Catherine Mann, Whitney Newey, Dan Sichel, and Ken West. Grossman thanks the
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the National Science Foundation for financial support.
The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2420
October 1987

Import Competition and the Stock Market Return to Capital

ABSTRACT

We measure the responsiveness of returns to capital invested in six U.S.
industries to shocks to the prices of competing import goods. Recognizing
that most capital services are not traded on spot rental markets, we treat the
intersectoral mobility of capital as the outgrowth of investment behavior.
Then the return to capital is realized as an asset return to equity holders.
We model expected returns by CAPM, and relate "excess" returns in a period to
unanticipated shocks to the variables that affect current and future profits.
We find that positive shocks to import prices cause higher than normal stock
market returns in all six industries. The magnitudes of the responses are
consistent with the hypothesis that capital is highly sector specific in five
of these industries.

Gene M. Grossman
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, N.J. 08540
609-452-4823

James A. Levinsohn
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI. 48109
313-763-2319

I. Introduction

The Stolper-Samuelson derivatives hold a central place in the theory of

international trade. These parameters, measuring the sensitivity of domestic
factor prices to changes in the output prices of internationally traded goods,
reveal the distributional implications of terms of trade changes, and suggest
the political economic motivations for trade and industrial policies.

At least since Jones (1971), Mayer (1974), and Mussa (1974), trade
economists have been well aware of the importance of factor specificity in

determining the effect of commodity price changes on factor rewards. When
factors are mobile, as in the analysis of the Heckscher-Ohlin model by Stolper
and Samuelson (1941) and Jones (1965), factor returns are governed by
conditions characterizing the full general equilibrium of the economy, and
individual returns may respond little or even positively to adverse shocks to

the particular sectors in which the factors are employed. By contrast, when a
factor is specific to a particular activity, its fate is tied closely to that
of its industry of employment.

Surprisingly, there have been few attempts to measure the sensitivity of
factor returns to international conditions, or to assess the intersectoral

mobility of factors. Magee (1980) provides some indirect evidence on this
from observed lobbying behavior of industry associations and trade unions. He
reports that, for a cross-section of industries, capital and labor employed in
an industry are much more likely to hold similar views on the desirability of

freer trade than they are to hold opposing views. This finding, he notes,
supports the hypothesis that factors are specific to their sector rather than

intersectorally mobile. A small number of studies have attempted more direct
measurement of the effects of import competition on factor returns, but these

2

have been limited, as far as we know, to the investigation of wage responses.1
Our goal in this paper is to measure the responsiveness of the returns to
capital invested in a number of U.S. industries to shocks to the prices of
competing import goods, and to infer therefrom a sense of the intersectoral

mobility of capital. Direct application of the familiar trade models would
seem to suggest a procedure for accomplishing this. That is, we might think
to regress the rental rate of capital on current and lagged values of the

variables that theory tells us should affect factor returns, including among

others the price of foreign products. Indeed, this is the procedure that
Grossman (1987) followed in his study of wage responsiveness. Unfortunately,
in attempting to implement this procedure, we immediately confront the fact
that most capital services are not traded on spot rental markets, as is

typically assumed in theoretical models. Rather, capital goods most often are
purchased outright by firms and installed as fixed equipment, so that the
return to capital is realized as an asset return to equity (and debt) holders.
Our attention must focus, therefore, on the determination of asset returns on
highly efficient, forward-looking, financial markets.
Our approach here bears some resemblance to a recent study by Pakes
(1985) of the relationship between R&D expenditures, patent applications, and

the stock market returns on firms' equities.2 We treat capital installation
using a simple theory of investment, with the degree of capital mobility

captured by a parameter in the cost-of-adjustment function. Expected stock

1 See, for example, Grossman (1987), Abowd (1987) and Heywood (n.d.).

2 See also Gardner (1986), who adopts a similar approach to study the
vulnerability of firms in the scientific instruments industry to exchange rate
fluctuations. More generally, our analysis bears some resemblance to the
event-study methodology; see Schwert (1981).

3

returns are modelled by CAPM, with excess returns measured by the deviations

of realized returns from the predictions of the CAPM equation. Finally, we
relate excess returns to unanticipated shocks (innovations) in the variables
that affect current and future profitability of the firm, including among

these the domestic currency price of competing foreign products. This
approach reflects our belief that only unanticipated changes in the extent of
import competition should have measurable effects on realized equity returns;
forward-looking traders already will have capitalized the implications of
expected changes in profitability variables into the beginning-of-period
values of the shares.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II we
explore the theoretical relationship between import competition, asset values,

and the intersectoral mobility of capital. In Section III we discuss the
elaboration of the model necessary for empirical application. Data and
estimation issues are treated in Section IV. Section V contains our primary
findings and interpretation. Finally, we present some sensitivity analysis in
Section VI and conclude in Section VII.

II. Import Competition and Stock-Market Returns: A Theoretical Framework
To explore the theoretical relationship between import competition,
stock-market values, and the degree of intersectoral capital mobility, we
adopt a simple, dynamic, competitive model of capital formation, output

production, and industry equilibrium. We follow Mussa (1978) in treating
intersectoral movements of capital as the outgrowth of investment decisions by
firms.

But our analysis is simpler than his, since a partial-equilibrium

framework is sufficient for our purposes.

4

Consider then a competitive industry in which imports substitute

imperfectly for home goods. The home country is assumed to be small, so that

the time path of import prices, p, can be taken to be exogenous. Domestic
output is produced with capital and a vector of intersectorally mobile factors

according to a constant-returns-to-scale production function. All home firms
have access to the same technology.

We take the capital stock of firm i, K, to be a state variable,
alterable by the installation or removal of fixed machinery and equipment.

For the purposes of this discussion, we ignore depreciation, so that K —

I,

where I is investment by firm i. Investment (or disinvestment) involves two
costs. First, the capital equipment must be purchased (or sold, in the case
of disinvestment) at the fixed price of one dollar per unit of capital.

Second, there is a convex installation (or dis-installation) cost that limits

the extent of investment at any point in time. We assume, for simplicity,
that these adjustment costs are symmetric for positive and negative

investment, and that they take the particular form, -yI/2K. In this
expression, -y is a shift parameter that raises or lowers uniformly both the

total and marginal costs of investment. We take -y as our measure of the
intersectoral mobility of the industry's capital, because it indicates the
ease with which capital can be moved into or out of the sector.
We assume that the equities of the firms in the industry are traded on a

perfect, efficient asset market. We assume as well (in this section, but not
in our empirical work) that investors are risk neutral, and that there exists

a risk-free asset paying a rate of return rf. Since we are in an environment
where the Modigliani-Miller theorem holds, the choice of investment financing

by debt versus equity issue has no real effects. Also, with tax consider-

5

ations absent from the model, a firm's dividend policy is irrelevant. So we
can assume with no further loss of generality that the firm pays out its

current cash flow as dividends to its stockholders. Then our assumptions
imply that the value of the firm, V1, is the present discounted value of the

firm's future cash flow, where discounting is at rate r.
Cash flow is the difference between operating profits and investment

costs. By the twin assumptions of constant returns to scale and perfect
mobility of all factors other than capital, we can write operating profits as

Kir(p), where r() represents the maximized value of instantaneous profits
per unit of capital and the maximization is taken over the choice of variable

inputs. Then the value of firm I at time t is

V(t) max J

{ (p)K1

—

ij

—

2K

dt

}

(1)

.

Instantaneous market clearing determines the path of domestic prices used by

the firm in maximizing its value in (1). The condition for industry

equilibrium can be written as p =
aggregate output by home firms, and

pr), where x —

< 0, 4 >

Kjir'(p) is

0.

To find the optimal path for the capital stock of firm i, assuming

perfect foresight about import prices, we form the current value Hamiltonian

H = ir(p)Kj —

I

—

'yI/2K

—

— I)

The first order condition for optimal investment implies

—

I

= (X1 — 1)K/-y

.

(2)

6

The co-state variable evolves according to

iLj

rfA — r(p) —

iI/2K

.

(3)

Notice from (2) that I/K1 depends only on A, while (3) reveals that the

evolution of A depends only on I/K. It follows that I/K and A will be
identical across firms.

Let us now suppose that agents expect the import price to remain constant

forever at some level, p*. The dynamic evolution of the state and co-state
variables for this case can be shown in the familiar phase diagram of Figure

1. We draw the A

0 schedule as downward-sloping to reflect the fact that an

increase in the capital stock of firm i corresponds to an equiproportionate
increase in the industry-wide capital stock (since all firms follow similar
investment behavior), and therefore to an increase in output and a fall in p.
As usual, there exists a unique path for the industry equilibrium that is

stable and converges to the steady state. This saddlepath for the dynamic
system is depicted in the figure.

What will happen if, having achieved a steady-state equilibrium corresponding to p', the industry is shocked by an unexpected abatement of import

competition? That is, suppose that the import price jumps suddenly to p', a
change that is perceived to be permanent. This shock causes the A — 0
schedule to shift out, as shown in Figure 2. The system now is governed by a
new set of differential equations, and begins to move to the new steady-state
equilibrium.

Notice that the co-state variable jumps at the instant of the shock, but

7

that it adjusts smoothly to its new steady-state value thereafter. By a
theorem of Hayashi (1981, p.218), we can relate the co-state variable to the

value of the firm. Hayashi proves that with perfect competition, constant
returns to scale, and an adjustment-cost function that is linearly homogeneous

in I and K, Tobin's marginal q is equal to average q. Marginal q in our model
is just equal to A, because the purchase price of capital is taken to be

unity. Average q is V/K. Thus, the jump in A at the time of the shock
corresponds exactly to the jump in the value of the firm per unit of installed

capital. It follows that equity holders earn an abnormal return (positive, in
this case) at the moment that the "news" about import competition is learned.

Thereafter, the higher than normal dividends that are realized while the
capital stock is growing are offset by perfectly anticipated capital losses on

the value of the shares. Total equity returns during the adjustment path are
"normal", i.e., just equal to rf.

Finally, we are ready to investigate the role of capital mobility in

determining the sensitivity of asset returns to shocks to import prices. Let
us compare the effect of similar shocks in two industries that differ only in

the size of y. Notice that the initial and final steady-state points in
Figure 2 are independent of -y, but that the path between them is not. We show
formally in Appendix A that, at least in the neighborhood of the new steadystate equilibrium, the saddlepath for a firm in the industry with higher

installation costs must be steeper than that for a similarly sized firm in the

industry with more mobile capital. Then, if the change in p is not "too"
large, the value of A at the moment after the shock must be larger for the

industry with the higher value of .

Since the initial capital stock is the

same in both cases, it follows from the previously cited theorem of Hayashi

8

(1981) that the jump in stock prices is larger in the industry with less

mobile capital. Specificity makes capital more vulnerable to shocks to the
profitability of the industry.

We summarize the analysis of this section in terms of its implications
for the time-series properties of the returns to shares of firms in a

particular industry. In any time period, the expected return to these
equities equals the expected return on the market portfolio, which, under the

assumption of risk neutrality, also equals the risk-free rate. That is,

=

E

E rmt

rf,

(4)

where rmt is the market return. Realized returns for shares of firm i may
differ from expected returns due to the influence of unanticiDated shocks to

variables that affect current and future profitability of that firm. Letting
u1 reflect the total effect of all such shocks, we have

=

E

nt +

(5)

Similarly, for the market portfolio,

— E rmt +

v

.

(6)

Combining (5) and (6) gives us the relationship between the realized returns,

— rmt +

— vmt

(7)

9

Finally, we would expect the coefficient on any given component of u (for
example, a permanent shock to import prices of a given magnitude) in (7) to be
larger, the less mobile is the capital used in production in the industry.

III. Elaboration of the Model for Empirical Application
Under the assumption of risk neutrality, arbitrage ensures the simple

relationship between expected returns on different assets given by (4). But a
large body of research in financial economics reject the hypothesis of risk
neutrality as applied to asset markets. The risk characteristics of different
assets are known to be important determinants of their expected returns.
Before turning to the data, therefore, it is imperative that we extend our
model to allow for uncertainty and risk aversion on the part of investors.
Certainly the most satisfactory way for us to incorporate risk into our
model would be to introduce all the primitive sources of uncertainty (import
prices, factor prices, technology and demand), and then to derive investment
behavior and asset-pricing formulas from the multi-period utility maximization

of consumer-investors. Unfortunately, multi-period, general-equilibrium asset
pricing models that take as their starting point the stochastic processes of
shocks to taste and technology are just now being developed by finance

theorists (Gibbons, 1987, p.37). Those models that have been analyzed (e.g.,
Cox, Ingersoll and Ross, 1985) typically assume a one-good economy and

suppress the role of factor markets. A suitable extension of such models to
incorporate many goods and several factors, some of which are imperfectly
mobile, would most likely yield a set of equations far too complex for
empirical implementation, and in any event is beyond the scope of this paper.

10

Instead we choose a simpler, albeit somewhat more , approach.3

We

assume that the relationship between the expected returns on different assets

is as predicted by the capital assetpicing model (CAPM):

Erjt—rf=j(Ermt—rf)

(8)

In our sensitivity analysis of Section VI, we do allow for the possibility
in (8) vary over time, as might occur in response to movements in

that the

the state variables of the industry; however, even there, we approximate the

movements of

by a quadratic time trend, rather than imposing the

restrictions on the relationship between

and the other endogenous variables

that a rigorous theoretical derivation would imply.

combining (5), (6) and (8), we find the relationship between the realized
returns that is implied by CAPM:

=

(l-1)rf

+

jrmt

+

u

—

Our next task is to specify the components of

(9)

and vmt. Recall that

represents the combined impact on the realized return of news that is acquired
during the period about variables that will affect current and future profits

of the firm. We adopt a reduced-form, partial-equilibrium approach similar to
that followed by Grossman (1987). We write reduced-form profits as a loglinear combination of variables that are exogenous to the industry, namely

Our approach is identical to that adopted in much of the event-study
literature. See, for example, Rose (1985) and Hartigan, Perry and Kamma
(1986). Gardner (1986), in his study of the effects of exchange-rate
fluctuations, also adopts CAPM as a starting point.

11

economy-wide factor prices (wages and energy prices) and exogenous demand
variables (aggregate income, prices of "other" goods, and the price of

competing imports).4 Then

comprises a linear combination of the

unanticipated components of the realizations of these variables during period
t, as well as the changes in beliefs about the future values of these
variables that occur due to the updating of expectations during period t.

To identify the innovations in the variables that enter the reduced-form
profit function, we posit the form of the stochastic process that each
relevant variable follows, and then estimate the parameters from time-series

data. Consider first the evolution of the domestic currency price of the

import good. Competitive pricing behavior implies p —

ec(f),

where e is

the exchange rate at time t, c is the foreign-currency cost function for the

import good prevailing at t, and f is a vector of factor prices. In
principle, the exchange rate, the parameters of the production function, and

the various factor prices might all follow different stochastic processes. Of
course, we do not observe the technology parameters, nor is it practical for
us (or the investor) to collect and incorporate data on all foreign factor

prices in forming an expectation about p'. Instead, we suppose that import
prices contain a trend component (due, for example, to improvements in
technology), and that they are influenced by own lagged values, and by lagged

values of the exchange rate and foreign wages (w). More specifically, we
assume that a detrended series for the log of p follows a multivariate
autoregressive process given by:

The exogeneity of these variables relies on the assumption that the
industry under consideration is small in relation to the U.S. economy, and
that the United States is small in its import markets.

12

+

+ E1

PqjW

•j + jl pejetj

+ PSNEWS

(10)

where PSNEWS is a white-noise error term, and the "tildes" denote detrended,
deseasonalized logs of the respective variables.5 We assume

as

well that the

(detrended logs of) the foreign wage and the exchange rate follow univariate

autoregressive processes, with four lagged own-values and residuals WSNEWS

and ERNEWS, respectively. Then, it is easy to show that p —
PSNEWS; and that, for all j,

Ep+

—

E1p+

—

is a linear combination of

PSNEWS, WSNEWS, and ERNEWS. Thus, a non-zero realization of any of the

variables,

three

PSNEWS, WSNEWS, and ERNEWS, causes an updating of beliefs

about current and future import prices and contributes to a deviation of the
actual from the expected stock returns.

We generate forecasts about the other variables that affect current and
future returns to industry capital (i.e., aggregate wages, energy prices,

G.N.P., and aggregate producer prices) by assuming that the detrended logs of
these variables follow a vector autoregressive (VAR) process that includes

four lags of each of the variables and four lags of the money supply. The
latter variable, while it does not affect profitability directly, is held to

be useful as a predictor of the others.6 We take the residuals from this
vector autoregression to be components of

(see Table 1 for variable

definitions), and write

All trends are assumed to take quadratic forms, so that the detrended
variables are the residuals from regressions on time and time-squared. The
time period in all our empirical analysis is one quarter. Section IV gives
more details of the estimation. We consider the robustness of our results to
in Section VI.
alternative specifications of the process generating
6 The estimated coefficients from the VAR confirm our priors about the
significance of the money supply as a leading indicator. This finding accords
well with that of many researchers before us.

13

u

— a1jPSNEWS + a2±WSNEWS + a3ERNEWS + a51PENEWS + a6jWNEWS

+ a7jGNPNEWS + a8PPINEWS + a9jMSNEWS +

(11)

Here p represents the combined effects of other information acquired by
investors during period t that is unobservable to the econometrician. Note
that each coefficient

for j=5,8, incorporates both direct and indirect

impacts: for example, an innovation in the aggregate wage lowers profits in
the current period, but also alters agents' predictions of the future values

of the other variables that determine profits. Without detailed knowledge of
both the structural parameters of the underlying model and the autoregressive
parameters of the VAR process, we can have no strong priors about the signs of
these reduced-form coefficients.

Our treatment of vmt is similar. The same set of aggregate variables
influences profitability throughout the economy. However, in place of
innovations in p and the variables that help to forecast it, we include in

v innovations in the index of aggregate import prices, as a measure of
shocks to economy-wide import competition. We model AGGMNEWS as the residual
from a fourth-order autoregression using detrended logarithms. Then,

— b4AGGMNEWS + b5PENEWS + b6WNEWS + b7GNPNEWS + b8PPINEWS

+ b9MSNEWS + 1mt

(12)

Substituting (11) and (12) into (9), we have finally a relationship

between the realized return on a particular stock, the market return, and
innovations in the variables that either affect profits directly, or that

14
influence the time-series evolution of variables that do:

r0 ÷ jrmt + r1PSNEwS + r21wsNEws + r3ERNEws + r4AGGMNEws
+

r5PENEws + rWNEWS + r7GNPNEWs
—

+ T9MSNEWS ÷

where r0 —

(l-)rf

and

—

ajj

—

+ r8IPPINEWS
(13)

;

for j

5,9.

Our main interest concerns the size of r1. This coefficient represents
the closest empirically identifiable analog to the Stolper-Samuelson

derivative of the simple, static models. A large positive value of r1 would
indicate, for example, that a lower-than-expected import price in the current

period can cause substantial capital losses for the owners of firms with

capital invested in the industry. Shareholders might well be expected to
complain vociferously of the ill effects of import competition under such
circumstances.

IV. Data and Estimation Issues

A. Data Sources and Methods
We sought to measure the sensitivity of stock market returns to foreign
prices for as wide a range of U.S. import-competing industries as possible.

Our criteria for selection of industries were as follows. First, we identified sectors for which a reasonably long time series of import prices was

available. Import prices from survey data are published by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics in U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes, but most series

begin with quite recent observations. Longer series exist for a small number
of categories, and these were the initial candidates for our study. We

15

eliminated several categories that were primarily export industries. Among
the remaining sectors, we chose all those for which no binding quantitative

restrictions were in effect during the sample period. Since our method
requires the assumption of a perfectly-elastic import supply, it would not be

appropriate to apply it where trade is subject to quotas or export

restrictions. This selection procedure left six industries. The industries
are listed in Table 1; sample periods are shown at the bottom of Table 3•7
For each industry, we included in our sample all firms traded throughout
the period on the New York Stock Exchange whose primary line of business, as
reported in Ward's Business Directory of Largest U.S. Companies, coincides

with the SIC category under consideration.8 The number of firms for each
product group is shown in Table 3. Monthly stock returns (dividends plus
capital gains) were taken from the 1986 Master File of the University of

Chicago's Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). The monthly returns
were compounded to yield quarterly rates.9

The sample period for SIC category 331 was cut short in 1984:2, in
recognition of the voluntary export restraints that took effect in October,
1984. For this category only, we extended the sample period back beyond the
--atarting date of the BLS import price series, by using a carefully constructed
index of unit values from Grossman (1986). The sample period for SIC 262 ends
in 1985:4, as two corporate acquisitions that took place during 1986 would
otherwise have eliminated several firms from our sample. With these
exceptions only, our samples use all of the available data.
8 The only exception to this rule concerns SIC 32, where we excluded
firms active in the production of asbestos. Returns to these firms have been
substantially affected by the evolution of the product liability lawsuits that
took place during our sample period.

Our procedure for compounding incorporates the implicit assumption that
dividends are paid on the last day of the month, and that they are reinvested
in the firm at the share price prevailing on that day. Fakes (1985) notes
that a correction for a similar type of approximation was inconsequential for
his findings.

16

The remainder of the data is from several sources.1° Macroeconomic
variables (non-agricultural wages, U.S. GNP, producer prices, energy prices

and the Ml money supply) were taken from the Citibase Databank. The index of
aggregate import prices (actually an index of unit values) is from the Survey
of Current Business. Six separate indexes for foreign wages and for the U.S.
exchange rate were constructed for use in predicting the various import

prices. For each index, we geometrically weighted the wage series and the
dollar exchange rate series for the major supplier countries of a particular

commodity by the value shares of those countries in 1980 U.S. imports. Endof-period exchange rates are those reported in the I.M.F.'s International

Financial Statistics. Wage data are from 0.E.C.D., Main Economic Indicators.

B. Construction of the "News" Variables

We turn now to the construction of the news variables. The shortage of
observations on import prices argues for the use of as parsimonious a

specification of the process generating this variable as possible; yet the
central role that this variable plays in our study dictates that we strive to

minimize any measurement error in this series. To achieve these goals, we
adopted a nested hypothesis-testing procedure. After quadratically detrending
all the variables, we estimated the multivariate autoregressions (equation

(9)) for each SIC category. We then tested separately for the joint

significance of the second through fourth lags on , the fifth through eighth

lags on , and the fifth through eighth lags on .

If we could not reject

10 A detailed data appendix describing sources and methods of variable
construction is available from the authors upon request. We will also make
available to interested parties those portions of our data set not subject to
copyright restrictions. Please include several 5.25-inch double-density,
floppy disks with any request.

17

the hypothesis that each of these sets of lags was different from zero at the
90 percent confidence level, then we re-estimated the autoregression without

the lags identified as insignificant. We repeated this procedure, testing and
excluding as appropriate the second through fourth lags on
finally the remaining (first) lag on

and .

and , and

The results of all these F-

tests, and the final lag structure adopted for each of the SIC categories, are

shown in Table 2. The residuals from these final-specification autoregressions constitute our PSNEWS series for the various industries.
We initially specified the processes for the exchange rate, the foreign
wage rate and the aggregate import price series as fourth-order auto-

regressions of the quadratically detrended series. We found however that the
second through fourth-order terms often were not significant, either singly,

or jointly. So, by nested-hypothesis testing, we pared down the specifications of these autoregressions until the coefficient on the last lag was

significantly different from zero at the 80% confidence level. In each case,
we checked that the resulting residuals showed no evidence of serial

correlation. The sample period for the construction of AGGMNEWS was 1974:2 to
1986:4. Those for the various WSNEWS and ERNEWS variables were the same as
for the corresponding PSNEWS variables, as reported in Table 2.

Finally, we estimated the fourth-order VAR

using

the five detrended

aggregative variables. We used quarterly data from 1959:1 through 1986:3 for
this estimation. No one of these variables was consistently insignificant
across all regressions, nor were the later lags always insignificant.

Consequently, we stayed with our initial specification in this case. The
remaining news variables were created as the residuals to these VARs.

18

C. Estimation of the Coefficients of the Reduced-Form Return Equations
Estimation of the coefficients of the reduced-form return equations
raises several econometric issues, among them a classic errors-in-variables
problem, a heteroscedastic error term resulting from the pooling of observations for different firms in the same industry, and a potential bias in the
estimates of the standard errors caused by the use of estimated residuals as

both independent and dependent variables. We discuss each of these issues in
turn.

Ordinary least squares applied to equation (13) would yield inconsistent

estimates of most, if not all, of the parameters. The reason is the familiar
errors-in-variables problem. The CAPM model specifies a relationship between
expected returns, whereas the econometrician observes realized returns. The
linear dependence of rmt on vmt is clear from the definition of the latter

variable in (6). Then, v, which is the unobservable component of v!fl in
(12), must also be correlated rmt. Thus, the error term in (13), which
includes Vmt must be correlated with one of the right-hand-side variables,

unless js happens to have the requisite offsetting negative correlation.11
The usual approach to correcting for errors-in-variables involves the use
of an instrumental-variables estimator, with lagged values of the regressors
or of other exogenous variables as the most frequent candidates for

instruments. But the assumption of efficient markets implies that no such
valid instruments can exist in our case. That is, with efficient markets, the

We might hope that OLS estimation of (13) nonetheless would provide a
consistent estimate of r1. But this would require that PSNEWS be
uncorrelated with rmt and with any other regressor that itself is correlated
with rmt. We found in our sample that the first of these conditions generally
was satisfied, but that the second was not. In particular, we found in
several cases moderate positive correlations between PSNEWS and AGGMNEWSt,
and a negative correlation between AGCMNEWS and rmt.

19

post return in period t should not be systematically related to information

available prior to time t. We are forced to adopt an alternative two-stage
estimation procedure as follows.

We assume the validity of the so-called "market model" (see Fama, 1973);
that is, we suppose that the ex post returns on all stocks are drawn from a

multivariate normal distribution. This new assumption implies, but is not
implied by, CAPM (Jensen, 1972). Under the normality assumption, it is always
possible to write

a +

+

where

is orthogonal to rmt.

Then the constant term and the covariance term (48j) can be consistently

estimated by an OLS regression of

on rmt. Once this first-stage

regression has been run, we can use the estimated residuals, €, as the
independent variable in a regression on the various news variables. The
variable can be interpreted as the "excess return" on stock i; it is the
difference between the actual return to stock i in period t and that which

would have been realized had the usual co-movement of the returns of that

stock and the market portfolio been observed. Our second-stage equation
relates the excess returns to innovations in profitability variables.

We note briefly a set of sufficient conditions for our two-step procedure

to yield a consistent estimate of the parameter of interest, r1. First,

PSNEWS must be uncorrelated with p. This is the small-country assumption
mentioned above. While not unimpeachable, this assumption is necessary if we
are to identify import competition by movements in the domestic currency price

of imports (see Grossman, 1987). Next, PSNEWS must be uncorrelated with 1mt•

Since the former is a sector-specific shock abroad, whereas the latter is an
unobserved shock to the U.S. macro-economy, this lack of correlation seems

plausible. Finally, we recognize that the unobserved v and the included

20

macroeconomic news variables might be correlated. If so, then PSNEWS must be
uncorrelated with these variables, or at least with the subset of them that is

correlated with v,. We find that the sample correlations of the various
PSNEWS series with all of the other news variables are relatively small, and
that their correlations with the U.S. macro variables are truly negligible.
Also, the other included foreign variables (AGGMNEWS, ERNEWS and WSNEWS)

themselves are little correlated with the U.S. aggregative variables and can
plausibly be assumed to have little correlation with L',,,.
even if &Imt

is

We

conclude that,

not orthogonal to all of the right-hand side variables in the

second-stage regression, this is not likely to be an important source of

inconsistency in the estimation of T1.
At this point, we could apply the two-step procedure to the stock returns

for each firm in our sample to obtain firm-specific measures of r1. But more
precise estimates are available if we impose the previously maintained assump-

tion that all the firms in an industry share the same technology. Under this
assumption, the true coefficient on each of the news variables is the same for

every firm in the industry)-2 In view of the limited number of time-series
observations in our sample and the considerable variability of the excess
returns, we chose to impose these restrictions in our estimation of the

model.'3
By pooling the observations of returns for the different firms in an

12 In principle, we could test the restriction that the coefficients on
the news variables are equal across firms in an industry. See Gardner (1986),
who conducted such a test in a similar context. However, these tests would
have limited power in our small sample.
13 In our sensitivity analysis of Section VI, we allow for the
coefficients vary across firms, while still imposing
possibility that the
the restriction that 1' is common to firms in the industry.

21

industry, we created a panel data set with the special feature that all firms

share common realizations of the right-hand-side variables for any time t. We
treated the panel as generated by a random-effects model with time-period and
idiosyncratic error components.1-4 That is, we assumed that
in the first-stage equation
components. The first component,

= a + rmt +

the residual

is composed of two

is time specific, but common to the firms

in the industry. The second component,

is a firm-time specific

(idiosyncratic) shock, taken to be identically and independently distributed

across firms and time. Similarly, we modelled , the error term in the
second-stage equation relatingthe excess return for stock i to the news
variables, as the sum of a time component and an idiosyncratic component.
These components represent respectively the unobserved period t shocks to

productivity that similarly affect all of the firms in the industry, and that

are specific to a particular firm. Note that we omit any firm-specific but
time-independent components, as the efficient-market hypothesis rules out
recurring (and hence predictable) shocks to the return of any given stock.
Ordinarily, to obtain efficient estimates of the random-effects model
with a time-period error component, it would be necessary to use a GLS
estimator to account for the heteroskedasticity of the composite error term

14 An altenative, but very similar procedure would be to treat the
different firm equations as a system and to estimate the system by Restricted
Seemingly Unrelated Regressions (RSUR). Both RSUR and the random-effects
procedure allow for contemporaneous covariance between the errors for
different firms. But the RSUR estimation procedure also allows the variances
of the error terms in both the CAPM and excess returns equations to vary
across firms, while the random-effects model imposes the restriction that
these be the same. We estimated the model by RSUR and found results very
similar to those reported below. (These results are available on request.)
The random-effects technique is of course more efficient if the restriction it
imposes is valid. A more compelling reason for selecting the random-effects
alternative is that this choice facilitates calculation of the correct
asymptotic standard errors of the estimates, as is discussed below.

22

(see Hsiao, 1986, p.34). The appropriate GLS estimator is a weighted average
of the "between-period" and the "within-period" estimators, where the weights
depend upon the contribution of the time-period disturbance to the overall

variance of the error term (Hsiao, 1986, p.36). However, for our case where
all firms in the panel are subject to a common set of observed shocks, the GLS

estimator and the OLS estimator are numerically equivalent. Evidently, in the
absence of any within-period variation in the right-hand-side variables,
information about the correlations of the errors across firms provides no
source of efficiency gain.

A final econometric point concerns the estimates of the standard errors
on the coefficients. Our two-step procedure uses estimated residuals as the

independent variable in the second stage. Moreover, all of the regressors at
this stage are themselves estimated residuals (from the various forecasting

equations). So the standard errors at the second stage should account not
only for the unexplained variance in this regression, but also for the
econometrician's uncertainty about the measurement of the dependent and
independent variables.

Pagan (1984) has shown that when estimated residuals are used as righthand-side variables, and the corresponding predicted values are not also
included in the regression, then the estimated standard errors on the
coefficients calculated by the usual least-squares formula are consistent

estimates of the true standard errors. In Appendix we show by calculations
similar to his that the same is not true when, as here, the indetendent

variable in the second stage is an estimated residual. Then the usual least-

squares formula always understates the true standard errors. We have used the
formula derived in the appendix to compute consistent estimates of the

23

asymptotic standard errors of the estimated coefficients.

V. Results and Interpretation

Table 3 presents our primary results. Note that we have excluded ERNEWS
from the second-stage regressions for S1C262, SIC3O1, S1C345, and S1C331. The
inclusion of this variable in the model follows from the assumption that the

exchange rate serves as a predictor of future import prices. Conversely, the
model implies that if p03

0 for all j, r3

0. The results in Table 2 show

that no lags of the exchange rate were significant in the autoregressions for

in four of the industries. Consequently, we dropped ERNEWS from these
regressions.

The model performs admirably. In each industry, several of the news
variables are found to have significant impacts on excess returns. The
coefficient on PSNEWS, which theory predicts should be positive, is found

indeed to be positive in all six industries. The effect of shocks to
aggregate import competition on the market rate of return is less pronounced;

we found r4 < 0 as predicted only in four instances, and only once (in Steel
Products) was the coefficient significant.

The signs of the coefficients on other variables are somewhat more

difficult to interpret. The direct effect of positive PPINEWS is to increase
demand for the output of each of the industries. This effect alone would lead
us to expect a positive coefficient on PPINEWS, but the variable also can have
indirect effects to the extent that producer prices serve as leading

indicators for some of the other aggregative variables. Nonetheless, we found
the coefficient on PPINEWS to be positive across the board, and significantly

so in three industries. The positive coefficients on WNEWS would suggest that

24

the industries under consideration might be more capital intensive than the
average (since a positive shock to wages increases the return in these
industries relative to the a-adjusted return to the market portfolio), but

again the possible presence of indirect effects limits the confidence that we

can place in this interpretation. A similar caveat applies to a possible
interpretation that ascribes the positive coefficients on GNPNEWS to large
income elasticities of demand in these industries, relative to the economy as

a whole. Finally, we note that several of the industries are adversely
affected by positive shocks to the price of energy; the negative coefficient
in Tires and Tubes is particularly compelling. (Presumably the decline in U.S
automobile production initiated by the oil-price shocks reduced the demand for
domestically-produced tires).

Recall that our main objective has been to measure the sensitivity of

stock market returns to import competition. We focus henceforth on the size
of the estimated coefficients on PSNEWS. What do these estimates tell us
about the intersectoral mobility of capital, and the likely response of

shareholders in these industries to an exacerbation of import competition? To
answer the first question, let us consider two extreme cases. First, suppose
that -y —

0.

This case corresponds to perfect, instantaneous, capital

mobility, a simplifying assumption that is adopted, for example, in the
Heckscher-Ohlin model. With -y — 0, adjustment is immediate, and changes in a
particular import price should have no effect on the stock market returns in a

small industry. Capital simply moves between industries to equate profit
rates in all uses. We can test the assumption of perfect capital mobility by
a one-tailed test of the null hypothesis, H0: r1 — 0, against the alternative

hypothesis of imperfect mobility, where we have H1: 1' > 0. Assuming that the

25

coefficients are approximately normally distributed, which gives a critical
value for the test statistic of 1.64 for 95 percent significance, we reject
the hypothesis of perfect capital mobility in five of the six industries.

Only in one industry, Tires and Tubes, do the data fail to give clear evidence
against the null hypothesis.

Now suppose instead that y .

This

parameter value implies complete

immobility of capital, as for example, in the specific-factors model. Then
the size of the reduced-form parameter, F,, would still depend on the forms
and parameters of the profit function, ir(), and the inverse-demand function,

4(,), and also on the permanence of shocks to import prices (as revealed in

the parameters p). To explore the nature of this relationship, we express
the reduced-form parameter r1 in terms of structural parameters for the case
of a Cobb-Douglas production function with capital share 0, and a constantelasticity demand function for home goods with own-price elasticity S and

cross elasticity with respect to import prices 6*. To determine the largest
value that F1 might reasonably take, we calculate this parameter for the case

of a permanent shock; i.e., where p = 1 and

0 for j

2,4.

For this extreme case of complete capital immobility, we find that

9 and that I* os*/(l9+o6)

6*/(l9+06)

Together these elasticities imply F1 =

A typical value for 9 among the industries that we study is

0.2.15 Then, if 6 — 4 and 6* — 2, for example, the structural parameters
would imply F1 —

1.25.

Alternatively, if 6 — 2 and 5* —

1.25,

then 1'1 —

1.04.

Plausible values of the structural parameters yield maximal values for r1 of

15 We can approximate 1-9 by the sum of the shares of labor compensation
and materials in the value of domestic shipments. Using data for 1980 from
the Annual Survey of Manufactures, we find the following values for 8: S1C242,
0.143; S1C262, 0.224; SIC3O1, 0.205; S1C32, 0.254; S1C345, 0.253; and SIC331,
0.097.

26

slightly above one, even under the counterfactual assumption that all shocks

are permanent. Evidently, estimated values for I' at or near 1.0 would imply
a high degree of capital specificity.16
Table 3 reports estimated coefficients on PSNEWS of greater than 0.8 for

four of the six industries studied. In view of the fact that the actual
shocks to import prices in these industries, while relatively long-lasting,

are far from permanent, a striking conclusion emerges. At least in four of
the six industries, namely Paper, Nuts and Bolts, Ceramics, and Steel, the

prospects for intersectoral movements of capital in response to changes in

profit opportunities seem to be quite limited indeed. Trade models that
assume complete immobility of capital may come much closer to capturing the
reality for U.S. industries than do ones that assume instead perfect mobility.
Finally, we remark on the quantitative significance of import competition

as a cause of fluctuations in stock market returns. Of course, stock returns
are highly volatile, and unanticipated movements in import prices explain but

a small fraction of this variability. Nonetheless, the distributional
implications of terms of trade changes for owners of capital invested in

import-competing industries are hardly negligible. Table 2 reports the

16 We note two caveats to this remark. First, we have implicitly assumed
for purposes of these calculations that firms are 100 percent equity financed.
Since variations in profit affect equity values more than they do debt values,
the stock returns of a firm that is leveraged (partially financed by debt)
will show greater sensitivity to shocks than one that is not. Second, we have
assumed that the firms have all of their capital invested in one industry. In
fact, most firms produce goods in more than one SIC category. Diversification
reduces the sensitivity of stock returns to shocks in any one sector.
Allowing for these considerations, and assuming that profit shocks affect only
the value of equity, we find that with complete capital immobility and
Here y is the fraction of the
permanent price shocks, r1 =
firm's value that it derives from profits in the import-competing industry and
z is the share of debt in the total value of the firm. Notice that the two
omitted factors have offsetting implications for the maximal value of I'.

y&*/(lz)(O6fl9).

27

standard deviation of the unanticipated shocks to import prices in each of the

industries. A one standard deviation shortfall of the import price in any
quarter relative to its predicted level can mean capital losses for owners of
shares of firms in the Paper, Lumber, Ceramics, Steel, and Nuts and Bolts
industries of between 1.4 and 3.0 percent.

\'

VI. Sensitivity Analysis
T narnar 11

analysis

°8" S 'kn c

nrn,,aA norctIn c4 ,al u

aF

hnr a,,ca anu annnnmnt-r4

involves numerous debatable decisions, findings cannot be convincing

unless they are shown to be robust. In this section, we explore the
sensitivity of our coefficient estimates to changes in several of the
modelling decisions that were made along the way.

One area where theory offers little guidance concerns the way in which

investors form their expectations. A rational investor will use all available
information, provided that the benefits of doing so do not exceed the

collection and computation costs. Still, the econometrician cannot observe
the investor's information set, nor can he know what information actually is

used and in what manner. Thus, any specification of expectations should be
viewed as doubtful (to use Learner's terminology) in empirical analysis.

In our base-case estimation, we formed PSNEWS, the unanticipated
component of the current period import price, by a procedure of nested

hypothesis testing. We assumed, in effect, that investors used exactly as
many lags of foreign wages, exchange rates, and the import price itself in
predicting detrended import prices as were shown to be statistically

significant in a multivariate autoregression. Other specifications clearly

have equal claim to plausibility. Here we consider three alternatives. We

28

formed PSNEWSA as the residual of a regression of

and on four lags each of * and

.

on itself lagged once,

Under this specification, investors are

assumed to use foreign wages and exchange rates as predictors regardless of
the statistical significance of these variables in the autoregression.
PSNEWSB is the residual from a simple, first-order autoregression for

We

motivate this specification with reference to the fact that, across all of the
industries in our study, the first lag of

explains

far more of the variance

f than any of the other variables in the autoregressions. Moreover, a
first-order autoregression certainly is the simplest procedure for investors

to implement. Finally, we formed PSNEWSC by taking first differences of the
log of the (non-detrended) import price. Until now, our various methods for
generating PSNEWS all have relied upon deterministic techniques for removing

the trend from the import-price series. If the (logs of) import prices
actually were to follow a random walk, then deterministic detrending would
introduce spurious cyclicality into the series (see Nelson and Kang, 1981),

and biased estimates of the autoregressions would result. The correct measure
of innovations in import prices in this case would be PSNEWSC.17
Table 4 reports the estimated coefficient on import price news (l'i) for

each of the alternative specifications of how expectations about import prices

are formed. Broadly speaking, the estimates of r1 seem to be robust with
respect to alternative specifications of PSNEWS. Most of the estimates in the
second through fourth columns of Table 4 are within one standard error of the

17 A second advantage of the log-difference specification is that it does
not use information from "future" years in generating expectations about next
quarter's variables. Strictly speaking, the other procedures require an
implicit assumption that the (time-invariant) processes for the exogenous
variables are known to investors from the outset, and the econometrician
estimates the autoregressions to learn what the investors already know.

29

corresponding estimates for the base case. The conclusion that capital is
nearly completely inunobile does not, perhaps, emerge quite as forcefully in

Table 4 as it does in Table 3. When the alternative measures of PSNEWS are
used, only three of the six industries are consistently found to have

estimated coefficients on this variable in excess of 0.6. But the evidence
against perfect intersectoral mobility of capital remains strong and

convincing. In fact, when PSNEWSB is used as the measure of unanticipated
shocks to import prices, the hypothesis of perfect capital mobility is
rejected for all six industries.

Not only is the investors' information set unobserveable to the econo-

metrician, but so too is the timing of the arrival of information. To this
point, we have assumed that investors learn the realizations of all variables

in the current period. Another possibility is that some or all of these

variables enter the information set with a lag of one quarter. Then currentperiod excess returns would respond to news lagged once. We experimented with
several specifications in which lagged news was entered either separately, or

in combination with contemporaneous news. In no case was the coefficient on a
lagged news variable statistically significant, and the inclusion of the
lagged variables had little effect on the estimated coefficients for currentperiod news.

Finally, one might question the restrictions imposed on the data by the

CAPM specification. In particular, our estimation has presumed that the
relationship between individual stock returns and the market return remained
constant throughout the sample period, and that all firms in an industry

experienced equal exposure to risk. We relaxed these assumptions for the
estimation reported in Table 5. The first column repeats our base-case

30

estimates of r1. Next, we removed the restriction that
time, allowing instead for

is constant over

to follow a quadratic time trend. That is, we

assumed that we could approximate $(t) by

+ fl2t + 3t2.1-8 For column (2),

we continued to assume that firms in an industry share common values of (t).
The estimates in column (3) were generated by again imposing time-invariance

for ,

but

now relaxing the restriction that this value be common to all

firms.19 Finally, column (4) shows the estimated coefficients on PSNEWS when
both the across-time and across-firm restrictions are removed simultaneously.
Once again, the estimates of r1 prove reasonably robust to variations in

specification. We continue to find substantial evidence contradicting the
assumption of perfect capital mobility in five of the six industries studied,
and considerable support for the hypothesis of complete capital specificity in
four of these cases.

VII. Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we have developed a method for assessing the sensitivity
of stock market returns to variations in import competition and other

exogenous variables affecting firms' profit streams. The method relies on
identification of the unanticipated component of variables that enter the

reduced-form profit function. These innovations determine the excess of

18 Note that equation (13) implies that if varies over time, so to do
the constant in the first-stage regression and the coefficients r , for
4,9, in the second-stage regression.
j
19 When 8 is allowed to vary across firms, then so too should the
4,9 in the second-stage regression be alloed to do so.
coefficients
for j
Thus, the random-effects model, which imposes that these coefficients be the
same, no longer is appropriate. Instead, we generated the estimates reported
in columns (3) and (4) by Restricted Seemingly Unrelated Regressions, where
only the coefficients on industry-specific variables were constrained to be
the same across firms in an industry.

31

realized returns on a firm's equity over the

ante expected returns. The

estimated reduced-form coefficients can be given a structural interpretation
by solving the reduced form for certain constellations of the structural
parameters.

By applying the method to data for six U.S. industries, we were able to
test the hypothesis of perfect intersectoral capital mobility against the

alternative hypothesis of imperfect mobility. The data reject the assumption
of perfect mobility at the 95 percent level of significance in five of the six

cases. Furthermore, in four industries, Paper, Nuts and Bolts, Ceramics, and
Steel, the size of the estimated coefficient on import price news is quite
consistent with the opposite extreme hypothesis of complete specificity of the

industry capital stock. The estimates indicate that a one standard deviation
shock to the expected import price creates substantial capital gains or losses
for shareholders in at least five of the six industries.

Of course, the method developed here warrants further refinement. More
sophisticated procedures for identifying the unanticipated shocks to the
profitability variables might improve upon the precision of the estimates.

Also, recent advances in finance theory might allow a better decomposition of

realized returns into expected and extra-normal components. We hope that the
encouraging results reported here will spur additional empirical research on
the distributional effects of international competition and trade policy.

32

APPENDIX
A. Capital Mobility and the Sensitivity of Stock Returns to Import Prices
We derive formally the relationship between capital mobility, as measured
by the parameter -y in the model of Section II, and the sensitivity of stock

market returns to changes in import prices.

Following a permanent, unanticipated change in the import price, the

industry adjusts to a new, steady-state equilibrium. Let
of the saddlepath for firm i.

dA

y(rfA —

ir) —

denote the slope

From equations (2) and (3), we have

'y2I/2K

(A—l)K
7(rfA — ir)

l)K

(A —

—

(A — 1)
(Al)

2K

Now consider how the slope of the saddlepath varies with a change in -y:

rfA—lr
d-y

(A—l)K1

+

Since

0,

(A—l)
2K

A < 1 r d1/d-y < 0.

(A2)

That is, for points to the right of the

steady-state equilibrium, where dis-investment takes place over time, an
increase in the adjustment-cost parameter unambiguously tilts the saddlepath

in a clockwise direction. This implies a greater sensitivity of share values
to declining import prices, as we shall see shortly.

33

What about the case where A >

1,

so that the industry capital stock must

rise over time? It is impossible to say, in general, how an increase in -y
tilts the saddlepath at some arbitrary point to the left of the steady-state

equilibrium. However, we can establish that d/d-y < 0

at least in the

neighborhood of a steady-state equilibrium. Taking the limit of (A2) as

K,

-+

and denoting the limiting slope by , we find

db
lim—

K-+

K

(i-.f

-v

where, from (Al),

—

In

-y(rfA — ir)

urn

'A —

lK

(A4)

'

a steady state, the right-hand side of (A4) is 0/0. Applying L'Hospital's

rule, we have

—

yrf1

—

(A5)

i 'Pj

where ir represents the change in profits as we increase the firm's capital,
thereby moving closer to the steady state. Since all firms in the industry
follow similar investment profiles, we know that the industry capital stock

grows in proportion to the growth in R, hence ir <

0.

Finally, we solve the

quadratic equation in (A5), and select the appropriate (negative) root for
stability, which gives

34

2 2

yrf — [-y

rf

4-yKr]

1/2

(A6)

.

2K1

From (A6) we see that -y >

0

< 0, hence d'1/d-y < 0 near the steady

state.

Having established that an increase in -y makes the saddlepath steeper

near the steady state, we can apply Hayashi's theorem to derive the

implications for stock prices. Consider an industry in steady-state
equilibrium that experiences a sudden jump in the import price. A steeper
saddlepath to the new steady state means that, immediately following the
increase (decrease) in the import price, with K still at its initial level,

the shadow value of the installed capital is larger (smaller). But the fact
that marginal q equals average q implies A

V1/K1. We conclude that a firm

of given size will experience a larger increase (decrease) in its stock price
following an increase (decrease) in the import price, when capital in the
industry is less mobile.

B. Correction Factors for the Standard Errors
In this appendix, we derive the correction factors for the estimated

standard errors. These corrections are needed to account for the fact that
the two-stage procedure uses estimated residuals from the first stage as the
independent variable in the second-stage regression.
Consider the following two equation model:

y—xfl+E

(Bl)

eza+?7

(B2)

35

Suppose that OLS estimation of (Bi) yields estimated residuals 2, and that
these estimated residuals are used in place of

in

OLS estimation of equation

(B2). Then the true (asymptotic) variance of the estimated vector of
parameters & is given by

a)(& — a)'

urn E T(& —

2a(z'z)1z'x(x'x)1x'z(z'z)1
(B3)
a(z'z)1z'x(x'x)1x'z(z'z)1]

plim T[a(z'z) +
+

— E

and since

e' E ,'
2

A

+ aE z' u, we can rewrite (B3) as

—1

asy coy a plim T[a,1(z'z)

2

+ (2cr,, +

oz'z) —lz'x(x'x)—lx'z(z'z) —l
2

I

How does this true asymptotic covariance matrix compare to the covariance

of the estimates as reported by OLS? Let
the second regression, and define

-

[I - z(zz)_lz*](,7

• Forming the sum

(, +

of

E)'[I

—

z(z'z)

€. Then

2 — za +

+

and

)

(l/T)z'e —

1z']( +

.). Now

since:

plim (l/T)i'x plim T(x'x)1 plim (l/T)x'€ —

plim (l/T)z' = 0

and

—

squared residuals, we have

plim (l/T),' —

plim

+

2

be the estimated residuals from

0

;

plim (l/T)z'x plim T(x'x)1

pliiu (l/T)x'€ — 0

36

plim (1/T)' — plim (l/T)e'x

we find plim (1/T)' —

a.

plim T(x'x)1 plim (l/T)xE — 0

Thus, the familiar OLS formula gives the

covariance matrix for & as something that converges in probability to

plim T(z'z)1a. This understates the true asymptotic covariances by

F

2

(2o- +

a
2

—1,
plim [T(z, z)
z x(x , x)—1,
x z(z z)
.

,

—l
J.

We obtained a consistent estimate of the aymptotic covariance matrix of
the parameter estimates by adding the matrix F to the estimated covariance

matrix as calculated by the usual least-squares formula. In Table Bi we have
tabulated the ratios for our base case of the corrected standard errors to

those computed without accounting for the two-stage procedure. As can be
seen, the corrections factors generally are small, and those for the standard

errors of the estimates of r1 never exceed eight percent. This is not
surprising in the light of the small correlations between rmt and the various
news variables that we find in our sample.

37

REFERENCES

Abowd, John M. "The Effects of International Competition on Collective
Bargaining Settlements in the United States", Unpublished paper,
Princeton University, 1987.
Cox, John C., Ingersoll Jonathan E., and Ross, Stephen A. "A Theory of the
Term Structure of Interest Rates," Econometrica, March 1985, 53, 385-407.
Fama, Eugene F. "A Note on the Market Model and the Two-Parameter Model,"
Journal of Finance, December 1973, 28, 1181-85.

5AyI 1-1

W,sy4 r,

binn vy,r,ciirr,

t-k cf-nr.lr M,rfrt Pr,rc Fr,

Exchange Rate News: An Empirical Investigation of the Instruments
Industry," Unpublished paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
1986.
Gibbons, Michael R. "The Interrelations of Finance and Economics: Empirical
Perspectives," American Economic Review, May 1987, 77, 35-41.
Grossman, Gene M. "Imports as a Cause of Injury: The Case of the U.S. Steel
Industry," Journal of International Economics, May 1986, 20, 201-23.

______ "The Employment and Wage Effects of Import Competition," Journal of
International Economic Integration, 1987, 2, forthcoming.
Hartigan, James C., Perry, Philip R., and Kamma, Sreenivas. "The Value of
Administered Protection: A Capital Market Approach," Review of Economics
and Statistics, November 1986, 68, 610-17.
Hayashi, Fumio. "Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical
Interpretation," Econometrica, January 1982, 50, 213-24.
Heywood, John S. "Imports and Domestic Wage Levels," Unpublished paper,
University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, n.d.
Hsiao, Cheng. Analysis of Panel Data, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1986.

Jensen, Michael C. "Capital Markets: Theory and Evidence," The Bell Journal of
Economics and Management Science, Autumn 1972, 3, 357-98.
Jones, Ronald W. "The Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models," Journal
of Political Economy, December 1965, 73, 558-73.

_____ • "A Three Factor Model in Theory, Trade and History," in J.N Bhagwati
et.al. (eds.), Trade, the Balance of Payments. and Growth, Amsterdam:
North Holland, 1971.

38

Learner, Edward E. "Let's Take the Con Out of Econometrics," American Economic
Review, March 1983, 73, 31-43.
Magee, Stephen P. "Three Simple Tests of the Stolper-Sarnuelson Theorem," in P.
Oppenheimer (ed.), Issues in International Economics, Stocksfield: Oriel
Press, 1980.

Mayer, Wolfgang. "Short-Run and Long-Run Equilibrium for a Small Open
Economy," Journal of Political Economy, September 1974, 82, 955-67.
Mussa, Michael. "Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of
Factor Specificity, Substitutability, and Intensity in the Short and Long
Run," Journal of Political Economy, November 1974, 82, 1191-1203.
"Dynamic Adjustment in the Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson Model," Journal
of Political Economy, October 1978, 86, 775-92.

Nelson, Charles R. and Kang, Heejon. "Spurious Periodicity in Inappropriately
Detrended Time Series," Econornetrica, May 1981, 49, 741-51.
Pagan, Adrian. "Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with
Generated Regressors," International Economic Review, February 1984, 25,
221-47.
Pakes, Ariel. "On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return," Journal
of Political Economy, April 1985, 93, 390-409.
Rose, Nancy L. "The Incidence of Regulatory Rents in the Motor Carrier
Industry," Rand Journal of Economics, Autumn 1985, 16, 219-318.
Schwert, C. William. "Using Financial Data to Measure Effects of Regulation,"
The Journal of Law and Economics, April 1981, 24, 121-58.

Stolper, Wolfgang and Samuelson, Paul A. "Protection and Real Wages," Review
of Economic Studies, November 1941, 9, 58-73.

Figure 1

Adjustment of Capital Stock

x
Saddlepath

1

r

K. = 0
:1.

I
x

=0

Figure 2

Unanticipated Increase in Import Price at Time T

x

A (T)

K. = 0

1

:i

=0

A

(after shock)

0 (before shock)

Table 1

Variable Definitions and SIC Categories

Var jab le s

nt -- The stock market return (dividends plus capital gains) to firm i in
period t.

rmt - - The

return (dividends plus capital gains) on a value-weighted portfolio
of all NYSE stocks.

PSNEWS -

- The news to an industry specific (SIC-based) import price index.

AGGMNEWS - PENEWS

-

The news to an aggregate import price index for the United States

- The news to an index of energy prices for the United States.

WNEWS -- The news to an index of non-agricultural wages in the United States.
GNPNEWS -- The news to U.S. Gross National Product.
PPINEWS - -

WSNEWS - -

The

news to a producer price index for the United States.

The news to an index of foreign wages for suppliers of a particular
import good to the United States.

ERNEWS - -

The news to an index of bilateral exchange rates for suppliers of a
particular import good to the United States.

SIC Code Groups
SIC 262 -- Paper Mill Products.
SIC 242 --

Sawmill and Planing Mill Products.

SIC 301 --

Tires

and Inner Tubes.

SIC 345 - -

Nuts,

Screws, Rivets, etc. of Base Metal.

SIC 32 -- Stone, Clay, Glass, and Concrete Products.
SIC 331 - -

Steel

and Rolling Mill Products.

Note: See the text for details of the construction of the various "news"
variables, Original sources of the data are provided in Section IV.B and in a
separate Data Appendix, available upon request.

Table 2

Specification Tests for Import
(See

p:4
*: 8

S1C331

.004

.694

.087

0

.548

.317

.283

.458

.644

.358

:5-8= 0

.711

.090

.734

.875

.937

.751

I

*:24= 0

.114

.054

.026

.661

.041

.078

I

:2-4= 0

.384

.895

.254

.191

.420

.001

.353

p : 1,4

*58

w : 1= 0

.031

1— 0

.153

.004

1,4,8 I
1,4,8

I

:

Final lag I
structure
on news
-*

S1C32

.251

I

W*:

S1C345

.391

I

4,8

SIC3O1

.939

I

*: 1,4
w:4,8

*4

S1C242

0

I

-*

Variable

interpretative note below.)

Restriction S1C262

Lags

Price News

.314

.342

(1,1,0)

(1,4,8)

(1,4,0) (4,1,0)

(1,4,1)

(4,4,0)

1974:2

1974:3
to
1986:4

1976:3

1975:2
to

1986:3

1986:3

1974:2
to
1986:4

1975:1

to

.017

.034

-* -

(p ,w ,e)
Estimationl

Period

I

to

I

1986:4

Stand.Dev.I
of PSNEWS

.022

.048

.012

.018

to

1986:3

Variable Definitions:
-

-The deterministically detrended, deseasonalized log of the import

-

-Weighted average of deterministically detrended, deseasonalized

price index for a specific (SIC-based) industry
logs of foreign wages in foreign currency, where weights are import
shares in the SIC group.
-Weighted average of deterministically detrended, deseasonalized logs
of exchange rates, where weights are import shares in the SIC group.

Note on interpretation: Cell entries are significance levels for F-tests. Each
F-test is a test of zero-restrictions on the lag structure of the autoregression
for import prices. A cell value less than .10 indicates rejection at the 90
percent confidence level. Failure to reject causes elimination of the relevant
lags before proceeding to next level.

Table 3

Estimation of RandoR-Effects Model with
(Base Case Results)

Time Components

Step 1: nt — a + flrmt + Eit

Step 2:

Step

— I'LPSNEWS + r2WSNEWS + r3ERNEWS + I'4AGGMNEWS + rPENEWS

+ r6wNEws + r7GNPNEws + r8PPINEwS + r9MSNEwS +
S1C262

S1C242

SIC3O1

S1C345

1.116 *

1.502 *

1.439

1.358

(.063)

(.083)

(.128)

S1C32

S1C331

1.080 *

1.081

(.058)

(.071)

1 Results

*

*

(.206)

*

Step 2 Results
PSNEWS

(.295)
WSNEWS

P434 *

1.222 *

-

.719

(.554)

.185

(.171)

(.926)

.147

-1.549
(2.02)

-

(.718)

1.548 t
(.920)

-2.112
(1.68)

.333

ERNEWS

-

.0062

(.180)
PENEWS

WNEWS

GNPNEWS

PPINEWS

MSNEWS

-

. 109

Estimation
Period

-

.800 *

(.170)

1.474 * 2.115
(.714)

*

(.737)

-

.012

.072

(.563)

(.384)

- .596

-

.291

(.632)

.131

(.161)
-

.720 *

(.197)

-

.447 *

(.190)

- .132
(.268)

(.298)

4.158 *

3.414 *

(.831)

(1.10)

(1.36)

(2.32)

(.883)

(.966)

.024

1.923
(1.36)

4.234 t
(2.16)

.717

1.549 *

(.696)

(.785)

2.752 *

(.778)

(1.09)

.754
(.757)

3.052 *

2.272 *

9

1974:2
to
1985:4

(1.03)

(.365)

-

(.233)

(.883)

#offirms
in SIC group

.079

(.246)

(.371)

.893 *

.043
(.342)

(.479)

AGGMNEWS

.804 *

4.527

2.713 *
(1.36)

1.361

1.464

(1.10)

(1.39)

5

1974:3
to
1986:3

7

1976:3
to
1986:3

.416

*

1.932
(2.35)

.004

2.682 *

1.953 *
(.704)

1.377
(.883)

2.445 *
(.830)

1.116

(2.41)

2

16

16

1974:2
to
1986:3

1975:1
to
1984:2

3.165

1975:2
to
1986:3

(.968)

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. An asterisk (dagger) indicates that
coefficient is significantly different from 0 at the 95% (90%) confidence level.

Table 4

Alternative Specifications of PSNEWS

Coefficient

SIC 262

on industry-specific import price news (r1)

PSNEWSA

PSNEWSB

1.222 *

1.305 *

1.201 *

1.200 *

(.326)

(.281)

(.249)

(.295)
SIC 242

SIC 301

S1C345

(.171)

(.163)

.185
(.926)

-

1.548 *

.804 *

(.371)
SIC331

.362 *

•434 *

(.920)
SIC32

PSNEWSC

PSNEWS

.893 *

(.170)

.091

(.974)

.827
(.788)

1.136 *
(.388)

.606 *
(.160)

.305 *
(.138)

1.667 *

.312 *
(.129)

-1.025

(.902)

(.872)

1.219 *

1.116 *

(.592)

(.616)

.832 *
(.290)

.583 *
(.145)

.996 *
(.299)

.332 *
(.124)

Variable Definitions:
PSNEWS - -The specification resulting from testing the significance of lagged
values of foreign wages, import prices, and exchange rates as summarized in
Table 2. This variable is used in the base case estimation.

PSNEWSA --The import price news variable for an SIC category resulting from
an autoregression of the deterministically detrended, deseasonalized log of the
SIC import price index on one lag of *, and four lags each of * and &.
PSNEWSB --The import price news variable for an SIC category resulting from
a first-order autoregression of deterministically detrended, deseasonalized,
log of the SIC import price index.

PSNEWSC --The import price news variable for an SIC category resulting from
first-differencing the log of the SIC import price index.

Note: Specification of the model is the same as for base case. Estimation
using PSNEWSA and PSNEWSB always excludes WSNEWS and ERNEWS from step 2.
Estimation using PSNEWSC always includes these variables. An asterisk
indicates rejection in a one-tailed test of the hypothesis of perfect capital
mobility at the 95% confidence level. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 5
Alternative Specifications of CAPM

CAPM:

+ 2i(r*t) + 3i(rmt*t2) +

a0 + a1t + a21t2 +

Restriction Set #1: a0 a1 a2j 0;

Restriction

fl2=

a= a2; =

Restriction Set #2: a0=

0.

$i—

Set #3: a1 a2j= 0; $21= 3j 0.

Restriction Set #4: No restrictions.

Coefficient on PSNEWS
for Alternative Specifications of CAPM

Restriction Set on CAPM
(3)

(4)

1.090 *

1.414 *

1.832 *

(.295)

(.381)

(.338)

(.364)

.434 *
(.171)

•547 *
(.198)

.185
(.926)

.390
(1.008)

-

1.548 *

2.317 *

(.658)

(1.393)

.976
(.613)

SIC Category

(1)

S1C262

1.222 *

S1C242

SIC3O1

S1C345

51C32

.804 *
(.371)

S1C331

.893 *
(.170)

(2)

.915 *

.340 *
(.203)

.297

(.826)

.849 *

(.448)

(.335)

.661 *

1.004 *

(.199)

(.205)

.319 *
(.198)
-1.008
(.713)

2.114 *
(.595)

.672 *
(.447)
.881 *
(.172)

Note: Columns (1) and (2) estimated as random-effects-time-components model.
Columns (3) and (4) estimated by Restricted Seemingly Unrelated Regressions.
An asterisk indicates rejection in a one-tailed test of the hypothesis of
perfect capital mobility at the 95% confidence level. Standard errors are in
parentheses. For reasons of cumputational complexity, those in columns (3) and
(4) have not been adjusted to account for the two-step procedure.

