NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF INTERNATIONAL PATENT SYSTEMS:
EVIDENCE FROM ACCESSION TO THE EUROPEAN PATENT CONVENTION
Bronwyn Hall
Christian Helmers
Working Paper 24207
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24207

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018

We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the European Patent Office (EPO) for the
preparation of the first draft and comments from Steve Bond, Mike Devereux, Christian FonsRosen, Nikolaus Thumm, and Andy Toole. The views expressed here are those of the authors.
They are not necessarily those of the European Patent Office. The paper was presented at the 12th
Annual Intellectual Property Scholars Conference at Stanford, the 7th Annual EPIP Conference in
Leuven, the JRC-IPTS in Sevilla, the 5th Annual Searle Center Research Roundtable on Patents
and Technology Standards, the 7th ZEW/MaCCI Conference on the Economics of Innovation and
Patenting, IPSDM in Mexico City, a seminar at Oxford Said Business School, Santa Clara
University, and the EEA-ESEM 2016 in Geneva. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Bronwyn Hall and Christian Helmers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of International Patent Systems: Evidence from Accession to the European Patent
Convention
Bronwyn Hall and Christian Helmers
NBER Working Paper No. 24207
January 2018
JEL No. F53,F55,O34
ABSTRACT
We analyze the impact of accession to the regional patent system established by the European
Patent Convention (EPC) on 14 countries that acceded between 2000 and 2008. We look at
changes in patenting behavior by domestic and foreign applicants at the national patent offices
and the European Patent Office (EPO). Our findings suggest a strong change in patent filing
behavior among foreigners seeking patent protection in the accession states, substituting EPO
patents for domestic patents immediately. However, there is little evidence that accession
increased FDI by patenting foreign companies in accession countries. Moreover, there is no
discernible reaction among domestic entities in terms of domestic filings, although we do find
some evidence that applicants in accession states increased their propensity to file patents with
the EPO post-accession. Inventor-level information suggests that the underlying inventions
originate in the accession states

Bronwyn Hall
University of California at Berkeley
123 Tamalpais Road
Berkeley, CA 94708
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org
Christian Helmers
Department of Economics
Santa Clara University
Lucas Hall
Santa Clara, CA 95053
christian.r.helmers@gmail.com

1. Introduction
There is a long-standing debate on the impact of intellectual property (IP) rights on innovation
and economic development.3 One of the most controversial questions revolves around the
strength of patent protection in lower- and middle-income economies. Underlying this debate is
the fact that countries have the ability to individually determine important aspects of their IP
rights systems. Although there are international agreements such as the Agreement on TradeRelated Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) which harmonize and regulate
important aspects of national IP systems,4 there is no global patent system,5 and only a few
regional systems.6 This often overlooked fact means that patents are national rights and thus
valid only in the jurisdiction that grants them. This in turn implies that regardless of the
strength of statutory patent protection, the same invention may be patent-protected in one
jurisdiction but not in another. Hence, apart from the availability and strength of patent
protection, the need to file patents on the same invention in each country for which patent
protection is sought is likely to affect companies’ decisions about where to obtain patent
protection and therefore their business decisions including R&D, foreign direct investment
(FDI), exporting, etc. It is also likely to affect business decisions of companies other than the
patentees, especially those in lower- and middle-income economies.
The fragmented nature of patent protection also raises a number of other issues. First, there are
doubtless a great deal of wasted resources when patent applications on the same invention
need to be examined in several different offices, to say nothing of issues related to enforcement
in different jurisdictions. To some extent this problem is mitigated by the PCT system which
allows a single search for prior art by one of the designated international search offices. 7
However, for developing countries the creation of a patent office and the acquisition of the
expertise required to grant patents may use resources that would be better spent elsewhere.
For this reason, regional offices may be a desirable and cost-effective solution for smaller and
less developed countries. A second problem created by the existence of many national patent
There is an extensive literature on the issue, see for example Nordhaus (1969), Diwan and Rodrik
(1991), Helpman (1993), Gould and Gruben (1996), and Lerner (2002).
3

Although TRIPS regulates important aspects of national IP systems (for example, signatories have to
grant patent protection on both product and process innovation), there remains considerable discretion
(for example, signatories can define patent eligible subject matter).
4

There is the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), which was signed in 1970 and is administered by the
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). The PCT offers only a simplified patent filing system for
an applicant to obtain patent protection in several countries worldwide through a single application.
However, the decision of whether the patent will be granted remains with the national or regional patent
authorities. Hence, despite a single patent filing, there is still the need to prosecute the patent filing
separately in each jurisdiction to obtain a patent grant. Enforcement and validity of PCT patents are also
subject to national law and procedures.
5

The main regional systems are the European Patent Convention (EPC), covering about 40 European
countries, the Organisation Africaine de la Propriété Intellectuelle (OAPI) for French-speaking Africa, the
African Regional Intellectual Property Organization (ARIPO) for English-speaking Africa, and the Eurasian
Patent Organization (EAPO) for Russia and the former Soviet republics. The EPC is by far the most
important regional system.
6

At the present time, these offices are those of Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, China, Chile, Egypt,
Finland, India, Israel, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine and
the United States of America, as well as the European Patent Office and the Nordic Patent Institute.
7

2

offices is that the same invention may result in patents of widely varying breadth, which can
raise enforcement and other costs for both the patent holder and her competitors. A regional
office could lead to more uniformity of coverage across jurisdictions.
In this paper, we examine empirically the response of firms and inventors to the addition of a
regional patent system to their own national system, in an effort to understand how it affects
both their innovative activity and their patenting strategies. We use data for a set of 14
countries that joined the European Patent Convention (EPC) during the 2000-2010 decade to
explore the impact of the accession on patenting behavior by firms in those countries.8 The EPC
is a regional patent system that provides uniform patent protection in all member and extension
states and that co-exists with national patent systems. It offers a single route to obtaining a
patent grant in all member and extension states. Accession to the EPC, therefore, offers an
interesting setting to study the effect of the introduction of a regional patent system. The period
that we study is particularly interesting because a number of relatively less developed
transition and emerging market economies joined the EPC regional patent system which had
been mainly composed of more advanced EU countries.9
Joining the EPC potentially has two main effects. First, it becomes cheaper for residents to
simultaneously obtain patent protection both domestically and in the other countries signatory
to the EPC. Second, it also becomes cheaper for foreigners to obtain patent protection in the
country as they can obtain an EPC patent in the country instead of filing a separate patent
application with the national office of the country. This implies that on the one hand, it becomes
cheaper for domestic firms to obtain patent protection at home and abroad simultaneously, and
on the other, it becomes cheaper for foreign firms to obtain patent protection in the country
provided they obtain patent protection in another country signatory to the EPC.10 Using both
aggregate and patent level data, we investigate how EPO and national office patenting by
residents and non-residents of accession countries change following accession to the EPC. We
also carry out some analysis that looks at the effect of EPC accession on FDI in accession
countries.
Our analysis offers three main insights. First, there is little evidence for a drop in patent filings
by domestic entities with the national office following accession. That is, entities in accession
countries do not substitute filings at the EPO for domestic filings. That said, in nearly all
accession countries, domestic entities filed very few patents with the national office before
accession and accession did not change that. Second, we nevertheless see a modest increase in
The countries are: Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Croatia, Hungary, Iceland, Lithuania, Latvia,
Norway, Poland, Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, and Turkey. See Table 2 and Appendix Table D-1. Note that
our analysis includes both extension and accession to the EPC (for an explanation see Section 3 and
Appendix A), although in the text we refer to both simply as accession as all countries eventually acceded
to the EPC.
8

2005 GDP per capita averaged US$33,800 in those countries that joined before 2000, whereas it
averaged US$18,600 (US$14,400 excluding Iceland and Norway) in those 14 countries that joined
between 2000 and 2008. See Table D-1 in the appendix.
9

In addition, a substantial share of the work burden associated with the filing and examination of
patents is shifted from national offices to the European Patent Office (EPO), which may have implications
for patent prosecution, such as examination practices, the speed of examination and hence backlogs. This
may also have implications for national patent office budgets, due to the change in both fee levels and
their allocation between national offices and the EPO -- although this is an aspect of accession that we do
not investigate here.
10

3

EPO filings by domestic entities albeit from a very low level. Analysis at the inventor-level
suggests that invention does increase slightly in the accession countries. We also find some
evidence for an increase in the complexity of the patent landscape in accession countries due to
the (unexpected) combined use of the national and EPC systems for the same patents. Third,
foreign entities react strongly to accession to the EPO. Filings with national offices by foreign
entities drop by over 90% immediately following accession to the EPC as they opt for filings at
the EPO instead of the domestic patent office. Despite the clear impact on patent filings, using
firm-level data on FDI, we find only very weak evidence that non-residents changed their
investment in accession countries following accession to the EPC.
Our analysis contributes to the literature by providing evidence on the effect of the national
character of patents as well as the introduction of a regional patent system. Because most
accession states were lower- and middle-middle income economies, our results also provide
some insight into the impact of such international patent systems on developing countries in the
rest of the world.
From a policy point of view, our analysis may in particular provide lessons for developing
countries that consider joining the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) system or other supranational systems.11 By facilitating the filing of patents in several jurisdictions, joining the PCT
system generates similar effects to joining the EPC system. Our analysis may also inform us
about the potential impact of the European patent with unitary effect in 25 countries (that are
part of the enhanced cooperation agreement) which will become available in 2018.12 Under the
agreement, validation of the European unitary patent in a national office is no longer required
for the patent to enter into force. Our results suggest that this will lead to a sudden and
persistent increase in the number of valid European patents in countries that so far recorded
few validations of EPO patents. Further, the co-existence of the existing national and EPO
systems with the new unitary patent during a transitional period of at least seven years may
result in a substantial number of duplicate patent filings across the different systems. This will
increase the complexity of the European patent landscape even further. Overall, given the
expected costs savings in obtaining patent protection across several European countries due to
the unitary patent, the effect may materialize in a similar way as what occurred after accession
to the EPC.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the existing literature on
the impact of patent strength and harmonization of patent systems on countries’ innovative
activity and patenting. Section 3 discusses the changes in patent filing behavior brought about
by accession to the EPC. Section 4 describes the data used in our analysis. Section 5 contains our
analysis of patent filings. Section 6 presents results from applicant- and inventor-level analyses.
Section 7 uses matched firm-level data to analyze any impact on FDI in accession countries.
Section 8 concludes.

While the PCT system unifies at an international level the filing of patents and the provision of search
reports, the examination of patents is still done by the designated national offices. In this sense, the EPC
system provides a much more harmonized patent system that comes a lot closer to an international
patent system than the PCT.
11

The regulations of the unitary patent were created in December 2012. For more details see
http://www.epo.org/law-practice/unitary/unitary-patent.html
12

4

2. Literature
Bilir et al. (2011) look directly at the impact of the internationalization of the patent system by
joining the Paris Convention.13 They study the response of patent filings by foreign nationals to
the U.S. accession to the Paris Convention in 1887. Using a sample of patents filed with the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) between 1865 and 1914, the authors find a strong
positive impact following the accession of the U.S. on patent filings by inventors from countries
that were already members of the Paris Convention prior to the U.S. relative to inventors from
countries that joined later. The positive effect is more pronounced for countries with high pretreaty levels of GDP per capita and education (measured as primary schooling), suggesting that
countries with higher levels of economic development respond more strongly to the
international strengthening and harmonization of patent rights.
McCalman (2001) models the impact of the harmonization of intellectual property systems
induced by TRIPS at the aggregate country level. He projects that there will be substantial
income transfers resulting from harmonization, mostly from developing to developed countries.
However, the analysis disregards the role played by multinationals and international trade in
patented inventions. It is specifically this aspect that Branstetter et al. (2006) examine to find
that a strengthening of IP protection in 16 countries during the period 1982-1999 had a positive
impact on technology transfer within U.S. multinationals. Technology transfer is measured by
the amount of royalty payments made by the U.S.-based company to its affiliates abroad for the
use or sale of intangible assets. Controlling for tax differences across jurisdictions, they find that
affiliates’ R&D expenditure and patent applications increased, with a stronger effect for affiliate
firms that have highly patent-active parent companies in the U.S.
The analysis by Branstetter et al. (2006) is part of a broader, related literature that analyzes the
impact of patent strength on innovation. Most of the empirical studies in this literature rely on
aggregate country-level data to explore correlations between some measure of the strength of
IP rights protection, economic growth and innovation. For example, Gould and Gruben (1996)
use a standard growth model to find a positive association between an index of patent
protection and growth of GDP at the country level (for 1960-1988). Instrumental variable
estimation suggests that the relationship is causal rather than simultaneous. Kanwar and
Evenson (2003) look more directly at the relationship between IP protection and innovation.
They find a strong positive correlation between the strength of patent protection and
innovation measured as R&D intensity for a sample of 29 countries over the period 1981-1990.
Similar evidence supporting a positive relationship between IP protection and innovation is
provided by Chen and Puttitanum (2005) for a sample of 64 developing countries (1975-2000)
measuring innovation as patenting. However, Qian (2007) uses data on 26 countries and
matched sampling methods to look closely at the impact of national patent protection on
pharmaceutical innovation and finds little impact, unless the country adopting a patent system
is already at a higher level of development.

The Paris Convention harmonizes national patent systems by providing national treatment and the socalled priority right. In particular the priority right facilitates the filing of patents in different jurisdictions
as it allows applicants to preserve the first filing date in any of the signatory states as the patent’s priority
date within 12 months from the first filing.
13

5

A key problem in some, but not all, of these analyses is the endogeneity inherent in a country’s
strength of patent protection; countries with superior innovative performance are more likely
to choose strong patent protection.14 Sakakibara and Branstetter (2001) address this problem
by exploiting an exogenous change in the patent law in Japan in 1988, which extended the scope
of patents mainly by allowing applicants to include several independent claims in a single
patent specification. Their firm-level analysis shows no discernible impact of stronger patent
rights on firms’ R&D investment or patenting. Similarly, Scherer and Weisburst (1995) exploit a
change in patent law in Italy in 1982 that allowed patentability of pharmaceutical compounds.
The authors treat the law change as exogenous because it was mandated by the Italian Supreme
Court rather than the direct outcome of lobbying by pharmaceutical companies. Their analysis,
which is based only on aggregate industry-level data, suggests no statistically significant impact
on R&D spending although there was an increase in patenting by domestic companies in the U.S.
following the law change. The authors interpret this as indicative of a change in patenting
propensity, i.e., firms patented more for a given amount of R&D investment.15
This short review of the existing literature shows that the evidence on the effect of
internationalization of the patent system is very limited. The only existing studies focus on
relatively broad international agreements that only affected certain aspects of national patent
systems but which did not produce a system that allowed obtaining a patent grant
simultaneously in multiple jurisdictions.16

3. The impact of accession to the EPC
As of March 2016, there are 38 EPC contracting states. Before acceding to the EPC, countries can
sign an extension agreement with the EPO which extends the possibility of patent protection for
patents granted by the EPO to countries that are not members of the EPC. Extension states
usually accede eventually to the EPC, although the majority of member states have acceded to
the EPC without prior extension agreements, as is shown in Table 2 later in Section 4.
The key feature of the EPC is the harmonization and standardization of the granting procedure
of patents in all member and extension states. Patent applications are filed with a single office,
the EPO, which examines and grants the patent. Nevertheless, patentees are required to extend
(in the case of extension states) or validate (in the case of EPC member states) the granted
patent in each national office of each country in which the patent should be enforceable.
Extension/validation in a national office requires prior designation during the grant process.
Once granted, it requires the payment of extension/validation fees as well as translation costs,
For example, Ginarte and Park (1997) find that countries characterized by higher R&D levels, market
freedom, and openness tend to have stronger patent protection. Moreover, the results suggest that there
is a critical size of a country’s R&D activity that drives countries to adopt stronger patent protection.
Lerner (2002) looks at changes in the presence and strength of patent protection in 60 countries over a
period of 150 years (1850-1999) to find a country’s GDP to be positively correlated with having a patent
system in place. He also finds civil law as well as democratic countries to be more likely to have a
(stronger) patent system.
14

15

See also Moser (2005) and Lerner (2002) for evidence based on 19 th century patenting.

However, there is some recent work on the trademark system. Herz and Mejer (2016) study the effect
of the introduction of the European Union (EU) Trademark in 1996 which created the possibility to obtain
trademark protection throughout the EU with a single trademark filing.
16

6

although exceptions apply for contracting states to the London Agreement.17 The national
character of granted patents implies that they have to be kept in force in each individual country
by paying renewal fees. Hence, turning an EPO patent into nationally enforceable rights
requires:
a. all the costs associated with the grant of an EPO patent (application fee, European
search fee, examination fee, grant fee, and EPO renewal fees beginning the 3rd year from
the date of filing until the patent is granted by the EPO);
b. the specific costs incurred for obtaining national patent rights (designation fee,
translation fees, and validation fees).
These account for the main difference between obtaining a patent right in a given
member/extension state of the EPC through the EPO or directly with the national office. An
additional difference arises from potential cost differences between employing the services of a
European patent attorney and a national/local patent attorney.
To obtain an EPO patent, fees payable to the EPO beginning the third year counting from the
application date until grant of a European patent that designates two EPC countries amount to
about EUR 4,360.18 To file with the EPO, domestic applicants in our set of accession states also
need to translate their patent specification into one of the three official languages of the EPO,
which is likely to be costly.19
Before 1 April 2009, which is the relevant period for our analysis, designation fees per
designated country amounted to EUR 90 and are capped at EUR 630, i.e., there is no additional
cost to designating more than seven countries. Extension and validation fees at national offices
vary across offices. While for example Norway and Slovenia do not charge validation fees, they
amount to nearly EUR 170 in Turkey. Appendix Table D-2 summarizes the different applicable
validation fees. Apart from designation, extension and validation fees, to obtain patent
protection nationally, applicants may also incur additional expenses due to translation
requirements.
In contrast, obtaining a patent directly with a national office is considerably cheaper than the
EPO route. Similar to validation fees, the costs differ considerably across national patent offices.
For example, national fees amount to approximately EUR 220 in Lithuania and to over EUR 900
in Norway.
While national renewal fees are incurred irrespective of the route taken, Harhoff et al. (2009)
suggest that their level still impacts on a patentee’s choice of whether to validate a given EPO
patent in a designated state. This means that the level of renewal fees may still impact on the
choice of countries in which a patent is obtained, whether it is through the national office or the
In the countries signatory to the London Agreement, foreign applicants only need a translation of the
claims of their EPO patent into the local language in order to validate the patent in the country. Among
our set of countries, translation of the complete patent specification is still required by Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Norway, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, and Turkey.
17

As of April 2010 (EPO Supplement 1 to Official Journal 3, 2010), the total cost can be computed as
follows: application fee EUR 105 (filed online); European search fee EUR 1,105; examination fee EUR
1,480; grant fee EUR 830; renewal fees for 3rd and 4th year from the date of filing: EUR 420 and EUR 525.
18

Practitioner estimates of translation costs are EUR 75-85 per page with an estimated average of 23
pages per patent specification (Roland Berger, 2004).
19

7

EPO route. Nevertheless, for a specific country the renewal fees are irrelevant for the choice
between filing with the national office and the EPO since the same fees incur in both cases. The
same applies to translation fees provided the national office requires translation of the entire
patent upon validation.
Table 1 summarizes the different choices that resident and non-resident patentees can make.
Before accession the choice is between filing a national patent and filing an EPO patent abroad
or doing both. Post-accession, the choice set grows. Now applicants have the additional option
of obtaining an EPO patent in the accession country instead of a national filing.

Table 1: Impact of accession to the EPC
Before accession
National
Home

After accession
EPO
Abroad

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

No
No

National
Home
Yes
No
No
Yes
No

No*
No
Yes
No
No

EPO
Abroad
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

The table describes the choices available to a given applicant before and
after extension/accession. For example, before accession, a given applicant
has the option to file for a national patent with the national patent office
and to obtain patent protection abroad by filing an EPO patent and
validating it abroad.
* Post accession, national filings and filings with the EPO are substitutes
which means in principle we should not observe such duplicate filings;
however, in practice, we see such filings in the data (see Section 5.2
below).

In our empirical analysis, we are interested in estimating the impact of accession on the
patenting behavior of both domestic and foreign inventors. The discussion above suggests that
any effect of accession to the EPC should come mainly from a shift in the costs (including costs
associated with the difficulty of having to file in a foreign country) associated with obtaining a
patent in a given country. Appendix B offers a simple model that analyzes the impact of
accession slightly more formally.

4. Data
We analyze the impact of accession to the EPC for the 14 contracting states that acceded to the
EPC between 2002 and 2008. The list is shown below in Table 2, where European Union (EU)
members are shaded in grey (see also appendix Table D-1).20

Due to a lack of sufficient data, the following contracting states are excluded from the analysis: Albania,
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Serbia, Malta, Montenegro, and San Marino.
20

8

Table 2: Accession states and dates
EPC Extension EPC Accession EU Accession
Country
Date
Date
Year
Bulgaria
1-Jul-2002
2007
Croatia
1-Apr-2004
1-Jan-2008
2013
Czech Republic
1-Jul-2002
2004
Estonia
1-Jul-2002
2004
Hungary
1-Jan-2003
2004
Iceland
1-Nov-2004
Latvia
1-May-1995
1-Jul-2005
2004
Lithuania
5-Jul-1994
1-Dec-2004
2004
Norway
1-Jan-2008
Poland
1-Mar-2004
2004
Romania
15-Oct-1996
1-Mar-2003
2007
Slovakia
1-Jul-2002
2004
Slovenia
1-Mar-1994
1-Dec-2002
2004
Turkey
1-Nov-2000

GDP in
2005*
74,896
63,820
208,287
20,658
161,505
9,404
28,311
46,682
287,147
511,949
200,192
82,222
44,191
755,490

GDP per
capita*
9,678
14,367
20,379
15,349
16,011
31,690
12,280
13,667
62,109
13,414
9,195
15,183
22,073
11,087

*Output-based GDP in 2005 US dollars, at PPP.
Source: Penn World Tables, Version 8.1
Note: grey shaded areas indicate country is European Union (EU) member

The set of countries covered by our analysis is heterogeneous. It includes a large number of
former Eastern bloc countries, the Scandinavian countries Iceland and Norway, as well as the
large transition economy Turkey. As noted earlier, these countries generally have lower GDP
per capita than the EPC founding states, with the exception of Iceland and Norway.
All accession states that also became part of the EU joined the EPC before officially becoming a
member of the EU (with the exception of Latvia, which acceded six months after joining the EU).
The fact that all members of the EU have to be signatories of the EPC (but not vice versa)
mitigates concerns of any endogeneity in the decision to join the EPC. The decision to join the
EPC was taken by these countries within the broader context of acceding the EU. They generally
did not attribute any specific importance to accession to the EPC especially within the context of
other common and much broader regulatory challenges presented by accession to the EU. 21 To
test this more formally, in appendix Table D-3 we show the results of a hazard rate regression
for accession as a function of the country’s population, GDP, and past domestic patenting.
Although the power of this test is low due to the small sample size, none of these variables has
any predictive power for accession, nor are they jointly significant.
The patent data for the analysis presented below come from EPO’s Patstat database (version
October 2015). We extracted patents filed with national patent offices, at the EPO and via the
PCT route at the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). Our analysis focuses on
We also confirmed this in conversations with representatives from various patent offices in accession
countries.
21

9

patents filed by residents of the countries listed above and residents of other countries
(referred to as “non-residents” in the analysis) with the national office as well as the EPO (and
WIPO). Appendix A explains in detail how we identify EPO patents that have been validated in
an accession state.
The patent data we use include filings at all offices between 1995 and 2014, although for some
of the analysis we restrict the period considered to that 3 years (12 quarters) before and after
the accession date for each country.
The firm-level data used in the analysis of foreign ownership of companies in accession
countries presented in Section 7 come from Bureau van Dijk’s Amadeus database. We use the
Amadeus data to determine whether any non-resident patentees change their direct investment
behavior in accession countries following accession to the EPC. To do this, we use the detailed
information on corporate ownership structure provided by Amadeus. The information allows us
to construct international business groups and hence to determine any foreign ownership of
companies in accession countries (see appendix Table D-4). We use annual versions of the data
covering the period 2000-2011,22 which means we are able to track changes in ownership over
time. The data nevertheless have important limitations for our analysis which are discussed in
detail in Section 7.
In order to combine the Amadeus with the patent data, we proceeded as follows: we first
identify all foreign companies with an ownership stake in any company registered in an
accession country over the period 2000-2011. We then match the set of 45,872 foreign parent
companies to the patent data. The data are matched by applicant name due to the absence of a
unique identifier that would allow merging the datasets. We matched company and applicant
names using a combination of automated matching and manual matching to minimize the
occurrence of “false positives”, i.e. firms are erroneously matched to patents, and “false
negatives”, firms are erroneously not matched to their patents. We match 9,162 parent
companies to the set of non-resident patentees, i.e., around 20 per cent.
In the next sections of the paper we use these data to analyze aggregate patent filings by
residents and non-residents, applicant-level and inventor-level filings, and changes in FDI, all as
a function of the date a country acceded to the EPC.

5. Aggregate analysis
5.1 National office filings
We first show that there have been large changes in aggregate patent filings following accession
to the EPC. In Figure 1, we compare filings by residents and non-residents with the national
offices around the time of accession.23 The figure shows a dramatic effect of accession to the EPC
Using annual versions of Amadeus is necessary in order to avoid sample attrition as Bureau van Dijk
drops inactive firms after four years, which means we would potentially miss firms that were active in the
early 2000s, but went out of business by 2007, if we were to use only a single version of Amadeus.
22

We have complete patent data for at least 12 quarters post-accession for all countries. This ensures that
changes in the number of patent filings are not driven by entry and exit of countries into the sample. In
order to visualize any potential changes following accession, in much of what follows we rescale the time
23

10

on filings by non-resident applicants at the national offices. Non-residents’ filings drop between
the pre-accession and post-accession quarters by over 90% from about 6,000 to fewer than 500
applications. More surprisingly, resident filings, in contrast, seem to be largely unaffected. A
potential implication is that joining the EPC had no immediate benefit for the residents of the
accession countries.
Figure 1: Patent filings at national office by non-residents and residents (by quarter)

1. Patent filings at national offices

0

2000

4000

6000

before and after accession

-10

-5

0
Quarters since accession

By non-residents

5

10

By residents

Note: time represents the application date of a patent. Number of patent filings by country have been corrected for
equivalents.

In Figures 2a and 2b we examine the variation in accession country response to joining the EPC
(see also appendix Table D-5). For visibility on the graphs, we divide the countries into two
groups, those that average more than 100 filings per quarter and those with fewer. Only 5
countries are in the larger group: the Czech Republic, Hungary, Norway, Poland, and Slovakia.
All of these except Norway show the same pattern in the aggregate figure. The anomalous result
of a second decline in non-resident patenting in Figure 1 turns out to be due almost entirely to
Norway, with a small contribution from Iceland. This delayed response may be due to fact that
the EPO filing date for a PCT application is the PCT filing date, rather than the actual EPO date,

period for all countries (the quarter of the accession date is time zero). The regressions presented later in
the paper control for the fact that there are also underlying trends in patent applications using calendar
quarter-year dummies.

11

which means that PCT applications during 2008 would not be available for Norwegian
designation, even if they were filed at the EPO after January 2008.24
Looking at the countries with fewer than 100 filings per quarter, Estonia and Turkey show a
similar pattern as the larger countries, while Croatia shows a decline occurring about 10
quarters before the accession date of January 2008. This is most likely due to the fact that
Croatia became an extension state earlier in April 2004. As described earlier, this status allows
applicants to extend their EPO applications to the country and to validate them there as national
patents if they are granted at the EPO. The other countries with extension status prior to
becoming full members of the EPC (Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovenia) have so few patent
filings by non-residents throughout the period that we see little response either to extension or
accession.
Figure 2a: Patent filings at national office by non-residents and residents
(larger countries)

Patent filings at national offices
before and after accession
Hungary

Norway

0

1400

Czech Republic

-10

0

5

10

Slovakia

0

1400

Poland

-5

-10

-5

0

5

10

-10

-5

0

5

10

Quarters since accession
By non-residents

By residents

Graphs by Name of accession country

Note: time represents the application date of a patent.

See http://ipkitten.blogspot.com/2009/02/plea-from-norway.html for a discussion of this issue. Also
http://ip-updates.blogspot.com/2007/11/norway-joins-epc-on-january-1-2008.html for the EPO rules.
24

12

Figure 2b: Patent filings at national office by non-residents and residents
(smaller countries)

Patent filings at national offices
before and after accession
Croatia

Estonia

Iceland

Latvia

Lithuania

Romania

Slovenia

Turkey

0

200

0

200

0

200

Bulgaria

-10

-5

0

5

10

-10

-5

0

5

10

-10

-5

0

5

10

Quarters since accession
By non-residents

By residents

Graphs by Name of accession country

Note: time represents the application date of a patent.

This first look at the impact of accession to the EPC reveals two basic facts: 1) Before accession
there is relatively little patenting by residents of accession countries with the exception of
Poland and Norway. 2) After accession, non-residents almost immediately stop applying for
patents at the national offices. The only perhaps surprising result is that the residents of these
countries who do patent are largely unaffected by accession to the EPO.

5.2 EPO filings
The discussion in Section 3 above and the model in appendix B suggest that the non-response of
residents to EPC accession could be because they only wish to patent in one or two countries,
and there is no cost advantage from switching to an EPO patent filing. We examined this
hypothesis by looking at the distribution of patent family filings (equivalents for the same
invention, defined as patent applications that share a priority patent)25 across the three choices:
(a) EPO only, (b) national office only and (c) both the EPO and the national office. This
distribution is shown in Figure 3, by quarters before and after accession to the EPC. There is a
complication due to the fact that patent filings at the EPO and the national office usually take
place 3 to 4 quarters apart. The figure shown is based on priority date, where each unique
As explained in the Introduction, separate patent applications have to be filed in each jurisdiction in
which patent protection is sought. Since these separate patent filings are based on the same invention,
they form a so-called patent family. To facilitate obtaining patent protection in multiple jurisdictions, the
Paris Convention allows “family members” (also referred to as equivalents) to be filed within 12 months
of the first filing in any jurisdiction signatory to the convention while preserving the first filing date (e.g. if
a patent is filed first in Germany on January 1st 2000, and then the patent is filed in the U.S., say on
October 1st 2000, the U.S. patent office will treat the patent as if it had been filed on January 1st 2000).
This first filing date is referred to as the priority date and the corresponding patent as the priority patent.
25

13

priority is counted only once, and the dating is relative to the priority date. Figure D-1 in the
appendix shows a version of the figure based on the application date, where each filing that
occurs both at the EPO and the national office is counted twice (hence the relatively large size of
the central band). Both figures show a similar pattern: first, the vast majority of patent filings by
residents of accession countries are at their national offices and this remains true after
accession. Second, there is a doubling of EPO filings after accession, but from a very small base
(from about 50 per quarter to 100 per quarter). Finally, and somewhat puzzling, the share of
patents filed at both the EPO and the relevant national office is largely unchanged by accession,
in spite of the fact that this strategy would appear to be more expensive than simply filing at the
EPO and designating one’s own country among others.
Figure 3: Patent filings by residents of accession countries
by quarter before and after accession
Patent filings by residents of accession countries - by priority date
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
-12 -11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0
National offices only

1

2

3

Both EPO and national offices

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11

EPO only

At the time of filing, applicants to the EPO can designate the member states for which they
desire patent coverage, paying a nominal fee (90 euros) for each, up to a maximum of 7, after
which the subsequent states are free. In practice, the majority of EPO applicants designate all or
almost all of the member states. However, after grant they can choose whether or not to validate
the patent in these member states, and in practice, applicants validate in fewer countries than
they have designated (Harhoff et al. 2009).
Unfortunately, determining precisely whether a granted EPO patent has been validated in the
accession countries proves to be somewhat difficult, due to lags in reporting from the national
offices to the various databases from which the Patstat legal status table draws information, as
well as apparently missing data in some cases. Appendix A presents data from Patstat and
discusses this issue more completely. As in Harhoff et al. (2012), we define validation as the
recording of fee payment to the national office, lapsing at the national office more than one year
after grant, or withdrawal or expiration at the national office.
14

Table 3 investigates the grant and validation behavior for accession country resident filings to
the EPO and finds that they behave like other EPO applicants and that this behavior is not
changed very much by accession to the EPO. Both before and after, about 80 per cent of the
applications from applicants who use both national offices and the EPO validate in more than 6
states. The number of validations is slightly higher for applicants that use only the EPO, but not
by much. The median number of validated states for those using both offices does not increase
after accession, whereas the median number for those using the EPO only increases from 12 to
13.
Table 3

Granted and validated patents from EPO patent filings by
residents of accession countries

Number of
validated states
at EPO
Zero
1-3
4-6
More than 6
Total filings

Applicant at EPO and
national office

Applicant at EPO only

Before
accession
0.3%

After
accession
0.0%

Before
accession
1.2%

After
accession
0.0%

7.0%
10.8%
81.9%
722

8.6%
11.2%
80.2%
723

7.7%
8.9%
82.2%
244

6.7%
9.9%
83.4%
433

Before is defined as 12 quarters prior to the accession date and after as the
accession quarter plus the 11 quarters following.
Unit of observation is an EP patent application by an accession country resident.

The fact that accession country residents hardly change their filing strategies after accession is
puzzling, because it would presumably become much cheaper to simply validate an EPO patent
in their own country. Clearly they are validating in a large number of states (including their
own) so it would be feasible at low cost. There are several possible explanations for this fact:
1. The applicant may wish to obtain a search report cheaply from his national office before
pursuing an international application.26 In this case, we would not expect to see a grant
of the patent, as the applicant is likely to withdraw the application before grant. 27
2. The applicant could have different expectations of granting probability, and seek to
maximize the chance that he receives at least one patent grant.
3. The applicant may wish to create the maximum amount of uncertainty about the extent
of his intellectual property rights for his competitors.
4. The actual claims on the applications may differ, in spite of the fact that the applications
claim the same priority patent application.

Search reports are issued by patent examiners during the examination process and provide an
evaluation of the patentability of the invention submitted for examination.
26

27

We are grateful to Roger Burt for suggesting this possibility.

15

Explanation (1) is somewhat difficult to assess because of grant lags. But there is some support
for it if we restrict analysis to accession countries prior to 2008 (excluding Norway and
Croatia). During the 12 quarters prior to accession, about 80 percent of the patents with
equivalents at both offices were granted before 2013, whereas after accession, only 47 per cent
were granted during the first 12 quarters following. We also examined the cases where an
accession country resident applied for a patent on the same invention at both the national office
and the EPO after accession. In almost all cases, the priority patent was the national office
patent, as suggested by (1) above. However, in about a quarter of the cases where we observed
either a grant at the national office or a validation in the accession country after an EPO grant or
both, the patent did appear to be pursued until grant and validation at both offices. The median
lag between the national grant and the subsequent EPO grant is about 2 years, and a significant
number have a lag longer than 5 years. Because the national patent lapses if an equivalent EPO
patent is validated in the country, this suggests that one reason for the dual approach may be
the earlier coverage that is obtained via a national patent filing.
The conclusion is that the co-existence of national and EPO patents in a given jurisdiction postaccession allows on the one hand for duplicate patent filings and on the other hand allows
applicants to combine the benefits of both systems (speed vs. coverage). Regardless of the
reasons behind these findings, the effect of the co-existence of the national and EPC systems is
to increase the complexity of the patent landscape faced by other firms and individuals,
especially in the earlier life of the invention, before an EPO patent issues.

5.3 Regression analysis
The results of the graphical analysis so far suggest the following two conclusions: 1) accession
to the EPC has little impact on patenting by residents of the accession countries, whereas 2)
non-residents immediately switch (almost) all their applications to the EPO. Next, we evaluate
this result more carefully using simple regression analysis of aggregate patent applications and
grants in order to isolate the impact of accession to the EPC on the patent filing behavior from
confounding factors such as broader economic reforms, EU accession, and unobserved
heterogeneity more broadly.
To identify the accession effect, we rely on the staggered timing of accession, i.e., we exploit the
fact that countries joined the EPC at different points in time (see Table 2). Hence, an estimate of
the impact of joining the regional system is obtained from comparing patent counts before and
after accession in a given country relative to the change observed during the same period of
time in another country that is not joining the EPC at the same time.28 The main motivation for
adopting this approach is the absence of any countries that could serve as controls. For one
thing, existing EPC members were directly affected by accession and hence are not a valid
control. Since nearly all Eastern European countries joined the EPC, there are few potential
control countries that never joined, such as Belarus or Ukraine, which arguably differ in many
observable and unobservable ways from our set of accession countries.
An important assumption underlying our approach is the exogeneity of the decision to join the
EPC and the timing of accession with respect to an applicant’s patenting activities (see Section
28

This identification strategy is similar to Acharya et al. (2014) and Png (2017).

16

3). The graphical evidence on resident and non-resident applicants’ filing behavior presented
above, reassuringly showed little evidence for accession to have occurred during a general
upward or downward trend in patent filings prior to accession. The exogeneity of accession is
mainly explained by the fact that most accession countries in our sample acceded the EPC as
part of much broader (structural) changes undertaken to accede the EU. See also appendix
Table D-3, which shows a proportional hazard model of accession as a function of population,
GCP, and aggregate patenting in the country. These variables are jointly insignificant in
predicting accession.
The estimation method used here is Poisson with the dependent variable equal to various
patent counts. The coefficients of interest are a dummy post-accession and a trend (also postaccession) to allow for slow adjustment to the change in regime. Our specification includes
calendar quarter-year dummies to adjust for the fact that overall patenting activity is changing
during this period, as well as a full set of country dummies to control for the differential size of
their economies. The sample has been restricted to the 24 quarters around the accession date,
to avoid contamination with other events and trends as much as possible. Regressions for the
whole time period (1995-2013) are shown in appendix Table D-6 and they are qualitatively the
same, but show a few differences.
In Table 4, the top panel of the table shows application regressions and the bottom half shows
grants. It is not possible to analyze non-resident applications at the EPO in a meaningful way
because most of them will never be validated in an accession country and there is no single
accession date around which to examine them. Therefore, two columns are empty in the top half
of the table.
Looking at the applications first, we can see that the main impact of accession is a decrease in
non-resident applications at the national offices. The one-time impact is a 70% decline (=1exp(-1.21)) in applications, followed by a further decline of 17% per year (weakly significant).
Resident applications also decline, but by a much smaller amount, about 10%.
The results for grants are somewhat different. It should be kept in mind that national office legal
status (including grant status) may be somewhat mismeasured due to reporting lags, and in the
case of Slovenia and Turkey, we have no information on grants at the national office so those
countries are dropped in the regressions for national office grants. The first three columns on
the bottom panel pertain to patents granted to residents of accession countries. Column one is
for EP grants to residents, by accession country. These may include patents that are validated
only in non-accession countries as well as those validated in accession countries. The next
column focuses on EP grants to residents of accession countries that are validated in their home
country. Finally, the third column is for resident grants at their own national office. Comparing
these numbers, we see a large increase in validation of EP patents in the home country (not
surprising since prior to accession this was not possible), a somewhat smaller but growing
increase in EP grants to residents of accession countries overall, and a small decline in grants at
national offices to residents, one which is commensurate with the small decline in applications.
Thus there is some evidence that residents of accession countries do take advantage of their
access to the EPO, although at a low level, recalling the earlier figures.
For non-residents the picture is simpler: EPO grants to non-residents that are validated in
accession countries increase by the same percentage as the decline in national office grants,
17

suggesting substitution. There is also a small declining post-accession trend at the national
offices for these applicants.
Table 4

Predicting aggregate patent applications
Dependent variable: patent filings in the quarter
336 obs = 14 countries x 24 quarters around accession date

Post-accession
dummy
Post-accession
trend
Pseudo R-squared

EPO applications
by residents

Resident
applications at
national offices

Non-resident
applications at
national offices

0.08 (0.09)

-0.10 (0.03)***

-1.21 (0.35)***

0.01 (0.02)

0.03 (0.02)

-0.17 (0.09)*

0.872

0.941

0.941

Predicting aggregate patent grants
Dependent variable: granted patents by filing quarter

Post-accession
dummy
Post-accession
trend
N of observations
N of countries
Pseudo R-squared

EPO grants to
residents of
accession
countries

EPO grants to
residents
validated in
accession
countries

Resident grants
at national
offices

EPO grants to
non-residents
validated in
accession
countries

Non-resident
grants at
national offices

0.29 (0.13)**

1.70 (0.41)***

-0.16 (0.05)**

1.10 (0.20)***

-1.06 (0.38)***

0.05 (0.02)***

-0.15 (0.16)

0.01 (0.01)

-0.27 (0.23)

-0.19 (0.06)***

336
14
0.713

336
14
0.713

288
12
0.916

336
14
0.898

288
12
0.908

All regressions include country and quarter-year dummies
Standard errors are robust and clustered on country.
Method of estimation is Poisson regression with robust standard errors

Our findings suggest that the impact on innovation by residents of accession countries may be
muted, and also that there may be considerable inertia in their patenting strategies. Because
EPO patenting from these countries rises so slowly, there is a good reason to think that access to
markets outside the country is not severely limited by access to patent protection and that
patent protection abroad more generally is not important for accession country firms. This
conclusion must be tempered by the observation that patenting at the EPO is still considerably
more costly than simply patenting at the national office. Apparently the prospect of greater
market penetration on the basis of patent protection is not sufficient to overcome the cost
differential.

5.4 By technology field
Next we briefly look at the aggregate patent filing behavior across technology fields to see if
there are any differences in the response to accession to the EPC. We use the 35 technology
classification proposed by Schmoch (2008), which is based on the International Patent
18

Classification (IPC) codes. These are further aggregated into 5 broad technology classes:
electrical engineering including computer technology, instruments, chemistry including
pharmaceuticals, mechanical engineering, and other fields (primarily consumer goods and civil
engineering).29
In general, we might expect that the average value of patents in a class might vary with the
technology type, with patent protection of chemical inventions, especially pharmaceuticals
being the most valuable (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 2005). However, recall that our earlier
analysis suggested that the shift of patenting by residents of the accession countries to the EPO
should be affected primarily by the cost of patenting at their home office, and not by the
expected value of the patented invention. We find support for both of these ideas in the data: 1)
non-residents are much more likely to patent chemical inventions than other inventions at the
accession country offices before accession; and 2) residents are equally likely across technology
classes to shift their patenting to the EPO after accession.
Figures 4a-4c illustrate the distribution of patent filings pre- and post-accession for residents of
accession countries at the national offices and the EPO and for non-residents at the national
offices.30 The resident filings at both offices show the same behavior across all the technology
classes, with a decrease of about 300 patent filings per class at the national office and an
increase of about 250 patent filings at the EPO. This provides some support to the argument
that the primary determinant of the shift towards the EPO is not patent value. In contrast,
before accession, non-resident patents are overwhelmingly in the chemical area (60% of all
patent filings, Figure 4c). About half of these patent filings are in the biotechnology and
pharmaceutical classes. In addition, about 20% of these filings are in the mechanical
engineering area, which is the most active area for resident filings at the national offices. Thus
before accession, non-residents are most concerned to protect their chemical and
pharmaceutical inventions in these countries, but are also influenced to some extent by the
technology profile of the countries. This can occur both because they may have inventions they
wish to use in the country, or because they are concerned about local competition.

Some patents (about 5%) are classed in more than one technology class, even at the 5-technology level.
We include these patents with a weight proportional to the number of technology classes in what follows.
Given the small number of such patents, unweighted results are essentially the same.
29

30

Recall that it is not meaningful to analyze non-resident filings at the EPO.

19

Figure 4a

National office filings by residents of
accession countries
7,000
Before
accession

6,000
5,000
4,000

After
accession

3,000
2,000
1,000
0
Electrical Instruments Chemistry Mechanical
engineering
engineering

Other

Figure 4b

EPO filings by residents of accession
countries
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0

Before
accession
After
accession

Electrical Instruments Chemistry Mechanical
engineering
engineering

Other

Figure 4c

National office filings by non-residents of
accession countries
45,000
40,000
35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0

Before
accession
After
accession

Electrical Instruments Chemistry Mechanical
engineering
engineering

20

Other

In order to quantify these results, and to control for differences across countries and over
calendar time, we run regressions similar to those in the top panel of Table 4, by technology
field. The results are shown in Table 5 below. In general, given the size of the standard errors,
the trends for the different technology classes cannot be distinguished. Resident applications at
the national offices fall slightly initially and then trend slowly upwards, while nonresident
applications fall precipitously and then continue to decline, as we saw in the aggregate results.
The only difference of note is that in chemistry the initial decline is slightly smaller and the
trend larger, suggesting a slightly slower adjustment in this sector. Finally, there are too few
EPO filings by residents of accession countries to discern any results of significance.
Table 5

Predicting aggregate patent applications by technology field
Dependent variable: patent filings in the quarter
336 obs = 14 countries x 24 quarters around accession date
Electrical
engineering

Instruments

Chemistry

Mechanical
engineering

Other

Post-accession dummy
Post-accession trend
Pseudo R-squared

-0.06 (0.06)
0.03 (0.03)
0.755

Resident applications at national offices
-0.12 (0.06)**
-0.14 (0.08)*
-0.11 (0.04)***
0.03 (0.03)
0.04 (0.02)*
0.04 (0.02)**
0.781
0.856
0.867

-0.02 (0.08)
0.04 (0.02)**
0.846

Post-accession dummy
Post-accession trend
Pseudo R-squared

-1.42 (0.15)***
-0.06 (0.04)
0.907

Non-resident applications at national offices
-1.66 (0.39)*** -1.24 (0.38)*** -1.18 (0.15)***
-0.13 (0.05)** -0.30 (0.11)*** -0.11 (0.03)***
0.892
0.925
0.927

-1.19 (0.26)***
-0.10 (0.05)**
0.903

Post-accession dummy
Post-accession trend
Pseudo R-squared

0.10 (0.33)
0.05 (0.06)
0.639

EPO applications by residents
0.26 (0.26)
-0.05 (0.19)
0.18 (0.16)
0.01 (0.03)
-0.02 (0.04)
0.03 (0.03)
0.707
0.732
0.725

0.11 (0.22
0.02 (0.03)
0.746

Fractional counts are used for applications classed in more than one technological field.
All regressions include country and quarter-year dummies
Method of estimation is Poisson regression with robust standard errors, clustered on country.

6. Accession country residents
In this section we analyze changes in the behavior of accession country residents in more detail,
in order to explore whether there are any real effects on innovation from accession to the EPC.
We first analyze the patent filing behavior at the applicant-level, i.e. we track individual
applicants over time (see Appendix C), and then use information on inventors to analyze any
changes in inventive activity in accession countries more broadly.

6.1 Applicant-level analysis
In this section of the paper we ask whether resident applicants change their patenting behavior
as a result of accession and also whether the number of resident applicants changes following
accession. Hence, we ask whether the effects are driven by (the lack of) adjustments at the

21

intensive (number of filings per applicant) and extensive (number of applicants) margin of
patent filings.
Table 6 shows aggregate figures for different “applicant types” where we classify applicants into
“types” according to their filing behavior as laid out in Table 1. At the aggregate level, we can
check whether the total number of applicants has changed following accession and whether
there has been change in the number of applicants across “applicant types.” This provides a
coarse way of verifying whether there have been any changes at the extensive margin. From the
table, we can see that after accession both new and prior accession country resident patentees
have shifted toward filing at the EPO and away from filing only at their own national office,
although the latter is still by far the dominant strategy.
Table 6

Choice of patent application office by residents of accession countries

before
accession
15,199
201
117
721
961
31
156

Number
after
accession,
prior
patenter
3,985
53
43
412
657
19
47

Not at the EPO
At the EPO

15,517
1,869

4,081
1,135

10,289
1,914

Total

17,386

5,216

12,203

Number of entities applying for
patent(s)
Own national office only
Other national offices only
Both at own & other national offices
EPO only
EPO & own national office
EPO & other national offices
EPO, own & other national offices

after
accession,
new
before
patenter accession
10,144
87.4%
105
1.2%
40
0.7%
1,230
4.1%
663
5.5%
7
0.2%
14
0.9%
89.2%
10.8%

Shares
after
accession,
prior
patenter
76.4%
1.0%
0.8%
7.9%
12.6%
0.4%
0.9%

after
accession,
new
patenter
83.1%
0.9%
0.3%
10.1%
5.4%
0.1%
0.1%

78.2%
21.8%

84.3%
15.7%

Before accession includes the 12 quarters prior to the quarter of accession to the EPO. After accession includes
the accession quarter and 11 quarters following.
National offices are the national offices of the accession countries.

We are interested in resident entities’ decisions to file for domestic or EPO patents and
therefore focus in our empirical analysis the entities’ choice of these two alternatives. We
estimate standard patent production functions for filings with the domestic office and filings
with the EPO. The coefficient of interest is obtained from the following (quasi-) differences-indifferences specification of a Poisson regression:

𝑝 ~𝑓(𝛼 + 𝛿 + 𝛾 𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝛾 𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 ×𝑡 + 𝑋 𝛽)
where 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑁, time 𝑡 = 1, … , 𝑇, and country 𝑐 = 1, … , 𝐶. In Equation (1), pict denotes the
number of patents (domestic or EPO) that firm i in country c in year t applies for. Accessionct = 1
after a country acceded to the EPC and zero otherwise. The impact of accession is therefore
captured by the coefficients γ0 (level) and γ1 (post-accession trend). αi is an applicant-level
random effect, δt a set of time dummies that absorb common time-specific shocks, and Xict
denotes a vector of (possibly) time-varying applicant-level characteristics.

22

(1)

The sample is an unbalanced panel over the period 1995-2014 (up to 80 quarters of data for
each applicant). Our analysis is based only on information we obtain from the patent data,
which limits the amount of information we have for each applicant but avoids the (non-random)
loss of data due to name-based matching to firm-level databases (which is especially
problematic for our smaller accession countries and those countries with non-Roman character
sets) – see Section 7. We assume that the applicant enters at the time of the first patent
application during this period and we follow them until the end of the period. We only have a
limited number of time-varying applicant-level variables, namely the applicant’s total domestic
and EPO patent stock (up until the quarter prior to the observation) and age (measured as
counting from the year an applicant is observed to patent for the first time). Because of the
variation in applicant age across applicants, the patent stock is normalized by age, which
converts it to an average patenting rate prior to the current period. This procedure also has the
advantage of quasi-orthogonalizing the two variables. Standard errors are clustered at the
applicant level, which effectively means that a Poisson random effects model is being estimated.
The results of estimating the model above are given in Table 7. All estimates include a complete
set of accession country and calendar year dummies. Both sets of dummies are highly
significant, as patenting levels vary enormously across countries and there is a pronounced time
trend underlying the patenting rates. The table has two panels: the top panel shows the
estimates for national patent office applications for three types of entities: firms, individuals,
and others, which includes various quasi-public entities such as universities, hospitals, and
research institutes. The bottom panel shows the same thing for EPO patent applications. Not
surprisingly, all the estimates show a very strong dependence on past patenting rates, whether
at the national offices or the EPO. A one standard deviation increase in past patenting rates is
associated with about a 120%-140% increase in patenting in the current period for all entity
types.
Looking at the national office patenting first, one notes two things: first, residents slightly
increase their patenting at national offices after accession to the EPC. The effect is driven by
individuals and other entities (universities, research institutes, etc.), perhaps due to heightened
awareness of the importance of patents given the accession. The trend estimate is two per cent
growth per quarter with a small standard error. In addition, the quasi-public entities are more
likely to continue to patent at the national offices if they were already patenting, possibly
reflecting longstanding administrative requirements for local patenting.
The bottom panel shows quite different results for EPO patenting. All types of applicants show
both a one-time increase in EPO applications post accession as well as a substantial trend,
approximately 4 percent per quarter. This applicant-based result is somewhat in contrast with
the aggregate result in Table 4, which showed no impact on filings at accession and a smaller
and insignificant trend post-accession. The difference is doubtless due to heterogeneity in
response across applicants of different size. In particular, smaller and newer applicants
presumably have higher growth rates even if their patenting levels are low. Note also that
individuals have a somewhat lower response to accession than firms and the other institutions;
nevertheless, they do respond.

23

Table 7

Predicting applicant-level patent applications
Dependent variable: National office patent applications by resident
entity during the quarter (1995-2014)
Post-accession dummy
Post-accession trend
D (entity patented before
accession)
Log (past patenting rate)
Observations
Entities
Share nonzero observations
Pseudo R-squared

All
0.000
(0.025)
0.018***
(0.002)
0.195***
(0.032)
1.388***
(0.020)
930,049
27,606
6.7%
0.267

Firms
0.025
(0.055)
0.006
(0.005)
0.038
(0.066)
1.320***
(0.046)
215,088
6,611
8.0%
0.265

Individuals
-0.105***
(0.027)
0.007**
(0.002)
-0.132***
(0.028)
1.283***
(0.013)
687,132
20,177
5.7%
0.180

Other#
-0.080
(0.095)
0.069***
(0.017)
0.540***
(0.088)
1.175***
(0.024)
27,829
820
19.9%
0.453

Dependent variable: EP patent applications by accession country
resident entity during the quarter (1995-2014)
Post-accession dummy
Post-accession trend
D (entity patented before
accession)
Log (past patenting rate)
Observations
Entities
Share nonzero observations
Pseudo R-squared

All
0.473***
(0.077)
0.040***
(0.005)
1.178***
(0.107)
1.425***
(0.040)
930,049
27,606
1.2%
0.305

Firms
0.538***
(0.102)
0.035***
(0.007)
1.290***
(0.118)
1.361***
(0.056)
215,088
6,611
2.5%
0.349

Individuals
0.272**
(0.086)
0.017**
(0.006)
0.526***
(0.057)
1.304***
(0.015)
687,132
20,177
0.8%
0.232

Other#
0.133
(0.275)
0.040
(0.024)
1.611***
(0.262)
1.184***
(0.050)
27,829
820
2.1%
0.292

All regressions include dummies for the accession countries and quarter-years.
Method of estimation is Poisson with robust standard errors clustered on patenting entity.
Past patenting rate is lagged patent stock at the relevant office divided by age in quarters
#Other incl udes government, universities, hospitals, and research institutes and academies.

We use the results of these regressions to evaluate the impact of accession to the EPO by
estimating the counterfactual: what EPO and national patenting would have looked like if these
countries had not acceded to the EPC. The results are shown in Figures 5a (national office
filings) and 5b (EPO filings). These graphs show the total patent applications by accession
country residents, first at their national offices, and then at the EPO. The data points (+s) and
the solid line are the actual and fitted totals, and the dashed line is the total patent filings
predicted when the post-accession dummy and trend are set to zero (the counterfactual). The
national office regressions seem to suggest that national office applications would have fallen in
the absence of accession, by about 600 applications per quarter after 6 years, whereas the EP
regressions show a substantial increase, of about 400 applications per quarter after 6 years. So
24

these graphs do suggest that residents have shifted some of their filings to the EPO as time as
passed.
Figure 5a

Figure 5b

25

6.2 Inventor-level analysis
Next we investigate the important question of whether accession to the EPO leads to an increase
in patented invention in the accession countries. A priori, we might expect effects of this kind to
be small, because the reduction in patenting cost may be rather minor. On the other hand,
becoming part of a major patent system may increase awareness of its benefits and provide an
encouragement for invention. For this purpose, we define invention as a priority application by
an inventor resident in an accession country, regardless of the location of the applicant listed on
the application. Using priorities ensures that we count a patented invention only once, since a
single invention can have multiple patent filings in different jurisdictions. Between priority
years 1995 and 2013 there are 282,227 patent applications with accession country inventors,
corresponding to 197,619 priority applications.31
Figures 6a (large countries) and 6b (small countries) show the behavior of priority patent
filings by inventors in accession countries around the time of accession. For some countries,
notably the Czech Republic, Poland, Turkey, Romania, and Slovenia, an increase in filings postaccession is visible, although there are few if any clear changes in trend. Other countries, such as
Hungary, Bulgaria, etc., show little impact from accession to the EPC. Using Poisson regression
and breaking things down between EPO, National office, and other office applications, we
quantify these results in Table 8.

Figure 6a

Priority patent filings by accession country inventors
before and after accession
Hungary

Norway

400
0

-20

0

10

20

Turkey

800

Poland

-10

0

400

Priority patent filings

800

Czech Republic

-20

-10

0

10

20

-20

-10

0

10

20

Quarters relative to accession date
Graphs by Accession country

There are a few cases with inventors resident in both an accession and non-accession country; we
include these but ignore the non-accession inventors that are also on the filing. When there are inventors
from more than one country on an application, we use fractional weighting so that the weighted number
of priorities equals the actual number.
31

26

Figure 6b

Priority patent filings by accession country inventors
before and after accession
Croatia

Estonia

Iceland

Latvia

Lithuania

Romania

Slovakia

Slovenia

0 100 200
0 100 200

Priority patent filings

0 100 200

Bulgaria

-20

-10

0

10

20

-20

-10

0

10

20

-20

-10

0

10

20

Quarters relative to accession date
Graphs by Accession country

Table 8 presents the results of a Poisson regression for the number of patented inventions
generated by inventors in an accession country as a function of the accession date. In these
regressions we allow for a one time change in patenting level at accession as well as separate
trends before and after accession. We also include country dummies to control for differing
levels of patenting and quarter-year dummies to control for the overall trends in patenting. The
first column shows the results for all priority patents while the next three columns break this
down into filings at the EPO, filings at the national office, and filings at other offices. 70% of the
other office filings are in the U.S., Canada, Germany, and Austria. Note that because a priority
patent may be followed by applications in several offices, these three columns overlap to some
extent. That is, the aggregate column focuses on invention behavior, whereas the next three
columns also describe filing behavior for these inventors.
The first column shows the basic result: little trend in patented invention before accession, no
significant increase at the accession time, but a substantial positive trend (2.6 per cent per
quarter, or about 11 per cent per year) after accession. The interpretation is that accession to
the EPC did have the effect of increasing patented invention in the accession country by
increasing its growth rate, rather than inducing a one-time jump. This gradual change seems
plausible, given that it takes time to invent, and it does suggest some kind of positive impact
from accession to the EPC, albeit from a relatively low base.
The next three columns break this down into filing behavior. The post-accession trend is
positive at all three offices and roughly equal in magnitude. There is no sign of a trend preaccession at the EPO or the other international offices. National office behavior does show
27

striking differences: there is a substantial negative pre-accession trend as well as a one-time fall
in patent filings at the time of accession. These results are doubtless due to the fact that many
accession country inventors work for non-resident applicants, and we already saw that national
office filings for this group simply collapsed.

Table 8

Predicting aggregate patent filings by accession country inventors
Dependent variable: log (patent filings by inventors resident in an accession country)
1064 obs = 14 countries x 76 quarters (1995-2013)
All, priority apps
only

EPO applications

Applications at
other offices

Applications at
national offices

197,619

48,816

68,309

138,064

Pre-accession trend
Post-accession dummy
Post-accession trend

-0.009 (0.006)
-0.203 (0.090)**
0.026 (0.010)**

-0.004 (0.004)
0.025 (0.080)
0.036 (0.010)***

-0.002 (0.003)
0.085 (0.068)
0.028 (.006)***

-0.019 (0.007)***
-0.296 (0.121)**
0.029 (0.010)***

Country dummies
Quarter-year dummies
Pseudo R-squared

yes
yes
0.907

yes
yes
0.878

yes
yes
0.887

yes
yes
0.886

Total filings*

Standard errors are robust and clustered on country.
Poisson estimation
* Filings will not add up because the aggregate in the first column counts each priority only once.

The conclusion from our analysis of inventor behavior in accession countries is that joining the
EPC does seem to induce a slow growth in patented inventions produced by inventors in the
country, as well as a shift towards patenting these inventions outside the country rather than at
the national office. Compounding a 2.6% quarterly growth rate over three years yields a 36%
increase in the level of priority patents from the 14 countries, which is about 1,440 additional
patent inventions per quarter on top of the pre-accession rate of 4,000 per quarter, a nontrivial
number.

7. Non-residents
The analysis above has shown that accession to the EPC has had only a modest effect on
residents’ patent filings at the EPO. In contrast, patent filings by non-residents react strongly to
accession. In this section we analyze whether accession has affected the investment behavior of
non-residents in accession countries as well as their patent filings.
One of the key arguments in favor of strengthening IP protection in developing countries is that
it leads to more FDI (Lee and Mansfield, 1996), in particular in high-tech industries (Javorcik,
2004). Section 5.4 above shows that filings by non-residents with national offices are indeed
concentrated in pharmaceuticals/chemistry and mechanical engineering, which are industries
in which patents are considered more important (Cohen et al., 2000). Hence, a strengthening of
patent protection in the form of accession to the EPC would affect non-resident companies in
28

these industries and could therefore also affect their investment behavior. That said, there is
also evidence to suggest that a strengthening of IP protection leads to more licensing of
technology at the expense of FDI (Yang and Maskus, 2001).
We use the firm-level data described in Section 4 to analyze any changes in ownership of
accession country firms by non-residents following accession. In contrast to existing studies on
the link between FDI and IP protection which estimate the direct effect of broad indices of IP
protection on FDI (e.g. Javorcik, 2004; Nunnenkamp and Spatz, 2004), we allow the effect of a
strengthening of IP protection on FDI to work through non-resident patenting behavior. That is,
we test whether ownership of accession country companies by non-residents changes as a
function of changes in their patenting behavior following accession. We nevertheless control for
any direct effect of accession on ownership by including the post-accession dummy and the
dummy interacted with a time trend as in our previous specifications. We therefore estimate the
following regression model:

𝑠

= 𝛼 + 𝜆 + 𝛿 + 𝛾 𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝛾 𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 ×𝑡 + 𝜑 𝑝

+𝜐

(5)

where 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑁 are non-resident parent companies, year 𝑡 = 1, … , 𝑇, accession country 𝑐 =
1, … , 𝐶, accessionct = 1 after country c acceded to the EPC and zero otherwise, 𝑝 denotes the
number of EPO patents validated in accession country c by parent company i in year t where
validations can only occur post-accession, ownership share 𝑠 that non-resident firm i holds of
resident companies in accession country c in year t. The specification also includes parent-firm
fixed-effects 𝜆 and year dummies 𝛿 .
The data pose a number of challenges for our analysis. Perhaps the most important challenge
concerns data coverage; the number of accession country firms available in Amadeus grows
significantly over time and so does information on ownership structures. This make it difficult
to infer changes of ownership structure over time. For example, if we observe non-resident
company X to hold 51 per cent of ownership shares of accession country company Y in year t
and t+1, we cannot necessarily infer that company X held zero percent in t-1 as that information
might simply be missing in the data. This limits our ability to track new investments over time
and we exclude all firm-year observations with missing ownership share information. Another
limitation is that ownership information is only available on an annual basis for the period
2000-2011; this leaves us with little data pre-accession especially for countries that acceded the
EPC in 2002.32
Figure 7 shows average ownership shares held by non-residents of accession country
companies over time. The figure distinguishes between patenting and non-patenting nonresidents. Note that for Figure 7, we exclude Norway and Iceland as they are at a much more
economically advanced stage than the Eastern European accession countries (but we show
regressions results including these in Table 9 below). We see in Figure 7 that patenting nonresidents on average hold a larger ownership stake, the difference is about 8 percentage points.
When we look for changes in ownership shares over time, there is a clear positive trend.

32

Note that our results reported in Table 9 are robust to dropping all countries that acceded in 2002.

29

However, the trend appears to be similar for both patenting and non-patenting companies.
Moreover, there is no obvious break in the trend following accession.

Average % ownership of company in accession country
70
75
80
85
90

Figure 7

Non-resident ownership of accession country companies
before and after accession

-3

-2

-1

0
1
2
3
Year relative to accession date

Patenting non-residents

4

5

Non-patenting non-residents

Note: the figure shows the average ownership share by non-resident companies of companies in
accession countries (excluding Norway and Iceland).

Table 9 shows results from estimating equation (5) using OLS and including firm-level fixed
effects. The first three columns show results for the entire set of accession countries for which
BvD has data (which excludes Turkey). The last three columns exclude Norway and Iceland. The
results suggest a positive association between the validation of EPO patents post-accession and
increased ownership shares in those accession countries. However, the coefficient on the postaccession dummy variable is not significant in any of the specifications shown in Table 9. This
indicates that accession as such had no direct, one-time effect on FDI. However, looking at the
interaction of the post-accession dummy with a time trend, we see evidence that following
accession, FDI grows over time in the sample that includes the more advanced economies
Norway and Iceland. This is consistent with the notion that more advanced economies benefit
through increased FDI from a strengthening of the patent system per se. In contrast, increases in
FDI in the far less economically advanced accession states in our sample are only associated
with changes in patenting behavior by foreign companies. Note however that the economic
magnitude of this effect of patenting on FDI is very small. For example, the main coefficients of
interest in columns (3) and (6) imply that a one standard deviation increase in the number of
validated patents post-accession is associated with approximately only an increase of 0.15
percentage points in ownership shares. Hence, although we find evidence for a positive
correlation between accession to the EPC and increased FDI, the relationship appears to be
economically negligible.
30

Table 9

Predicting firm-level non-resident ownership
Dependent variable: ownership share by non-resident company of resident company (2000-2011)
Post-accession dummy
Post-accession trend

-0.148
(0.184)
0.221**
(0.097)

D (validated EPO patent)
Number of validated
EPO patents
Observations
Entities
R-squared

135,957
39,398
0.004

All countries
-0.187
(0.183)
0.218**
(0.097)
1.147**
(0.045)

135,957
39,398
0.004

-0.169
(0.184)
0.218**
(0.097)

0.018**
(0.008)
135,957
39,398
0.006

excluding Norway and Iceland
-0.151
-0.194
-0.182
(0.288)
(0.288)
(0.288)
-0.164
-0.163
-0.164
(0.299)
(0.298)
(0.299)
0.927**
(0.468)
0.016*
(0.008)
102,671
102,671
102,671
30,990
30,990
30,990
0.013
0.014
0.013

Method of estimation is OLS with robust standard errors clustered at firm-accession country-level.
All regressions include a complete set of entity and year dummies.

8. Conclusion
Our analysis offers empirical evidence on the effect of accession to the regional patent system
created by the European Patent Convention on patent filings by entities in those countries as
well as foreigners. Despite the substantial enlargement of the group of states signatory to the
EPC over the last two decades and the importance of the EPC within the global patent system, so
far there is no evidence on the impact of accession. This paper represents a first step towards
filling this gap.
Our analysis suggests that accession to the EPC system did not result in significant changes in
patenting with the national offices by residents of accession countries. They largely did not
switch to the EPC system but instead continued filing with the domestic office. In a significant
number of cases, they even filed for duplicate patent protection, filing applications for the same
patent with both the domestic office and the EPO. That said, our analysis suggests that there was
nevertheless a small increase in patent filings with the EPO by accession country residents.
Although the magnitude of this effect is very small in absolute terms, it might nevertheless
suggest some benefits to residents, especially because our analysis indicates that there is an
increase in patentable inventions originating in the accession states. Non-residents switch
immediately from national to EPO patents following accession. This indicates that most nonresidents that seek patent protection in accession states do so as part of a wider international
patenting strategy and hence accession brings about cost savings.
Therefore, our analysis highlights the differential effect of accession to a regional patent system
on residents and non-residents of the mostly smaller, less developed accession countries in our
sample. Non-residents certainly benefit from the expansion of the regional patent system given
their strong reaction, but the net effect on residents is a lot less clear. While we see a small
increase in filings with the EPO by accession country residents, overall their low-level patenting
activities remain unaffected by accession. This may suggest that most firms in our sample of
31

accession countries are not yet at a stage where they actively use the patent system and
accession to an international patent system did not change this substantially.

32

References
Acharya Viral V., Ramin P. Baghai, and Krishnamurthy V. Subramanian (2014): “Wrongful
Discharge Laws and Innovation,” Review of Financial Studies, vol. 27(1), pages 301-346.
Bilir K., P. Moser, and I. Talis (2011): “Do Treaties Encourage Knowledge Transfer? Evidence
from the Paris Convention,” Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1893052
Branstetter L., R. Fisman, and F. Foley (2006): “Do Stronger Intellectual property Rights
Increase International Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence From U.S. Firm-Level
Panel Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 121, pp. 321-349.
Chen Y. and T. Puttitanum (2005): “Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation in Developing
Countries,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 78, pp. 474-493.
Cohen, W. M., R. R. Nelson, and J. Walsh (2000): “Protecting Their Intellectual Assets:
Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not),”
Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. 7552.
Diwan I. and D. Rodrik (1991): “Patents, appropriate technology, and North-South trade,”
Journal of International Economics, Vol. 30, pp. 27-48.
Eurasian Patent Organization (2017): https://www.eapo.org/en/feature.html
European Patent Office (2015): Patstat database, April 2015 edition. Available at
https://www.epo.org/searching-for-patents/business/patstat.html#tab3
Feenstra, R. C., R. Inklaar and M. P. Timmer (2015): The Next Generation of the Penn World
Table, American Economic Review, 105(10), 3150-3182, available for download at
www.ggdc.net/pwt
Fink, C., M. Khan and H. Zhou (2016): Exploring the worldwide patent surge. Economics of
Innovation and New Technology 25(2): 114-142.
FPA Patent Attorneys (2013). http://www.fpapatents.com/resource?id=220
Ginarte J. C. and W. G. Park (1997): “Determinants of patent rights: A cross-national study,”
Research Policy, Vol. 26, pp. 283-301.
Gould D. M. and W. C. Gruben (1996): “The role of intellectual property rights in economic
growth,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 48, pp. 323-350.
Hall B. H., C. Helmers, V. Sena (2013): “The importance (or not) of patents to UK firms,” Oxford
Economic Papers, Vol. 65(3), pp. 603-629.
Hall, B. H., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2005): “Market value and patent citations,” Rand Journal
of Economics 36 (1), pp. 16-38.
Harhoff, D., K. Hoisl, B. Reichl, and B. van Pottelsberghe (2009): “Patent Validation at the
Country Level – the Role of Fees and Translation Costs,” Research Policy, 38, pp. 14231437.
Helpman, E. (1993): “Innovation, Imitation, and Intellectual Property Rights,” Econometrica, Vol.
61, pp. 1247-1280.
Herz, B. and M. Mejer (2016): “Reform of Trademark Protection in the European Union,” mimeo.

33

Javorcik B. (2004): “The composition of foreign direct investment and protection of intellectual
property rights: Evidence from transition economies,” European Economic Review, Vol.
48, pp. 39-62.
Kanwar S. and R. Evenson (2003): “Does Intellectual Property Protection Spur Technological
Change?,” Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 55, pp. 235-264.
Lee J.-Y. and E. Mansfield (1996): Intellectual Property Protection and U.S. Foreign Direct
Investment, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 78(2), pp. 181-186.
Lerner J. (2002): “150 Years of Patent Protection,” American Economic Review, Vol. 92, pp. 221225.
McCalman P. (2001): “Reaping what you sow: an empirical analysis of international patent
harmonization,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 55, pp. 161-186.
Moser, P. (2005): “How Do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from NineteenthCentury World’s Fairs,” American Economic Review, Vol. 95(4), pp. 1214-1236.
Nordhaus W. D. (1969): Invention, growth, and welfare: A theoretical treatment of technological
change, MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
Nunnenkamp P. and J. Spatz (2004): “Intellectual Property Rights and Foreign Direct
Investment: A Disaggregated Analysis,” Review of World Economics, Vol. 140(3), pp. 393414.
Png I.P.L. (2017): “Law and Innovation: Evidence from State Trade Secrets Laws,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 99(1), pp. 167-179.
Qian, Yi (2007): Do National Patent Laws Stimulate Domestic Innovation in a Global Patenting
Environment? A Cross-Country Analysis of Pharmaceutical Patent Protection, 1978–
2002. The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 89(3), pp. 436–453.
Berger, R. (2004): Study on the Cost of Patenting, Report for the European Patent Office.
Sakakibara M. and L. Branstetter (2001): “Do Stronger Patents Induce More Innovation?
Evidence from the 1988 Japanese Patent Law Reforms,” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol.
32, 771-1000.
Scherer F. M. and S. Weisburst (1995): “Economics Effects of Strengthening Pharmaceutical
Patent Protection in Italy,” International Review of Industrial Property and Copyright
Law, Vol. 26, pp. 1009–1024.
Schmoch U. (2008): “Concept of a Technology Classification for Country Comparisons,” WIPO,
available at
http://www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/classifications/en/ipc_ce_41/ipc_ce_41_5annex1.pdf (accessed February 2012)
Yang, G. and K. Maskus (2001): “Intellectual property rights and licensing: An econometric
investigation,” Weltwirtschaftiches Archiv, Vol. 137, pp. 58–79.

34

NOT FOR PUBLICATION
Online Appendices to “The impact of international patent systems:
Evidence from accession to the European Patent Convention”
Bronwyn H. Hall and Christian Helmers

Appendix A: Extension and validation of EPO patents33
This appendix describes how we determine whether an EPO patent grant has been extended to
or validated in an accession country. This turns out not be straightforward, since not all
validations generate a patent publication record and hence these validations can be missing in
the legal status tables provided in the Patstat database.

EPO patent extension and validation
Patents granted by the EPO can take effect in countries that are not party to the EPC through
extension agreements. The main difference between EPC member and extension states is that in
the latter case, extending a European patent depends on national law and hence national
extension rules whereas in the former case validation is regulated uniformly across member
states by the EPC. In practice, however, extension rules are the same for all extension states. The
extension fee is EUR 102 and payable to the EPO within six months counting from the date the
European search report was published (or in case of Euro-PCT filings 31 months from the date
of filing or earliest date of priority or six months from the date on which the international
search report was published). To enter into force in an EPC or an extension state the patent then
has to be validated in the target country after it has been granted by the EPO. Validation
requires the payment of a fee, but the payment is not reported in the Patstat legal status tables.
More recently, the EPO also signed bilateral validation agreements, the first of which (with
Morocco) entered into force in March 2015; these are not part of our analysis.

Determining whether an EPO patent is validated
We rely on legal status information to identify the countries designated by an EPO patent
application and use information on patent renewals and lapses to determine whether a patent
was actually validated in a given country.34 Validation occurs only after a patent has been
33

We are very grateful to Dietmar Harhoff for assistance in preparing this appendix.

Legal status information is necessary because validation cannot be determined from equivalents, that
is, from checking whether an EPO patent has national equivalents. Validated patents are only registered
in national patent registers, which does not trigger a national patent publication that would be visible in
Patstat. National equivalents are only visible when the national patent office requires a translation in
accordance with Article 65(1) of the EPC. However, contracting states to the London Agreement do not
necessarily require such translations. Among the countries included in our analysis, Croatia, Hungary,
Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, and Slovenia have ratified the London Agreement. Croatia, Hungary, and
Iceland require only the translation of a patent’s claims into their official language provided the European
patent has been granted in English. Latvia, Lithuania, and Slovenia require a translation of the claims
regardless of the language in which a patent was granted. Hence, relying on national equivalents, i.e.,
34

35

granted. Given the average time lag between application and grant of about 43 months at the
EPO (EPO Annual report 2009) and the fact that our data ends in 2015, we are left with a
relatively short time series of post-accession EPO filings for which we can determine validation.
Since validation only occurs after the granting of a patent, this limits the sample to EPO patents
that have already been granted.
In all accession countries included in our sample, validation has to occur within three months
upon grant by submitting a translation into the country’s official language (see discussion in
footnote 29). In order to determine whether an EPO-granted patent has been validated in a
given accession state, we use information on the dates of register entry, renewal, withdrawal,
expiry, and lapse from the Patstat legal status table (TLS221). About 70 per cent of the granted
patents have at least one of these dates recorded in Patstat. Table A-1 provides some
information on the legal status data available for the accession countries. We base the table on
the total number of filings between the accession date for each country and the end of 2014. The
table shows the number of these filings that were granted, the number of eligible granted
patents that had no information on the legal status file, and the number that were validated in
that country.

Table A-1

Patent lapse data 2000-2014 for accession countries
Code
BG
CZ
EE
HR
HU
IS
LT
LV
NO
PL
RO
SI
SK
TR

Country
Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Estonia
Croatia
Hungary
Iceland
Lithuania
Latvia
Norway
Poland
Romania
Slovenia
Slovakia
Turkey
Average

EP patent
Number
filings 2000- granted by
2014 #
2015
551,965
468,131
551,965
468,131
551,965
468,131
340,552
159,700
533,600
438,660
468,049
338,295
468,049
338,295
438,475
295,322
340,552
159,700
496,235
380,567
533,600
438,660
543,078
453,598
551,965
468,131
611,329
573,540
498,670
389,204

Share
granted
84.8%
84.8%
84.8%
46.9%
82.2%
72.3%
72.3%
67.4%
46.9%
76.7%
82.2%
83.5%
84.8%
93.8%
78.0%

Number
missing
info %
190,733
140,763
142,713
28,120
206,077
93,314
81,785
67,724
27,736
107,522
138,298
171,573
141,383
264,353
128,721

Share
missing
Number
info validated*
40.7%
83,108
30.1%
11,635
30.5%
43,929
17.6%
1,925
47.0%
212,544
27.6%
2,907
24.2%
3,138
22.9%
1,164
17.4%
625
28.3%
11,416
31.5%
7,847
37.8%
44,541
30.2%
5,734
46.1%
254,269
33.1%
48,913

Share
grants
validated
17.8%
2.5%
9.4%
1.2%
48.5%
0.9%
0.9%
0.4%
0.4%
3.0%
1.8%
9.8%
1.2%
44.3%
10.1%

* Validation defined as at leasat one of lapse, renewal, withdrawal, expiry dates present and lapse date < one year from
grant.
# EP patents that were applied for between the accession date and the end of 2014.
% No information was available on the legal status file.

published translations of the complete patent specification, is likely to grossly and non-randomly
underestimate validation.

36

Most patent offices record non-validation as a lapse of the patent right shortly after the patent
has been granted. To allow for some delay in the non-payment to be recorded, we take one year
to be the relevant time period. If the lapse occurs after one year, we code the patent as originally
validated and then lapsed (data as of October 2015). Employing this approach, we find that on
average in 9 per cent of designated countries a given patent was eventually also validated, but
there is substantial variation across countries. In several countries the validated shares are less
than one per cent, but in Hungary and Turkey they are nearly one half. Although later accession
means that there has been less time for action at the national office, not all of this variation can
be attributed to variations in the date of accession. The most likely explanation is differences in
reporting from different national offices, which means that our validation data may be
somewhat unreliable.
Table A-2 repeats some of the analysis, restricting the time periods to the accession quarter and
the following 12 quarters for each country. This minimizes the effects due to differences in the
length of the time series for each firm. The differences in validation rates still persist, however.

Table A-2

Designation and validation for EPO patents in accession countries
Accession quarter + 12 following quarters

Country
Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Estonia
Croatia
Hungary
Iceland
Lithuania
Latvia
Norway
Poland
Romania
Slovenia
Slovakia
Turkey
Average

Total EPO
filings*
541,553
541,553
541,553
578,825
549,302
587,440
587,440
590,914
578,825
570,538
549,302
547,962
541,553
537,028
560,271

Granted by
Oct 2015
208,658
208,658
208,658
140,670
205,294
194,102
194,102
185,684
140,670
198,905
205,294
207,938
208,658
226,229
195,251

Granted &
validated
32,439
8,423
41,026
1,871
101,931
2,169
2,284
1,041
614
9,477
5,722
11,487
3,883
83,587
21,854

Granted
share
38.5%
38.5%
38.5%
24.3%
37.4%
33.0%
33.0%
31.4%
24.3%
34.9%
37.4%
37.9%
38.5%
42.1%
35.0%

Validated
share of
grants
15.5%
4.0%
19.7%
1.3%
49.7%
1.1%
1.2%
0.6%
0.4%
4.8%
2.8%
5.5%
1.9%
36.9%
10.4%

* Total filings at the EP during the quarter of the country's accession and the subsequent 12 quarters.

Figures A-1 and A-2 look at the validation behavior of residents and non-residents with the EPO.
For this analysis we restrict the sample of patent filings with the EPO to patents that have been
granted. A complication is that both residents and non-residents validate in a range of accession
countries, and because accession dates vary, it is not possible to generate an aggregate figure for
non-residents that is exactly parallel to the figure for residents. Therefore for non-residents, we
look at each accession country separately, which eliminates the accession date timing problem.
37

For residents of accession countries, we focus on validation in their home country, which
eliminates the timing problem.
Figure A-1 shows that EPO filings by accession country residents do rise slightly after accession,
albeit from a low level. About half of these filings are granted by the end of 2013, and the share
of the grants validated in the accession country is constant at about 60 per cent. That is, a fair
number of these granted EPO patents are not validated in their own country, casting some
doubt on the role of accession in the uptake of EPO filings by accession country residents.

Figure A-1: EPO patent filings by residents (by quarter)

0

100

200

300

400

EPO filings by accession country residents

-10

-5

0
Quarters since accession

EPO Filings
Validated in home accession country

5

10

EPO patent granted

Note: time is the application quarter of an EPO patent relative to the accession date of the relevant
country.

Figure A-2 shows the data for non-residents, country by country. This figure shows the share of
granted EPO patents that are validated in each of the 14 accession countries. From the figure,
one can see that in some cases (Hungary and Turkey) non-residents of the accession countries
are about as likely as residents to validate a granted patent in that country. However, validation
rates are quite a bit lower in most of the countries. We do not know why, but it may be related
to the aforementioned quality issues with our validation data.

38

Figure A-2: EPO patent filings by non-residents (by quarter)

Shares of non-resident granted EPO patents
validated in accession country
Croatia

Czech Republic

Estonia

Hungary

Iceland

Latvia

Lithuania

Norway

Poland

Romania

Slovakia

Slovenia

Turkey

0 .2 .4 .6
0 .2 .4 .6

Validated share

0 .2 .4 .6

Bulgaria

-5

0

5

10

-10

-5

0

5

10

0 .2 .4 .6

-10

-10

-5

0

5

10

-10

-5

0

5

10

Quarters since accession
Graphs by Name of accession country

Note: time is the application quarter of an EPO patent relative to the accession date of the relevant
country.

Appendix B: A simple model of the impact of accession
To illustrate the effect of accession on patent filing behavior slightly more formally, let the
incremental value of a patent in each European country be denoted Vi and the cost of patenting
be denoted Ci with countries denoted i = 0,1,…,J. The value and cost of domestic patenting are V0
and C0. A firm will take out a patent in every country where Vi - Ci > 0, with one complication due
to the fact that the EPO is cheaper after a certain point. Assume that V0 - C0 is larger than all the
others. That is, if a domestic firm patents at all, it patents in its home country (which is
supported by our data as shown in Section 5.1 below). We disregard maintenance fees in our
analysis because they are the same regardless of the route through which patent protection is
obtained. We also disregard any differences in legal fees across the two patenting strategies. 35
Before accession to the EPC, firms make the following computation when they decide whether
to patent domestically:

V0  C0  0

Alternatively, we could include the legal fees in the cost variable, which would mean that we can no
longer use the patent office fee schedules to calibrate it. It is likely that legal fees for applying at the EPO
exceed those for domestic offices. However, if an applicant wants to pursue applications at several
national offices, legal and translation fees could be substantial.
35

39

(2)

In contrast, their decision to obtain an EPO patent or instead to patent directly with the
individual national patent offices is determined by the following condition (assuming that



J
i

(Vi  Ci )  0 ):
J

J

i 1

i 1

 Vi  CEPO   (Vi  Ci )

(3)

Which is to say that firms choose the EPO route if the net value of taking out a patent with the
EPO exceeds the sum of the net values of obtaining patent rights with the individual offices.
After accession, expression (2) changes into
J

J

V0  Vi  CEPO  V0  C0   (Vi  Ci )
i 1

i 1

J

or C0   Ci  CEPO  0
i

If the value of a patent and fees stay the same after accession, then the effect of accession works
exclusively through C0, that is, for sufficiently large costs at the domestic patent office, firms
choose an EPO patent over several national patents including a patent with their domestic
patent office.
Then the main question is for which number J, expressions (2) and (3) hold. If for illustration we
assume that the threshold is J≥3, this means that for J=1 or 2, domestic firms only wanted to
patent in one or two countries in addition to their own before accession. After accession,
domestic patenting enters the set J, which means that patentees that were formerly patenting in
only J=2 countries, find themselves at the threshold level J≥3 after accession. This in turn means
that expression (3) holds and these firms will choose an EPO patent instead of patenting
separately at each national patent office. Hence, our simple analysis implies that for J=1 and
domestic patenting before accession, EPO accession will not affect domestic firms’ patenting
strategies for most inventions. That is, if firms only wanted to patent in one or two countries in
addition to their own before accession, accession does not change this.

Appendix C: Applicant names and types
Table 1 in the main text defines 3 different applicant types before accession to the EPC and 4
types post accession depending on whether a given applicant files with the national office, the
EPO validating the European patent only outside of the accession country, or also in the
accession country. The definition of these applicant types requires uniquely identifying
applicants (i.e. associating different patent filings at the national office and the EPO by the same
applicant to the applicant where the same applicant can appear under different names or
variations of the same name for a range of different reasons, for a more detailed description of
these problems see Helmers et al., 2010). This involves the well-known problem of name
harmonization (Thoma et al., 2010). We address this problem by using a combination of
Patstat’s (version October 2015) own name harmonization in form of the doc_std_name_id
variable of Table TLS206_PERSON, OECD’s HAN database (version February 2015), our own
string harmonization code, as well as very extensive manual checking and cleaning (we checked
40

(4)

over 20,000 applicant names manually). Applicants are defined as residents/non-residents
according to the country code reported by Patstat for the applicant.
References
Helmers Christian, Mark Rogers and Philipp Schautschick (2010). Intellectual Property at the
Firm-Level in the UK: The Oxford Firm-Level Intellectual Property Database, Oxford
University, Department of Economics Discussion Paper No. 546.
OECD, HAN database, February 2015
Thoma Grid, Salvatore Torrisi, Alfonso Gambardella, Dominique Guellec, Bronwyn Hall, and
Dietmar Harhoff (2010). Harmonizing and Combining Large Datasets - An Application to
Firm-Level Patent and Accounting Data, NBER Working Paper No. 15851.

41

Appendix D: Supplementary Tables and Figures
Table D-1

Accession to the European Patent Convention
Code
BE
FR
DE
LU
NL
CH
GB
SE
IT
AT
LI
GR
ES
DK
MC
PT
IE
FI
CY
TR
BG
CZ
EE
SK
SI
HU
RO
PL
IS
LT
LV
MT
HR
NO
MK
SM
AL
RS

Country
Belgium
France
Germany
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Switzerland
United Kingdom
Sweden
Italy
Austria
Liechtenstein
Greece
Spain
Denmark
Monaco
Portugal
Ireland
Finland
Cyprus
Turkey
Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Estonia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Hungary
Romania
Poland
Iceland
Lithuania
Latvia
Malta
Croatia
Norway
FYROM
San Marino
Albania
Serbia

Accession date
7-Oct-77
7-Oct-77
7-Oct-77
7-Oct-77
7-Oct-77
7-Oct-77
7-Oct-77
1-May-78
1-Dec-78
1-May-79
1-Apr-80
1-Oct-86
1-Oct-86
1-Jan-90
1-Dec-91
1-Jan-92
1-Aug-92
1-Mar-96
1-Apr-98
1-Nov-00
1-Jul-02
1-Jul-02
1-Jul-02
1-Jul-02
1-Dec-02
1-Jan-03
1-Mar-03
1-Mar-04
1-Nov-04
1-Dec-04
1-Jul-05
1-Mar-07
1-Jan-08
1-Jan-08
1-Jan-09
1-Jul-09
1-May-10
1-Oct-10

PPP-adj GDP per
capita in 2005#
33,893
31,230
31,657
73,243
36,402
36,994
33,983
33,959
29,562
36,151
NA
25,308
28,325
34,677
NA
19,949
40,247
32,293
18,240
9,532
8,904
20,347
15,962
15,376
22,909
16,476
8,137
13,250
40,448
13,068
12,031
20,314
14,028
49,293
6,573
NA
4,939
7,177

# Source: Heston et al. (2012) Penn World Tables. Gray shaded
countries are included in our analysis.

42

Table D-2
Fee overview
Country

Validation
Fees
Bulgaria
26
Czech Republic16
Estonia
32
Hungary
87*
Iceland
Latvia
36
Lithuania
46**
Poland
22
Romania
60
Slovakia
7
Slovenia
Turkey
169
Notes:

1

2

33
26
87
96

33
26
87
96

46
117

46
117

73

3
26
33
64
87
96
86
46
117
150
66
30
78

Renewal Fees at national office (Year)
4
5
6
7
26
77
102
128
33
66
66
66
77
96
115
134
87
87
87
87
108
120
132
144
129
143
150
172
46
46
46
46
61
73
86
98
160
180
200
220
83
100
116
133
34
42
50
60
86
143
153
191

All values in Euros
* plus ~EUR 13 for sixth and each subsequent page
** plus ~EUR 11 for the 11th and each subsequent claim
Source: National Law Relating to the EPC (15th edition)

43

8
153
66
153
87
162
215
46
110
240
149
70
199

9
204
98
179
87
180
258
46
135
260
166
80
213

10
255
131
205
87
198
322
46
159
280
199
110
247

Table D-3

Predicting Accession to the EPC
Cox hazard rate regression for accession
Coefficient

Standard error

Clustered s.e.

Lagged log(population)

0.125

(0.261)

(0.233)

Lagged log(real GDP/pop)

-0.388

(1.054)

(1.070)

Lagged log(patent apps/pop)

-0.037

(0.339)

(0.343)

1.39 (3)

3.85 (3)

Chi-squared (deg of freedom)
119 annual observations on 14 accession countries.
Patent applications are filings at the national patent office
Time period is 1995-2008

Table D-4

Companies registered in accession countries available in BvD Amadeus
Accession country firms

Country
# all
Bulgaria
Croatia
Czech Republic
Estonia
Hungary
Iceland
Latvia
Lithuania
Norway
Poland
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia

233,354
24,952
121,452
91,139
385,967
28,269
10,322
15,515
297,843
93,385
1,196,861
17,904
51,784

# foreign
% foreign
ownership share>0 ownership share>0
1,267
0.54%
749
3.00%
5,413
4.46%
2,728
2.99%
2,279
0.59%
263
0.93%
841
8.15%
949
6.12%
8,501
2.85%
7,828
8.38%
7,486
0.63%
1,488
8.31%
537
1.04%

44

% of foreign owned
companies with ownership
>50%

100%

74.66%
83.58%
88.88%
79.47%
78.37%
60.08%
85.02%
77.98%
78.90%
87.08%
74.04%
90.46%
78.40%

49.17%
68.76%
73.19%
65.36%
42.04%
47.15%
69.08%
55.74%
70.77%
63.77%
39.85%
70.16%
59.40%

Table D-5

Filings by country before and after accession
Patents applied for at National Offices before and
after accession
Country

Bulgaria
CzechRepublic
Estonia
Croatia
Hungary
Iceland
Lithuania
Latvia
Norway
Poland
Romania
Slovenia
Slovakia
Turkey
Total

Residents
Before
After
1,098
783
1,679
1,791
62
88
672
608
2,781
2,502
143
118
227
201
289
371
3,763
3,215
6,552
6,205
1,595
1,161
709
863
584
495
232
652
20,386
19,053

Non-residents
Before
After
3,351
1,446
11,619
904
2,058
67
844
178
10,767
389
1,260
1,113
133
116
144
113
15,124
7,300
15,629
1,788
362
141
289
96
5,058
290
1,805
523
68,443
14,464

Before is defined as 12 quarters prior to the accession date and after as 12
quarters including the accession date.

45

Accession country filings
at the EPO before and
after accession
Residents
Before
19
140
18
101
300
93
11
14
1,348
170
21
110
28
52
2425

After
55
270
19
71
363
95
18
36
1,491
368
45
255
63
152
3301

Table D-6

Predicting aggregate patent applications
Dependent variable: patent filings in the quarter
1064 obs = 14 countries x 76 quarters (1995-2013)

Post-accession
dummy
Post-accession
trend
Pseudo R-squared

EPO applications
by residents

Resident
applications at
national offices

Non-resident
applications at
national offices

0.12 (0.12)

-0.29 (0.12)**

-1.86 (0.26)***

0.05 (0.01)***

0.05 (0.02)***

-0.05 (0.04)

0.844

0.895

0.924

Predicting aggregate patent grants
Dependent variable: granted patents by filing quarter
EPO grants to
residents of
accession
countries
Post-accession
0.10 (0.10)
dummy
Post-accession
0.07 (0.01)***
trend
Number of observations 1064
Number of countries
14
Pseudo R-squared
0.739

EPO grants to
residents
validated in
accession
countries

Resident grants
at national
offices

EPO grants to
non-residents
validated in
accession
countries

Non-resident
grants at
national offices

2.18 (0.42)***

-0.12 (0.07)

2.01 (0.19)***

-1.57 (0.27)***

-0.11 (0.08)

-0.02 (0.02)

0.03 (0.09)

-0.07 (0.02)***

1064
14
0.740

912
12
0.872

1064
14
0.874

912
12
0.942

All regressions include country and quarter-year dummies
Standard errors are robust and clustered on country.
Method of estimation is Poisson regression with robust standard errors

46

Figure D-1
Patent filings by residents of accession countries - by appln. date
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
-12 -11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0
National offices only

1

2

3

Both EPO and national offices

47

4

5

6

7

EPO only

8

9 10 11

