                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      KINSHIP AND CONFLICT:
 EVIDENCE FROM SEGMENTARY LINEAGE SOCIETIES IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

                                           Jacob Moscona
                                            Nathan Nunn
                                         James A. Robinson

                                        Working Paper 24209
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w24209


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2018




For helpful feedback and comments, the authors thank Jean Ensminger, James Fenske, Francisco Gallego,
Joseph Henrich, Saumitra Jha, Sara Lowes, Beatriz Magaloni, Stelios Michalopoulos, Jake Shapiro,
Dean Yang, Pierre Louis-Vezina, ScottWalker, and MaxWinkler, as well as seminar participants at
U.C. Berkeley, University of British Columbia, University of Connecticut, Brown, Chicago Harris,
University of Minnesota, M.I.T, U.C. Irvine, Princeton, Simon Fraser, Stanford, and various conferences.
We thank Mohammad Ahmad, Aditi Chitkara, Ariel Gomez, Sherif Mabrouk, Matthew Summers,
Adam Xu, and Juan Camilo Yamin for excellent research assistance.. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Jacob Moscona, Nathan Nunn, and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Kinship and Conflict: Evidence from Segmentary Lineage Societies in Sub-Saharan Africa
Jacob Moscona, Nathan Nunn, and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 24209
January 2018, Revised September 2019
JEL No. D74,O55,Z1

                                              ABSTRACT

We test the long-standing hypothesis that ethnic groups that are organized around ‘segmentary lineages’
are more prone to conflict. Ethnographic accounts suggest that in segmentary lineage societies, which
are characterized by strong allegiances to distant relatives, individuals are obligated to come to the
aid of fellow lineage members when they become involved in conflicts. As a consequence, small disagreements
often escalate to larger-scale conflicts involving many individuals. We test for this link between segmentary
lineage and conflict across 145 African ethnic groups in sub-Saharan Africa. Using a number of estimation
strategies, including an RD design at ethnic boundaries, we find that segmentary lineage societies
experience more conflicts and particularly ones that are retaliatory, long in duration, and large in scale.


Jacob Moscona                                         James A. Robinson
Department of Economics                               University of Chicago
M.I.T.                                                Harris School of Public Policy
E52-380, 50 Memorial Drive                            1155 East 60th Street
Cambridge MA 02142                                    Chicago, Illinois 60637
moscona@mit.edu                                       and NBER
                                                      jamesrobinson@uchicago.edu
Nathan Nunn
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
nnunn@fas.harvard.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24209
1. Introduction

Conflicts are a common feature of the modern world. In 2013, there were 34 ongoing civil wars,

18 in Asia and the Middle East, 14 in Africa and 2 in the Americas.1 Some of these have been

very protracted. An example is the conflict between the Lord’s Resistance Army and the Ugandan

state, which can be traced back to 1987 or the civil conflict in Mindanao, the southern island of

the Philippines, which has been ongoing since the late 1960s (Allen and Vlassenroot, 2010). These

conflicts cause a great deal of damage and loss of human life. In 2013 alone, an estimated 70,451

people died fighting in civil conflicts and 10.7 million civilians were newly displaced, resulting in

a total stock of 33 million people being displaced due to fighting.2

   In this study, we test a long-standing hypothesis from the field of anthropology about the

relationship between conflict and the kinship structure of a society, namely whether an ethnic

group is organized into segmentary lineages. Although in Western cultures, the central kinship

unit is the nuclear family, in most of the world, people live within much more complex social

structures, connected by extended kin networks. Segmentary lineage organization is one such

social structure. The first defining characteristic of this organizational form is unilineal descent,

where people trace their ancestry either through the male line (patrilineal) or female line (ma-

trilineal), but not both. Typically, ancestry is traced back to a common often mythical founder,

after whom the tribe or society is named. Examples are Samale and Orma who are the common

ancestors of the Somali and Oromo (Ahmed, 2013b, p. 20). The second feature is the presence

of sub-sets or segments of a full lineage, which function as coherent autonomous groups (Smith,

1956, pp. 39–40). The lineage segments take a ‘corporate form,’ meaning that they are important

for organizing a range of activities and functions that are political, judicial, and administrative in

nature (Fortes, 1953).

   Figure 1 displays a hypothetical patrilineal segmentary lineage system. In the figure, triangles

indicate men and the straight lines indicate descent, with each row of triangles indicating a

generation. All individuals in the figure descend from a common ancestor indicated by “I.” Also

shown in the figure are various segments of the full lineage. The segments are of different sizes:

The smallest is the “Minimal Segment,” the next larger is the “Minor Segment,” and the largest

is the “Major Segment.”
  1 These   figures are based on the authors’ calculations using the UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset.
  2 These   figures are from the UCDP Battle-Related Deaths Dataset and the UNHCR Statistical Yearbook, 2013.


                                                         1
                                                                      Maximal Lineage
                                                                            I




                                  Major Segment

                                                     A                                                               B
                             Minor




                                                                                                                                         1
                            Segment

                                  1                                   2                               3                       4



                         a                  b                c               d                e                f          g       h
                      Minimal
                      Segment

                        i    ii       iii       iv       v       vi       vii viii       ix       x       xi       xii xiii xiv xv xvi

      Figure 1: The figure provides a representation of a hypothetical segmentary lineage society.



   Although it is true that, from a biological perspective, descent is universal among human

societies, in terms of social significance, descent varies significantly. For example, not all groups

trace descent through unilineal lineages. Another common kinship form is cognatic descent

where individuals can simultaneously belong to two sets of groups and trace their lineage through

either their mother’s relatives, father’s relatives, or both. Many small-scale societies, for example,

hunter-gatherer groups such as the Hadza or San, have no established elaborate kinship system

at all. In addition, the importance placed on a society’s kinship system, as well as the associated

responsibilities and obligations, also vary widely. Unlike in a segmentary lineage society, where

lineage and kinship are of the utmost importance, in many societies other structures, like social

class or location of residence, are more important. In others, completely different types of social

structures, such as age sets and age grades, provide the main way of organizing societies, both

administratively and politically.

   A number of scholars in the anthropology literature have hypothesized that there is a rela-

tionship between the social structure of groups and the prevalence of violence and conflict. More

specifically, it is argued that segmentary lineage societies are prone to engage in more conflicts,

and in ones that are longer in duration and larger in scale. This is not because segmentary lineage

societies harbor particular grievances, but because the social structure facilitates the mobilization

of combatants when a dispute or conflict occurs. To see why this is the case, consider Figure

1. An important aspect of segmentary lineage societies is that lineages and segments, and one’s


                                                                                     2
responsibility to them, are of the utmost importance. In the figure, if individual “i” were to have

a dispute with individual “ix” within a segmentary lineage system, this would mean that all

individuals belonging to “Major Segment A” would be allied with and come to the defense of

individual “i.” Similarly, all individuals in “Major Segment B” would be allied with and come to

the defense of individual “ix.” Thus, a dispute between two individuals escalates into a dispute

between two large communities. Outside of segmentary lineage systems, where these allegiances

are absent, the dispute might comprise, at most, a small number of friends or immediate family

members of the two involved in the dispute.

   In general, the number of individuals involved in a conflict will depend on the genealogical

distance of those involved in the dispute. Because of one’s membership in a set of nested segments

and the strong obligations to one’s kin within the segments, in segmentary lineage societies,

small-scale disputes can easily escalate into larger-scale, sustained fighting or even full-blown

warfare. In the modern context, and particularly in Africa, the region of our study, conflict often

takes the form of civil conflict, where the external enemy is the government. However, even in this

context, the same characteristics of segmentary lineage societies are still relevant. The structure

allows segments to effectively mobilize against the common enemy, which in the setting of civil

conflicts is the government.

   This characteristic of segmentary lineage systems has been thoroughly studied by anthropol-

ogists. For example, Sahlins (1961, pp. 323, 333) argues that “segmentary lineage organization is

a successful predatory organization in conflicts with other tribes. . . [Conflict], even if it has been

initiated by a small lineage segment, pits ‘all of us’ against ‘them’." Along similar lines, Evans-

Pritchard (1940a, p. 142) describes the organization of the Nuer, a segmentary lineage group:

“Each segment is itself segmented and there is opposition between its parts. The members of any

segment unite for war against adjacent segments of the same order and unite with these adjacent

segments against larger sections.” The logic is also illustrated by a traditional Bedouin proverb

that is roughly translated as: “I against my brothers; my brothers and I against my cousins; my

cousins, my brothers, and I against the world.” (e.g., Barth, 1973, p. 13; Combs-Schilling, 1985, p.

660).

   In this study, we take this long-standing hypothesis to the data and test for a relationship

between the presence of segmentary lineage organization and conflict today. There are a number

of benefits to moving beyond the case study evidence. First, it is unclear whether the cases that


                                                  3
have been examined in the anthropology literature are representative. Our empirical strategy

has the advantage of being able to estimate an average effect across the ethnicities in our sample.

Second, the ethnographic studies are primarily from before the 1970s, and so it is possible that the

strength of segmentary lineage organization, and the obligations that go with it, have weakened

in recent decades. Although there are examples of segmentary lineages being important for

recruitment in modern conflicts (e.g., Stearns, 2013), our findings provide systematic evidence

that is relevant to this question. Third, our analysis also makes progress on the mechanisms that

underly the relationship between segmentary lineage and conflict. The ethnographic literature

has focused on retaliation and escalation mechanism. Because of this, once a conflict starts, it is

more likely to escalate into a larger-scale and more-prolonged conflict than would be the case in

non-segmentary lineage societies. In our analysis, we test explicitly for such mechanisms.

   Information on the presence of segmentary lineage systems is not available from existing

ethnographic databases such as the Ethnographic Atlas or the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample.

Therefore, we collect data using published ethnographies, the primary source being the Ethno-

graphic Survey of Africa, which is a series of studies, produced from the 1940s until the 1970s

and edited by Daryll Forde. Using the definition from Middleton and Tait (1958), we code an

ethnic group as having a segmentary lineage organization if: (1) there is a recognized and known

unilineal descent system; (2) segments of the lineage take a ‘corporate form’, meaning that they

are sub-units that affect administrative functions and political positions; and (3) lineages and ge-

nealogical relationships influence one’s location of residence. If any of these three characteristics

are known to not be present, the group is coded as not having a segmentary lineage organization.

If information about any of the three characteristics is missing, then the ethnic group is coded as

missing and not included in our analysis.

   We restrict our analysis to ethnic groups from Africa, both because the ethnographic data are

most readily available, systematically documented, and comparable within Africa, and because

the geo-coded micro-level conflict data that we use are only available for Africa. In the end,

we are able to definitively categorize 145 African ethnic groups, 74 of which are segmentary

lineage societies and 71 of which are not. This comprises an estimated 212 million people or

approximately 38% of the population of sub-Saharan Africa.

   We use conflict data from the Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project (ACLED), a

geo-coded data set that catalogs information about each conflict event in Africa from 1997–2014.


                                                 4
The database includes information on the location, date, and other characteristics of “politically

violent events.” By linking the geo-coded conflict data with a digitized map of the traditional

locations of ethnic groups, we are able to calculate the frequency of conflicts that occur within the

territory of each ethnic group.3

   Our empirical analysis comprises two estimation strategies.                  The first is to estimate the

cross-ethnicity relationship between the traditional presence of a segmentary lineage organization

and the intensity of conflict within the territory of the ethnic group from 1997–2014. We find

a consistent and robust positive relationship between the two.                  Segmentary lineage groups

experience more conflicts. This is true whether we measure conflict intensity using incidence,

duration, or number of fatalities. We also find a positive relationship for conflicts of different

types; namely, all conflicts, civil conflicts, non-civil conflicts, and localized within-group conflicts.

The magnitudes of the estimated effects are sizeable. For example, segmentary lineage groups

tend to experience approximately double the conflict incidents of groups without segmentary

lineages.

   We find that these relationships are very similar when we control for an extensive set of

covariates, which include: country fixed effects, historical covariates (political centralization,

historical development as measured by settlement complexity, and patrilineal descent), and a

host of geographic covariates (agricultural suitability, altitude, distance from the equator, amount

of land inhabited by the ethnic group, distance from the center of an ethnic group to the nearest

country border, an indicator for the ethnic group being split by a national border, and historical

malaria exposure as measured by the prevalence of the sickle cell trait).

   Since the conditional correlations potentially suffer from the standard inference concerns that

plague cross-sectional estimates, namely the presence of omitted factors, including those that

are unobservable to the researcher, we also implement a second set of estimates that attempt to

address the presence of omitted factors that may bias our estimates. We first restrict attention to

pairs of ethnic groups that share a border and where one has a segmentary lineage organization

and the other does not. In our sample, there are 68 such pairs. We then take 10km-by-10km grid-

cells to be the unit of observation and implement a regression discontinuity (RD) identification

strategy, where we estimate the effect of segmentary lineage organization on conflict across grid-
  3 The strategy of using location to link conflicts to ethnic groups follows the methodology of Michalopoulos and

Papaioannou (2016). The same logic has also been used to measure the average incomes of ethnic groups (e.g.,
Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013, 2014, Alesina, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2016).



                                                        5
cells that are close to the border, while controlling for two-dimensional running variables.

   We first verify that the accuracy of the ethnic boundaries by using data from the third to sixth

rounds of the Afrobarometer surveys, which report information on the exact location (latitude

and longitude) and self-reported ethnicity of respondents. The RD estimates shows a sharp

discontinuity in ethnicity exactly at the mapped ethnicity boundaries. This confirms the validity

of the boundaries and their use in the RD estimation.

   We find that the RD estimates are qualitatively identical to our OLS estimates. The relation-

ships between segmentary lineage organization and our measures of conflict are all positive and

highly significant. These findings are robust to different bandwidths and to different methods of

controlling for the two-dimensional running variables.

   The benefit of the RD estimates over the OLS estimates is that omitted factors, even those that

are unobservable, are better accounted for. As long as the omitted factors vary smoothly over

space – for example, because physically close units have similar geography, climate, and history

– they will be taken into account by the RD estimation strategy. However, the strategy is deficient

if there are omitted factors that also vary discontinuously at the border. To explore the potential

importance of this issue, we first check for differences in observable characteristics between

societies with and without segmentary lineages. We find that the two groups are balanced on

a wide variety of observable covariates. This finding is consistent with arguments suggesting

that the emergence of segmentary lineage systems was an idiosyncratic process and, therefore, is

uncorrelated with environmental, social, or structural factors (Evans-Pritchard and Fortes, 1940,

Smith, 1956, Salzman, 1978, Kelly, 1983). We also conduct a series of placebo tests where we

examine pairs of adjacent ethnic groups that have the same segmentary lineage status but differ

in other dimensions. We then test for discontinuities based on these alternative ethnicity-level

characteristics. We find no evidence that the other characteristics affect conflict.

   The most-commonly cited reason for a link between segmentary lineage organization and

conflict is that the segmented structure and the strong allegiances cause initially-small disputes

to escalate into larger-scale conflicts. If an individual is wronged or becomes involved in a conflict

or dispute, lineage mates must come to their defense. We undertake a number of strategies to

test for such a mechanism. The first identifies conflict incidents that appear to be responses to

previous incidents and separately estimate the effects of segmentary lineage on conflicts that are

retaliatory and those that are not. We find that while segmentary lineage is associated with more


                                                  6
conflict of both types, the association is larger for retaliatory conflicts.

   The second test that we undertake separately estimates the relationship between segmentary

lineage organization and the frequency of conflicts of different sizes, namely those with: no

fatalities, 1–10 fatalities, 11–100 fatalities, and more than 100 fatalities. We find that although

segmentary lineage organization is associated with a greater incidence of conflicts of all types,

the estimated relationship is systematically stronger, both in terms of magnitude and statistical

significance, the larger the conflict.

   The final test explicitly examines the effect of segmentary lineage organization on the duration

(i.e., offset) of existing conflicts and on the onset of new conflicts. We find that the presence of

a segmentary lineage organization has a positive effect on the duration of conflicts (i.e., negative

effect on the probability of conflict offset). The estimated effects are large in magnitude, highly

significant, and robust across specifications. By contrast, we find that the effect of segmentary

lineage on conflict onset, although also positive, are much smaller in magnitude, often statistically

insignificant, and not robust across specifications.

   Overall, the evidence provides support for retaliation and escalation being important channels

behind the relationship between segmentary lineage organization and conflict. We also test for a

host of other channels through which segmentary lineage could affect conflict, including through

economic wellbeing, public goods provision, risk sharing, and exclusion from national political

power. We find no evidence that these factors are affected by segmentary lineage organization.

Thus, it is unlikely that these are mechanisms that explain the conflict findings.

   Our findings contribute to a better understanding of the incidence, intensity, and duration

of conflict in developing countries.4 This literature has proposed various types of explanations,

many based on the dichotomy between ‘greed’ and ‘grievance’ (Collier and Sambanis, 2005).

Greed factors include the presence of ‘lootable wealth,’ such as oil or diamonds (Weinstein,

2006, Ross, 2004, 2006), or foreign aid (De Ree and Nillesen, 2009, Nunn and Qian, 2014, Crost,

Felter and Johnston, 2014). On the grievance side, conflict could be induced by inequality within

society (Cederman, Gleditsch and Buhaug, 2013), the presence of ethnic cleavages (Montalvo and

Reynal-Querol, 2005, Esteban, Mayoral and Ray, 2012), distrust (Rohner, Thoenig and Zilibotti,

2013), arbitrary national boundaries (Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2016), the lack of polit-

ical accountability and democracy (Gleditsch and Ruggeri, 2010) or other types of exploitative
  4 See   Blattman and Miguel (2010) for an overview of this literature.



                                                            7
institutions (Richards, 1996, Wood, 2003). Also potentially important are factors that influence

the opportunity cost of engaging in conflict (Miguel, Satyanath and Saiegh, 2004, Debos, 2011,

Hoffman, 2011, McGovern, 2011, Dube and Vargas, 2013, Debos, 2016). A final recurrent theme in

the literature is that conflict – namely, civil conflict – occurs as a consequence of state weakness,

as proxied by real per capita GDP (Fearon and Laitin, 2003) or measured more directly by

state history (Depetris-Chauvin, 2014). Most closely related to the focus of our research is the

recent analysis by Konig, Rohner, Thoenig and Zilibotti (2017), which shows the importance of

cross-group network structures and alliances. Our findings complement this line of research by

also showing the importance of within-group social structure for conflict.

   Our findings also contribute to a well-established anthropological literature that, through case

studies, has hypothesized and documented the effects that segmentary lineage structures have on

conflict (e.g., Evans-Pritchard, 1940a,b, Bohannon, 1958, Kelly, 1985, Lewis, 1994, 1989, Salzman,

2007, Zeman, 2009, Stearns, 2013, Ahmed, 2013b, Hoehne, 2015). While the studies recognize

that segmentary lineage organization can potentially affect all types of conflict, their focus tends

to be on the effects that segmentary lineages have on within-ethnicity conflict. Our estimates

test for this directly by examining the effects of segmentary lineage organization on localized

within-group conflicts, as well as extending this line of inquiry and asking whether the same

mechanisms are also important for civil conflicts.

   Our findings also contribute to a deeper understanding of the long-run consequences of the

pre-colonial characteristics of African societies. A number of important studies have documented

the importance of historical political centralization for economic outcomes today (e.g., Gennaioli

and Rainer, 2007, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013). Although this is clearly an important

determinant of subsequent outcomes, our analysis shows that other dimensions – namely, social

structure and the nature of kinship – are also important. Our focus on this dimension of social

structure connects our findings to previous studies that also examine the importance of various

dimensions of social structure within developing countries. For example, La Ferrara (2007),

Gneezy, Leonard and List (2009), La Ferrara and Milazzo (2011) and Lowes (2016) study the

importance of matrilineal versus patrilineal inheritance, while Bau (2016) studies the importance

of matrilocal versus patrilocal residence. Dunning and Harrison (2010) show how the social

custom of cross-cutting alliances called “cousinage” influences the appeal of ethnic political

appeals in Mali. Greif (1994) examines the institutional divergence between Genoa and other


                                                 8
parts of the Mediterranean by positing differences in underlying kinship relations, which did not

allow the Genoese to use community enforcement mechanisms in contractual relations and Greif

and Tabellini (2010), building on a large historical literature, use a similar argument to explain

the historical divergence between Europe and China. More recently, studies have examined the

relationship between the strength and scope of kinship networks and democracy (Schulz, 2017),

corruption (Akbari, Bahrami-Rad and Kimbrough, 2017), and morality, psychology, and economic

behavior (Enke, 2019).

   The difference between attitudes towards and treatment of family members versus non-family

members has a basis in biology (Hamilton, 1963, Henrich and Henrich, 2007) and has been applied

to study problems of economic development (Banfield, 1958). Kinship, as measured by the

strength of family ties, has also been extensively used in the literature on social networks (Ansell

and Padgett, 1993, Naidu, Robinson and Young, 2015), and has been shown to be associated with

a range of economic, social, and political outcomes (Alesina and Giuliano, 2014). In the political

economy literature, family ties have also been explored as sources of political power and dynastic

politics (Dal Bo, Dal Bo and Snyder, 2009, Querubín, 2016, Cruz, Labonne and Querubin, 2017).

   The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we review the existing anthropological

explanations for why some societies are organized along the basis of segmentary lineages and

others are not. We then discuss case study evidence which makes a causal link between seg-

mentary lineage organization and conflict. Section 3 discusses the data and, in particular, the

coding of segmentary lineage structure based on ethnographic sources. Section 4 presents our

OLS estimates and section 5 presents our RD estimates. Section 6 investigates causal mechanisms,

including retaliation and escalation channels that have been the focus of the anthropology litera-

ture. Section 7 discusses the relevance of our findings for ethnic groups outside of Africa. Section

8 concludes.


2. Background

A. The Determinants of Segmentary Lineage Organization

Why some societies are organized in segmentary lineages and not others has been a longstanding

question in anthropological research. Although several theories have been presented to explain

the origin of segmentary organization, there is, as of yet, no agreed upon explanation. One



                                                 9
school of thought hypothesizes that the physical environment is an important determinant. For

example, a number of scholars postulate that if the environment is such that a group can survive

without significant travel outside their tribal sub-group’s territory, then associations outside of

the group do not form and this tends to maintain a segmentary lineage system (Evans-Pritchard,

1969, Forde, 1953, 1970, Verdon, 1982). Thus environments that fail to facilitate long-distance

trade will tend to promote the presence of segmentary lineage organization.

   Another line of reasoning argues that segmentary lineage organization is not determined by

the environment but is an ideology or culture that emerges through a complex evolutionary pro-

cess that leads to the emergence of the organization form in a manner that appears idiosyncratic

(Smith, 1956, Salzman, 1978, Kelly, 1983). Empirical evidence testing these hypotheses remains

scarce. A recent exception is Enke (2019), who documents a relationship between the historical

disease environment of a society and the strength of kinship ties. While strong kinship is not the

same as the presence of segmentary lineage organization, there is likely a relationship between the

two. Motivated by this finding, which suggests the potential importance of ecological conditions

for the emergence of segmentary lineage organization, our analysis checks for balance between

segmentary lineage and non-segmentary lineage groups across an extensive set of covariates and

we also control for a large number of covariates in our OLS analysis. In addition, our RD analysis

compares locations that are geographically very close to each other and, thus, should have very

similar ecological conditions.


B. The Relationship between Segmentary Lineage and Conflict

Numerous studies have documented examples of an apparent link between segmentary lineage

organization and the initiation and/or propagation of conflict. Many point out the strong effect

that segmentary lineage organization can have on the exacerbation of small conflicts. Once a

conflict begins, segmentary lineage structure results in an essentially automatic mobilization of

additional combatants, which makes resolving the conflict much less likely.

   One of the best-studied segmentary lineage societies is the Somali, whose social structure

is dominated by segmentary organization. Anthropologist Ioan Lewis (1961) argues that the

segmentary lineage system plays a major role in propagating conflict in Somalia. He writes that

“quarrels between individuals which result in loss of life or property or both are often quickly

followed by retaliation where there is little thought of negotiation. Within a clan bitter feuds


                                                10
develop and persist, often for many years and sometimes generations, erupting spasmodically

as later incidents occur, and being temporarily forgotten only in the context of wider hostilities”

(Lewis, 1961, p. 243).

   Segmentary lineage organization has also been associated with more-organized forms of

conflict, like political violence. In his book Blood and Bone, Ioan Lewis (1994) describes the link

between segmentary lineage organization and organized violence in the Somali region during

the 1980s. After the Ogaadeen war of 1977–1978, there was an upsurge of “tribalism,” which

was led by the President Siad Barre, whose goal was to consolidate the position of his own clan

and family. Rather than develop a national identity, his strategy was to recruit as many tribal

segments as possible within the segmentary system. In turn, this caused segments opposed to

the government to build allegiances among their own segments (Lewis, 1994, pp. 225–226). That

is, the “segmentary structure allowed both the government and opposition to mobilize large

swaths of the lineage system” (Lewis, 1994, p. 232). This societal polarization along tribal and

genealogical lines lays at the foundation of Somalia’s subsequent political conflict.

   The relationship between lineage organization and violent conflict continues to be important.

A 2015 Rift Valley Institute Report reaffirms its importance in a discussion of an upsurge of

conflict during 2006. It describes how the military efforts of the Warsangeli and Dubays fighters

is “in line with the segmentary logic of the northern Somali society as a whole: as soon as a

common threat emerges from outside, members of a descent group unite at the highest necessary

level (sub-clan, clan, or clan-family). Conversely, in the absence of such a threat, a group breaks

up into smaller units that fend for themselves” (Hoehne, 2015, p. 217).

   The Somali example clearly illustrates the obligations that arise due to segmentary lineages

and how these can cause individuals to align with large portions of society against common

threats and to become involved in conflicts even if they are otherwise far removed from the

source of the conflict. This effect has also been documented among several other segmentary

lineage groups. The Nuer, an ethnic group from South Sudan that strictly abides by segmentary

lineage organization, have been well studied. Evans-Pritchard (1940a) describes this obligation

among the Nuer of South Sudan, writing that they “state this structural principle clearly in the

expression of their political values. Thus they say that if the Leng tertiary section of the Lou tribe

fights the Nyarkwac tertiary section – and, in fact, there has been a long feud between them – the

villages which compose each section will combine to fight.” (Evans-Pritchard, 1940a, p. 142).


                                                 11
  Numerous other segmentary lineage societies also exhibit this same pattern. Lienhardt (1958)

describes this same allegiance structure among the Dinka. Bohannon (1958) describes it amongst

the Tiv of Nigeria, another segmentary lineage society and provides the specific example of

fighting between the Morov of MbaKetsa and MbaHura of Tondov.               In this case also, the

segmentary structure facilitated recruitment to conflict, which significantly escalated a feud that

began between just two tribal segments (Bohannon, 1958, p. 46).

  The link between segmentary lineage and contemporary civil conflict is nicely illustrated by

events in the Eastern DRC, which is a location of persistent conflict since 1994. One of the more

prevalent rebel groups in the region today are the Raia Mutomboki. As their name, which is

“angry citizens” in Swahili, indicates, the groups comprise populations of villagers who have

mobilized for self-defense. The population, which is a segmentary lineage group called the Rega,

first mobilized in a spontaneous and decentralized manner from 2005–2007 and then again in

2011. The success of this group is believed to have been due, in part, to their segmentary lineage

structure, which enabled the near-automatic mobilization of fighters against their common enemy,

the FDLR (Stearns, 2013). It is very plausible that the Raia Mutomboki, who are among the most

prevalent and well-known rebel groups in the region today, would not have emerged without

their segmentary lineage organization.


C. Other Systems of Kinship

Those societies without segmentary lineage organization comprise our control group. A common

alternative organization form is centered around the village, which is led by a village chief.

Radcliffe-Brown (1950, p. 42) describes this form of organization, referring specifically to the

Lozi and Bemba of modern Zambia: “The typical corporate group in that region is a village

constituted, by the persons who attach themselves to a headman. . . This group is an open, not

a closed group; that is, individuals or families may join or leave it, moving from one village to

another. It is usual that a number of the inhabitants of a village at any time should be related,

either by cognatic ties or through marriage with the headman or with one another, but they do

not form a unilineal kin group, which is by its constitution a ‘closed’ group.”

  Radcliffe-Brown (1950, p. 43) also describes why unilineal descent (lineage traced through the

male line only or the female line only) is important for segmentary lineage organization and why

cognatic descent (tracing lineage through both the male or female lines) is not compatible with


                                                12
segmentary lineage organization: “It is the corporate kin group. . . that controls the use of land,

whether for hunting, for pastoral life, or for cultivation; that exacts vengeance for the killing

of a member, or demands and receives an indemnity. . . A continuing social structure requires

the aggregation of individuals into distinct separated groups, each with its own solidarity, every

person belonging to one group of any set. . . In kinship systems cognatic kinship cannot provide

this; it is only made possible by the use of the principle of unilineal descent.”5 Analyses of

cognatic kinship groups illustrate that they are very different in structure from segmentary lineage

groups. Most important for thinking about the mechanisms linking social structure and conflict

is the fact that segmentary lineage societies are closed in a way cognatic societies are not and

that all of the functions that a corporate group might undertake – social, political, judicial, or

administrative – are fused together in a segmentary lineage group. These elements seem to create

a far greater social solidarity in segmentary lineage societies and much greater ability to engage in

collective action. This is not so in societies with cognatic kinship, where there is typically a clear

differentiation between kinship relations and political relations (Fortes, 1953, p. 26; Gluckman,

1951, p. 31).

   Writing about the Lozi of Zambia, Max Gluckman (1950) makes a similar point: “No corporate

unilineal group of kinsmen exists among the Lozi. Every child. . . has a right to make its home in

a village of either of its mother’s parents and to inherit there. It also has these rights with the

kin of its father. . . There are no broadly based unilineal groups associating in common rights of

residence, ownership, inheritance, production etc.” (Gluckman, 1950, pp. 171, 173). Thus, it is

clear that the social organization of ethnic groups, like the Bemba or Lozi, who base groups on

villages, is very different from segmentary lineage organization, in which kinship ties are pre-

determined, clearly defined, and form distinct non-overlapping groups (e.g., segments). While

the Bemba and Lozi had centralized states, their form of village/chief organization can also be

found among ethnic groups that were stateless, such as the nearby Tonga (Colson, 1951). This

system is also common among groups in other parts of Africa, with the most well-studied groups

being the Wabena of Tanzania and the Ankole and Toro of Uganda (Gluckman, 1950, p. 178).

   In addition to cognatic kinship societies, there are a number of other common forms of

organizing society apart from adopting a segmentary lineage organization. For example, there are
   5 As we discuss further below, one of the primary characteristics of segmentary lineage organizations, which is

relevant for creating an ethnicity-level measure is whether a society has unilineal descent.




                                                       13
societies, like the Masai in Kenya and Tanzania, whose politics and administration are organized

by age – i.e., around age-sets – and not by lineage or descent. Age-based organizations also

create obligations, although to those within one’s own age set. One could also imagine that

age could also provide a useful axis for mobilization and collective action and there is some

evidence that it certain instances it can, either historically (Gluckman, 1940, Eldredge, 2014) or in

the modern period (Kurimoto and Simonse, 1998). However, what is distinct about segmentary

lineage societies is the number of individuals that can be mobilized through lineage relative to

age sets. While an age grade typically consists of tens of people lineage segments consist of

hundreds or even thousands of people. Another example is very small scale societies that never

develop either unilineal or cognatic kinship in any institutionalized form. Examples include such

groups as the Hadza or the San people.


3. Data

A. Conflict Data (ACLED)

Our conflict data are from the Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project (ACLED) database,

which provides details of all known conflict events within Africa from January 1, 1997 to De-

cember 31, 2014. For each conflict event, information is provided on the location (latitude and

longitude), the type of incident (riots and protests, battles, violence against civilians, etc), the

actors involved (government forces, rebel militia, civilians, protestors, etc), the motivation of the

actors (e.g., aimed at taking over land, riots, protests, etc), and the number of fatalities.

   Given the possibility that the effect of segmentary lineage systems on conflict may differ

depending on the nature of the conflict, our analysis examines four different measures of conflict.

The first is the broadest and most aggregate measure, which includes all conflict incidents. The

next two measures disaggregate conflict incidents depending on whether or not they are part of

a civil conflict, which is defined as fighting between the government military and rebel groups.

Thus, the second measure is conflict incidents that are part of a civil conflict, and the third

measure is of conflict incidents that are not part of a civil conflict. The last measure that we

construct isolates very local conflict incidents where both parties in the conflict are geographically

local belonging to the same village or local ethnic group.6
  6 Details   of the identification of each conflict type are provided in the online Appendix.



                                                            14
   For each of the four types of conflict, we construct three measures of the frequency or

prevalence of each type: the number of deadly conflict incidents, number of conflict deaths,

and number of months from 1997–2014 with a deadly conflict incident. A deadly conflict is one

with at least one battle death. In total, we have twelve measures of conflict.7

   Following the methodology of previous studies (e.g., Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2016),

we use location to connect conflict incidents to ethnic groups. This is done by combining the

location of the conflict event with a digitized version of the map of ethnic boundaries taken

from Murdock (1959) to construct measures of the frequency and intensity of conflicts occurring

within the territory of each ethnic group.8 The use of location to infer those who are involved in

the conflicts is motivated by the fact that, in general, conflicts tend to occur close to the homelands

of participants. This is most clearly true for disputes and conflicts that do not involve the

government military, which tend to be very localized. For conflicts that involve the government

military – i.e., conflicts that we refer to as civil conflicts – conflicts also often occur within the

ethnic homelands of the combatants. See for example the recent findings of Michalopoulos and

Papaioannou (2016).9


B. Identifying Segmentary Lineage Societies

The most commonly used source for ethnographic information is the Ethnographic Atlas, which

contains information on the traditional practices and characteristics of 1,265 ethnic groups. Al-

though this source does include some characteristics of kinship practices, it does not contain

information on whether a society is organized according to segmentary lineages. Therefore, to

identify the presence or absence of a segmentary lineage system, we relied on the Ethnographic

Survey of Africa, which is a multi-volume work that compiles ethnographic information from

a large number of African ethnic groups. The Survey, edited by Daryll Forde, was published

over the course of several decades, beginning during the late-1940s, by the International African

Institute in London. It is divided into individual volumes, first by region and then by ethnic

group, and each entry contains detailed information about the political, social, cultural, and
   7 Allmeasures are positively correlated, with correlation coefficients that range from 0.49–0.84.
   8 The digitized map is taken from Nunn (2008) and is the same map as used in Michalopoulos and Papaioannou
(2013, 2014, 2016).
   9 Although it would also be informative to connect ethnic groups to conflict by using information on the participants

involved, unfortunately, this strategy is not feasible. It requires detailed information on the ethnicity of the parties
involved in each conflict, which is not available. Often, we only have a very general description of the participants,
such as “locals”, “protestors”, “civilians”, etc.


                                                          15
economic practices of each ethnic group, as well as a description of the ecological environment

inhabited by the group. If a particular group was not included in the Ethnographic Survey of

Africa, or when the information available was insufficient to determine whether or not it was a

segmentary lineage society, we then consulted additional sources, including the references used

in the Ethnographic Atlas to try to determine if the group had a segmentary lineage structure. Full

details of the data construction are provided in the online Appendix.

   For a group to be coded as a segmentary lineage society, we required that it satisfy the follow-

ing three criteria, which are taken from Middleton and Tait’s (1958) definition of a segmentary

lineage society.

   1. The society must be based on unilineal descent, and there must have been direct and

      explicit evidence that people identify with their lineages and are aware of their genealogical

      connections to members of other sub-groups.

   2. The segments of the lineages must take on a ‘corporate form’, which means that branching

      lineage segments must determine administrative functions and political allegiances and that

      a centralized political authority entirely divorced from the lineage structure does not exist.

   3. Lineage and genealogical relationships affect where people live, with those who are more

      closely related living geographically closer to one another. Thus, we require evidence that

      there is a geographic organization of residence that is based on the lineage system.

   For an ethnic group to be coded as a segmentary lineage society, we required direct evidence

that each of the three criteria is satisfied.       Likewise, for an ethnic group to be coded as a

non-segmentary lineage society, we required direct evidence that any of the three criteria is not

satisfied. That is, lack of evidence for a criterion was not sufficient for a variable to be coded as

not being a segmentary lineage system. In the end, we are able to code our segmentary lineage

society indicator variable for 145 ethnic groups within Africa using the ethnicity classification of

Murdock (1959). For the other ethnic groups, the existing evidence was not sufficient to determine

with confidence whether an ethnic group is based on segmentary lineage organization or not.

Although we do not have data for all ethnic groups in sub-Saharan Africa, the 145 ethnic groups

account for 38% of the population of sub-Saharan Africa.10
  10 The
       figures are calculated using NASA EarthData estimates of population density in 2000 and Murdock’s ethnic
boundary shapefile.




                                                      16
          (a) Segmentary lineage classification                  (b) Segmentary lineage classification and conflict inci-
                                                                 dents

Figure 2: Maps showing the boundaries of ethnic groups, the presence and absence of segmentary lineage
organization, and, in Figure 2b, the location of conflict incidents that occur within the boundaries of the
ethnic groups in our sample.


   As a check on the validity of our coding, after the variable was constructed, we consulted the

existing secondary literature for cases where scholars had previously characterized or described

specific ethnic groups as having a segmentary lineage organization or not. Reassuringly, in

all cases (42 in total), our classification matched the majority consensus.11                         These cases are

summarized in the online Appendix.12

   The 145 ethnic groups are shown in Figures 2a and 2b. Segmentary lineage societies are

depicted in dark grey and non-segmentary lineage societies in light grey. The map shows that

our sample includes ethnic groups from many parts of Africa. In Figure 2b, we add the locations

of conflict incidents in the ACLED dataset that occur within the boundaries of the ethnic groups

in our sample.

   To better understand the extent to which our sample of 145 ethnic groups is representative of

the full population of societies within sub-Saharan Africa, we compare the characteristics of the

ethnic groups within our sample to the ethnic groups that are outside of our sample but in the
  11 This is not to say that there is always unanimity within the literature about the classification of every society. For

example, Sahlins (1961) argues that the Dinka are not a segmentary lineage society, while Butt (1952) and Middleton
and Tait (1958) argue that they are. The difference arises because Sahlins appears to have been using a narrower
definition of segmentary lineage than is standard.
  12 The results that we report below are robust to restricting our sample of segmentary lineage ethnicities to those

whose coding is verified by secondary sources and omitting from the sample those that cannot be verified.


                                                            17
Ethnographic Atlas. Within the Ethnographic Atlas, there are 420 ethnic groups from sub-Saharan

Africa, 145 of which are in our sample and 275 of which are not. In Appendix Table A1, we report

the averages for and differences between the two groups for nineteen historical, ethnographic, and

geographic characteristics. For 16 of the 19 variables examined, we find no statistically significant

difference between the two groups (at the 5% level or stronger). The three measures for which the

samples appear different are: levels of jurisdictional hierarchy, the natural log of total population,

and longitude. Thus, larger groups that have a more centralized political system are more likely

to be in our sample. This is not surprising given that larger ethnic groups were more likely to

be studied and documented by anthropologists and therefore are more likely to appear in our

sample. This difference should be kept in mind when interpreting our results.13


C. Descriptive Statistics

Within our sample of 145 ethnic groups, 74 have a segmentary lineage organization, while 71 do

not. Average differences between the two groups are summarized in Table 1, which reports the

sample mean of and the estimated difference between segmentary lineage and non-segmentary

lineage ethnic groups for different covariates. Panel A of the table reports statistics for the twelve

conflict measures, constructed from the ACLED database.14 We observe that for all twelve conflict

measures, conflict is significantly higher within segmentary lineage societies. The differences are

large. Segmentary lineage groups tend to have 100–200% more conflicts than non-segmentary

lineage groups.

   Panels B, C, and D of Table 1 report balance for geographic, historical, and contemporary

covariates.15 In contrast to the difference in conflict prevalence, we find little difference between

the two groups for these other characteristics. For eighteen of the twenty geographic variables

and for twenty-three of the twenty-four historical variables, we find no statistically significant

difference. We find that for all seven of the contemporary measures, there is no statistically

significant difference between the two groups.
  13 Our sample is slightly more likely to include ethnic groups from the eastern portion of Africa. It is possible that

ethnic groups in the region were studied in greater detail than groups from other regions. It is also possible that it is
simply due to chance. With almost 20 variables being examined, it is expected that even with actual balance, one of
the twenty would be different from zero at a 5% significance level.
  14 Four types of conflicts are examined (all, civil, non-civil and local), with their intensities measured using either

number of incidents, months of fighting, or deaths.
  15 The source and details of each variable are reported in the online Appendix.




                                                           18
Table 1: Balance statistics, reporting average differences between segmentary lineage and non-
segmentary lineage societies.
                 (1)                         (2)          (3)                              (4)                         (5)          (6)                           (7)                         (8)          (9)
            Variable Name                Sample Mean SL vs. Not SL                    Variable Name                Sample Mean SL vs. Not SL                 Variable Name                Sample Mean SL vs. Not SL


                                                                                             Panel A: Conflict Variables
ln (1+Deadly Conflict Incidents):                                        ln (1+Conflict Deaths):                                                   ln (1+Months of Deadly Conflict):
  All Conflicts                               2.556        1.554***        All Conflicts                               4.006         2.085***        All Conflicts                           2.158        1.246***
                                                            (0.269)                                                                   (0.426)                                                              (0.217)
  Civil Conflicts                             2.070        0.972***        Civil Conflicts                             3.109         1.800***        Civil Conflicts                         1.631        1.043***
                                                            (0.297)                                                                   (0.443)                                                              (0.215)
  Non-Civil Conflicts                         2.024        1.034***        Non-Civil Conflicts                         3.046         1.910***        Non-Civil Conflicts                     1.674        1.108***
                                                            (0.248)                                                                   (0.361)                                                              (0.197)
  Within Group Conflicts                      1.266        1.058***        Within Group Conflicts                      2.196         1.737***        Within Group Conflicts                  1.128        0.916***
                                                            (0.196)                                                                  (0.343)                                                               (0.169)

                                                                                            Panel B: Geographic Variables
Land area (km squared)                       32,517          8,955       Sorghum maximum yield (kg/ha)                 157.9          -2.13        Mean tempereture (degrees C)              24.17          -0.202
                                                            (7,132)                                                                  (10.07)                                                               (0.471)
Distance to nearest border (km)               127.8        -35.23**      Potato maximum yield (kg/ha)                  58.41          11.51        Split ethnic group (10%), 0/1             0.317         0.0697
                                                            (17.49)                                                                  (16.81)                                                              (0.0775)
Agricultural suitability index, 0-1           0.569        -0.00379      Yam maximum yield (kg/ha)                     217.7          -7.89        Malaria index, 0-39                       14.05          1.213
                                                           (0.0282)                                                                   (12.66)                                                              (1.554)
Maize maximum yield (kg/ha)                   277.6          -5.581      SD of agricultural suitability index          1.461          -0.0884      Tsetse fly suitability index              0.122          -0.226
                                                            (11.78)                                                                  (0.0776)                                                              (0.154)
Cassava maximum yield (kg/ha)                 288.6          -7.921      Ecological diversity (Fenske, 2014)           0.344          -0.0025      Sicke cell allele frequency              0.0590        -0.0125**
                                                            (20.14)                                                                  (0.0362)                                                             (0.0056)
Millet maximum yield (kg/ha)                  49.27          -3.941      Mean altitude (km)                            0.365          0.0286       Absolute latitude (degrees)                7.70         -1.692*
                                                            (4.159)                                                                  (0.0569)                                                              (0.880)
Longitude (degrees)                           19.50          3.978       Latitude (degrees)                            1.355          0.728
                                                            (2.655)                                                                  (1.517)


                                                                              Panel C: Ethnicity-Level and Historical Variables
Jurisd. hierarchy (beyond local), 1-5         2.270         -0.417**     Property rights in land, 0/1            0.939        -0.0121              Female particip. in agriculture, 1-6      4.051          -0.352
                                                            (0.165)                                                                  (0.0448)                                                              (0.221)
Jurisd. hierarchy (local), 1-3                1.879         -0.0624      Patrilineal, 0/1                              0.697           0.0954      ln slave exports (norm. land area)        0.348          0.113
                                                            (0.111)                                                                  (0.0766)                                                              (0.124)
Settlement pattern complexity, 1-8            5.821          0.228       Matrilineal, 0/1                              0.138          -0.0098      Headmen elected, 0/1                     0.0621         -0.0164
                                                            (0.288)                                                                  (0.0585)                                                             (0.0444)
Dependence on agriculture, 0-9                5.834          -0.269      Patrilocal, 0/1                               0.783           0.0511      Moral high God, 0/1                       0.172         -0.0485
                                                            (0.242)                                                                  (0.0694)                                                             (0.0632)
Dependence on husbandry, 0-9                  2.021          0.0405      Matrilocal, 0/1                              0.0420           0.0262      City in 1800, 0/1                        0.0417         -0.0012
                                                            (0.233)                                                                  (0.0335)                                                             (0.0335)
Herding society (Becker, 2019), 0-1           0.207         0.00514      Polygyny, 0/1                                 0.855          -0.0906      Christian mission station, 0/1            0.690          0.0266
                                                           (0.0241)                                                                  (0.0581)                                                             (0.0774)
Agricultural intensity, 1-6                   3.462          0.108       Cousin marriage, 0/1                          0.673          0.0705       Colonial railroad, 0/1                    0.166         0.0483
                                                            (0.165)                                                                  (0.0890)                                                             (0.0619)
Single inheritor for land, 0/1                0.577         -0.0730      Bride price, 0/1                              0.786          0.0778       ln population density in 1960             2.656          0.339
                                                           (0.0944)                                                                  (0.0685)                                                              (0.208)


                                                                                         Panel D: Contemporary Variables
Mean lights in 2010                           0.814          0.820       SD of lights in 2010 (norm. by mean)     13.04               -2.102       Growth 2000-2010, mean lights             0.157           0.036
                                                            (0.512)                                                                  (2.105)                                                               (0.169)
ln (1+mean lights in 2010)                    0.311          0.138       ln (1+SD lights in 2010)                      2.323          -0.119       SD of lights growth, 2000-2010            0.509          -0.007
                                                            (0.088)                                                                  (0.142)                                                               (0.104)
Muslim majority religion, 0/1                 0.200         -0.0221
                                                           (0.0669)
Notes : The unit of observation is an ethnic group. Columns 1, 5, and 7 report the ethnicity-level characteristics. In Panel A, the characteristics are the 12 baseline measures of conflict. In Panel B, they are
geographic variables. In Panel C, they are historical characteristics. In Panel D, they are contemporary characteristics. Columns 2, 5, and 8 report the sample mean of each measure and columns 3, 6, and 8
report the difference in the characteristic between segentary lineage and non-segmentary lineage groups. The standard error is reported in parentheses and *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%,
%, and 1% levels.




    One of the balance tests that is worth mentioning is that we find balance for the traditional

reliance on pastoralism measure from Becker (2019). This helps alleviate the concern that seg-

mentary lineage organization might be correlated with a tradition of herding, which is known

to be associated with a ‘culture of honor’, which can lead to the escalation of violence and

conflict (Nisbett and Cohen, 1996, Grosjean, 2014). The one measure that is statistically different

between the two groups is the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local



                                                                                                         19
community.16 This is an important characteristic, especially given the existing evidence that this is

associated with better development outcomes today (Gennaioli and Rainer, 2007, Michalopoulos

and Papaioannou, 2013). Given this, we include this measure of historical state centralization in

our baseline set of covariates.


4. OLS Estimates

A. Baseline Estimates

We now turn to OLS estimates of the relationship between segmentary lineage organization and

conflict today. For this, we use the following estimating equation:


                                          yi = αc(i) + βIiSL + Xi0 Γ + εi ,                                         (1)


where i denotes ethnic groups and c countries. yi denotes one of our twelve measures of conflict

experienced by ethnic group i. IiSL is an indicator variable that equals one if ethnic group i is

traditionally organized into segmentary lineages and zero if it is not. αc(i) denotes country fixed

effects. Xi0 is a vector of ethnicity-level historical and geographic covariates. The geographic

controls are: the natural log of the land area occupied by the ethnic group, the natural log of

the minimum distance between the ethnic group centroid and a national border, an indicator

variable that equals one if the ethnic group is cut by a national border, average altitude, the

absolute value of latitude, longitude, average agricultural suitability, and the historical prevalence

of malaria measured using the frequency of the sickle cell gene. The historical controls are: pre-

industrial political centralization (levels of jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community),

pre-industrial economic development measured by the complexity of settlement patterns, which

is measured on a 1–8 integer scale, and an indicator variable that equals one if the group is

patrilineal.17 The coefficient of interest is β. A positive coefficient indicates that segmentary

lineage societies experience more conflict.

   Estimates of equation (1) are reported in Table 2. Each panel reports estimates for one of the

four conflict types: all conflicts, civil conflicts, non-civil conflicts, and within-group conflicts. Each

triplet of columns reports estimates for one of our three measures of conflict intensity: the natural
  16 The relationship between segmentary lineage and state centralization is negative and significant with a correlation
coefficient of −0.41.
  17 The details of the construction and measurement of each covariate is provided in the online Appendix.




                                                          20
                                  Table 2: Segmentary lineage and conflict: OLS estimates.
                                     (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)            (8)           (9)
Dependent Variable:                 ln (1+Deadly Conflict Incidents)                      ln (1+Conflict Deaths)                  ln (1+Months of Deadly Conflict)
                                                                                          Panel A: All Conflicts
Segmentary Lineage                   1.147***      1.146***       1.102***        1.627***        1.685***      1.439***        0.905***       0.890***    0.869***
                                      (0.294)       (0.217)        (0.245)         (0.467)         (0.375)       (0.420)         (0.240)        (0.176)     (0.195)
Jurisdictional Hierarchy                                          -0.0641                                         -0.303                                    -0.0133
                                                                   (0.122)                                       (0.186)                                   (0.0964)
Mean of Dep. Var.                       2.56          2.56           2.56            4.01            4.01          4.01            2.16           2.16        2.16
R-squared                              0.530         0.705          0.717           0.555           0.694         0.716           0.525          0.713       0.726
                                                                                         Panel B: Civil Conflicts
Segmentary Lineage                   0.819***      0.790***       0.611**         1.306***        1.383***       1.051**        0.704***       0.704***    0.577***
                                      (0.297)       (0.245)        (0.256)         (0.497)         (0.433)       (0.460)         (0.251)        (0.205)     (0.216)
Jurisdictional Hierarchy                                            -0.178                                       -0.347*                                     -0.112
                                                                   (0.122)                                       (0.184)                                   (0.0925)
Mean of Dep. Var.                       2.07          2.07           2.07            3.11            3.11          3.11            1.63           1.63        1.63
R-squared                              0.556         0.693          0.716           0.514           0.633         0.670           0.470          0.634       0.657
                                                                                       Panel C: Non-Civil Conflicts
Segmentary Lineage                   0.905***      0.893***       0.993***        1.513***        1.580***      1.637***        0.773***       0.765***    0.848***
                                      (0.244)       (0.189)        (0.218)         (0.407)         (0.317)       (0.371)         (0.214)        (0.164)     (0.185)
Jurisdictional Hierarchy                                            0.101                                         0.0552                                     0.0971
                                                                   (0.114)                                       (0.183)                                   (0.0996)
Mean of Dep. Var.                       2.02          2.02           2.02            3.05            3.05          3.05            1.67           1.67        1.67
R-squared                              0.584         0.730          0.742           0.518           0.681         0.693           0.524          0.705       0.721
                                                                                    Panel D: Within Group Conflicts
Segmentary Lineage                   0.773***      0.779***       0.800***        1.393***        1.363***      1.320***        0.664***       0.661***    0.684***
                                      (0.190)       (0.184)        (0.204)         (0.349)         (0.337)       (0.385)         (0.162)        (0.157)     (0.174)
Jurisdictional Hierarchy                                          -0.0399                                         -0.129                                    -0.0374
                                                                   (0.112)                                       (0.211)                                   (0.0956)
Mean of Dep. Var.                       1.27          1.27           1.27            2.20            2.20          2.20            1.13           1.13        1.13
R-squared                              0.586         0.679          0.697           0.576           0.650         0.673           0.583          0.689       0.703
Country FE                              Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
Geographic controls                      No           Yes            Yes              No             Yes            Yes             No            Yes          Yes
Historical controls                      No            No            Yes              No              No            Yes             No             No          Yes
Observations                            145           145            141             145             145           141             145            145         141
Notes : The unit of observation is an ethnic group. Along with the segmentary lineage variable, in columns 1, 4 and 7, we include country fixed effects. In
columns 2, 5 and 8, we add a set of 'geographic controls,' which include the log of the land area occupied by the ethnic group, the log of the minimum distance
between the ethnic group centroid and a national border, an indicator variable that equals one if the ethnic group is split by a national border, mean altitude,
absolute latitude, longitude, an agricultural suitability index, and the average sickle cell allele frequency in the ethnic group homeland. In columns 3, 6 and 9,
we add a set of 'historical controls,' which include historical political centralization (jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community), historical
settlement pattern complexity, and an indicator for patrilineal societies. The coefficient on the political centralization variable is displayed since it is of
independent interest. In Panel A, the dependent variables are constructed using all conflicts in the ACLED data; in Panel B they are constructed using civil
conflicts; in Panel C, they are constructed using non-civil conflicts; and in Panel D, they are constructed using within group conflicts. All dependent variables
are parameterized as ln(1+x). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.




log of the total number of deathly conflict incidents (columns 1–3), the natural log of the number

of conflict deaths (column 4–6), or the natural log of the number of months of deadly conflict

(columns 7–9). For each outcome variable, we report three specifications, each with a different

set of covariates. The first specification (in columns 1, 4, and 7) is the most parsimonious and

only includes country fixed effects. The second specification (in columns 2, 5, and 8) also controls

for the geographic covariates. The final specification (in columns 3, 6, and 9) also controls for

historical covariates.

   Across all 36 specifications, we estimate a positive and significant relationship between the

presence of segmentary lineage organization and conflict. In addition to being statistically signif-


                                                                                21
                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BIROMACHOLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LUO               AMBA




                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BARI




                                                                                                                                                       e(ln(1+Deadly Civil Conflict Incidents)|X)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MBUNDU                                SONGHAI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KIKUYU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MATAKAMEWE
   e(ln(1+Deadly Conflict Incidents)|X)
                                                                                               BIROM                                                                                                                                                        DOROBO      LENDU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TORO          SUMBWA        NANDI   GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LAMBA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AZANDE
                                                                                      MATAKAM                                                                                                                                                                NUER           ITSEKIRI
                                                                                                                         LENDU                                                                                               SHILLUK BENA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                KORANKO             TEMNE KONJODINKA               DUALA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IBO          MOBA
                                2

                                                                                      MBUNDU LUO ACHOLI BARI                                                                                                              KURAMA, GURE (NE)                          KWERE
                                                                                                             LAMBA                                                                                                                             LANGOKONGO              YORUBA
                                                                                                 EWE               AMBA SONGHAI                                                                                                          MUNDANG  ZULU     REGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NGURU LUGURU
                                                                                  KIKUYU  SUSU                              ITSEKIRI                                                                                      NDEBELE                 NYANJA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MAKONDE                GISU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ZIGULA          EDO
                                                                                                   ZULU          GA                  KISSI                                                                                                  POKOMO   GUSII
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TURKANA     NDEMBU
                                                                              SHILLUK      SUMBWA    TEMNE
                                                                                                         NANDI         MOBA
                                                                                                             DOROBODINKA
                                                                                                                      KWERE
                                                                                                                        YORUBA     DUALA                                                                               BEMBA NYORO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FIAKPE     HAYASUSULOZI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SUKUMA       BAMBARA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SINZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MADI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WOLOF        GBARI        FALI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IGBIRA     NYAKYUSA             TIV




                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                AZANDE                                                                                                          MASAI    DIGO    NGWATO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FANG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BALANTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KUNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MIJERTEIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ANUAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VAI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BUBI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RUANDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GURMA     IGALA
                                                                             TORO
                                                                                      BENA        SINZAKONGONUER
                                                                                                               TIV                                                                                                       LOTUKO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IBIBIO  BAKAKARI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LUBA            TENDA BAGIRMIGANDA                     KISSI
                                                                           KURAMA, GURE
                                                                                 MASAI
                                                                                  SUKUMA
                                                                                          MUNDANG
                                                                                            (NE)   NYANJA
                                                                                             MAKONDE
                                                                                                LANGO GUSII   KONJO
                                                                                                            IGALA GISU
                                                                                                            REGA
                                                                                                          IBO
                                                                                                                              EDO
                                                                                                                          SAGARA                                                                                       KATAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NKOLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AKYEM   NENCHAGA SANDAWE        YAO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TUMBUKA SHERBRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KANEMBU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PIMBWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KIPSIGI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       KARANGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IDOMA
                                                                        KATABNYORO  HAYA POKOMO      WOLOF              KARANGA
                                                                                                                          IDOMA                                                                                                             FIPA  MUM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SOTHO          DOGON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TEMCHOKWE
                                                                                                  TURKANA     NGURU
                                                                                                              YAKO                                                                                                                     IRAQW
                                                                                               BAMBARA   MADI GURENSI
                                                                                                                    LUGURU FALI                                                                              SONINKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          KABRE             NYAMWEZI  MENDE
                   0




                                                                                                  NGWATO
                                                                                                  FON
                                                                                                  FANG
                                                                                                  BALANTE
                                                                                                  KUNG
                                                                                                  MIJERTEIN
                                                                                                  ANUAK
                                                                                                  VAI
                                                                                                  BUBI
                                                                                                  RUANDA
                                                                                                  GURMA           GBARI
                                                                                                              NDEMBU
                                                                                                                ZIGULA                                                                                                                            MINIANKA
                                                                            KPELUBA
                                                                           NDEBELE
                                                                         FIA      CHAGANYAKYUSALOZILUGBARA
                                                                                                   KANEMBU       GANDA                                                                                                             YALUNKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BASABAMILEKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   KUKU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LUGBARA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 JERAWA,     GURENSI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CHAWAI   (SW) SAGARA SAFWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             YAKOTIKAR
                                                                          LOTUKO
                                                                        BEMBA       KUKU
                                                                               IGBIRA     DIGOTENDA YAO  SHERBRO
                                                                                                        BAGIRMI DOGON      KIPSIGI SAFWA                                                                                              MERU         NGBANDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       KONKOMBA
                                                              SONINKE   IBIBIONEN
                                                                             NYAMWEZI            TUMBUKA
                                                                                           BAMILEKEMINIANKA
                                                                                                    NGBANDI          CHOKWE
                                                                                                                          MONDARI                                                                                            AFO
                                                                         NKOLE              SANDAWEMUM  KONKOMBA  TEM                                                                                            MAMVU NUPE                                              MONDARI
                                                                                       MENDE
                                                                                          KUBA
                                                                                       MERU     PIMBWE
                                                           KABRE                    YALUNKA
                                                                                             FIPA    LUNGUCHAWAI TIKAR
                                                                                                  JERAWA,            (SW)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KUBA         ALUR
                                                                           NUPE         IRAQW SOTHO
                                                                      AKYEM BAKAKARI                   ALUR SOGA                                                                                                                   LUCHAZI TEITALUNGU         SOGA




                                                                                                                                                                -2
                                                                  MAMVU          KORANKO                                                                                                                                  LELE
                                                                              AFO
                                                                                               TEITA
        -2




                                                                           LELE      BASA
                                                                                    LUCHAZI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TOPOTHA
                                                                                                KAMBA

                                                                                      TOPOTHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              KAMBA
                             -4




                                                                                                                                                                              -4
                                                      -1                     -.5                0                    .5                       1                                                      -1                    -.5                 0                    .5                       1
                                                                                    e( Segmentary Lineage | X )                                                                                                                    e( Segmentary Lineage | X )
                                                      coef = 1.1016372, (robust) se = .24461294, t = 4.5                                                                                             coef = .61054682, (robust) se = .25619528, t = 2.38



                                                                                   (a) All conflicts.                                                                                                                         (b) Civil conflicts.
                                                  4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BIROM                 LENDU
   e(ln(1+Deadly Non-Civil Conflict Incidents)|X)




                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                       e(ln(1+Deadly Local Conflict Incidents)|X)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DINKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LAMBA          ITSEKIRI
                                                                                                  BIROM                   LENDU                                                                                                  KIKUYU                               YORUBA
                                                                                            MATAKAM                                                                                                                             MASAI            LUGBARA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EWE     NANDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GUSII    TIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LUO             GANDA
                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ZULU       NUER    KWERE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SAGARA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MOBA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GISU
                                                                                                             LAMBA DINKA                                                                                                                MUNDANG             GURENSI      SONGHAI
                                                                                  KIKUYU                                     ITSEKIRI                                                                                        SHILLUKMATAKAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SUSU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TURKANA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     YAO         AMBA IDOMA      SAFWA
                                                                                      MBUNDU LUO                                                                                                                       KATAB KORANKO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LUCHAZI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KUBA       TEMNE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NGBANDI      GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GBARI
                                                                                                   ZULU        BARI     YORUBA                                                                                                           BAMILEKE  WOLOF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SINZA  SHERBRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IBO   AZANDE        FALI
                                                                                                 EWE
                                                                                                   LUGBARA
                                                                                                         NANDI   GA KWERE   SONGHAI                                                                          SONINKE      KURAMA,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NYORO  GURE  (NE) MINIANKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NYAKYUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MBUNDU      MUM  BAGIRMI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NYANJA      BARI     KARANGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BENA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HAYA                                 MONDARI

                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                 MASAI                         TIV GISU   SAGARA
                                                                                                                       MOBA                                                                                                  NENSUKUMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NDEBELE               NGWATO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FANG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BALANTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                KUNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MIJERTEIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ANUAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VAI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BUBI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RUANDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GURMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           POKOMO    KONGO    ZIGULA KIPSIGI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DOROBO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ALURCHAWAI                    KISSI
                                                                        KATAB                                 NUER
                                                                                                      GUSII REGA
                                                                                                  SINZA          GANDA
                                                                                                             DOROBO                                                                                                                KUKU SUMBWA TUMBUKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                JERAWA,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LOZI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BAMBARA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            YAKO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NGURU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ACHOLI SOGA    (SW)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TIKAR     EDO
                                                                                           SUMBWA
                                                                                          MUNDANG  NYANJA IBO GURENSI           EDO DUALA                                                                                                     PIMBWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TENDA LUNGU        TEM
                                                                              SHILLUK
                                                                           KURAMA,SUKUMA
                                                                              NYORO  GURE (NE)
                                                                                                     TEMNE
                                                                                                     WOLOF
                                                                                                  TURKANA     KONJO
                                                                                                         SHERBRO   AMBAKARANGA
                                                                                                                  GBARI   IDOMA SAFWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FIA TOROCHAGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           KPE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BEMBA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LOTUKO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LELE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IBIBIO         MERUSANDAWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MAKONDE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LUGURU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CHOKWE        DUALA
                                                                                             MAKONDE   KONGO                   FALI   KISSI                                                                             NKOLE         IRAQW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IGBIRA MENDE FIPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LANGO         KONJO
                                                                               LUBA       SUSU
                                                                                             POKOMO           YAKO                                                                                        KABRE MAMVU                                       NDEMBU
                       0




                                                                             TOROKORANKO
                                                                                    HAYA
                                                                                      BENANYAKYUSA
                                                                                          KUBA    NGWATO
                                                                                                  FON
                                                                                                  FANG
                                                                                                  BALANTE
                                                                                                  KUNG
                                                                                                  MIJERTEIN
                                                                                                  ANUAK
                                                                                                  VAI
                                                                                                  BUBI
                                                                                                  RUANDA
                                                                                                  GURMA
                                                                                               BAMBARA  BAGIRMI
                                                                                                      ACHOLI    ZIGULA MONDARI                                                                                                     YALUNKA SOTHO KANEMBU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MADI   DOGON
                                                              SONINKE         NEN   KUKU
                                                                                  CHAGA        LOZI    YAO
                                                                                                   MINIANKA IGALA
                                                                                                              NGURU
                                                                                                               SOGA LUGURU                                                                                                NUPE                        KONKOMBA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IGALA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          REGA
                                                                           NDEBELE
                                                                        BEMBA       YALUNKA
                                                                             NYAMWEZI      BAMILEKE NGBANDI
                                                                                                        KONKOMBA
                                                                                                   KANEMBU
                                                                                               TENDA LUNGU      DOGON                                                                                                       NYAMWEZI KAMBA
                                                                         FIA
                                                                         NKOLE
                                                                        IBIBIO IGBIRA  MERU     PIMBWE
                                                                                                   MUM ALUR
                                                                                                 TUMBUKA MADI NDEMBU
                                                                                                                  TEMTIKAR KIPSIGI                                                                                   AKYEM AFO
                                                                            KPE
                                                                          LOTUKO                LANGO
                                                                                             FIPA
                                                                                            SANDAWE             AZANDE
                                                                                                                     CHOKWE                                                                                                   LUBA      DIGO
                                                           KABRE                       MENDE
                                                                                          DIGO JERAWA, CHAWAI (SW)
                                                                                    LUCHAZI
                                                                           NUPE
                                                                           LELE         IRAQW
                                                                                                 SOTHO                                                                                                                                 BASA        TEITA
                                                                                                                                                                -2



                                                                      AKYEM AFO                                                                                                                                                    BAKAKARI
                                                                  MAMVU                        TEITA
                                                                                           KAMBA
            -2




                                                                                BAKAKARI
                                                                                     BASA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TOPOTHA

                                                                                      TOPOTHA
                             -4




                                                                                                                                                                              -4




                                                      -1                     -.5                0                    .5                       1                                                      -1                    -.5                 0                    .5                       1
                                                                                    e( Segmentary Lineage | X )                                                                                                                    e( Segmentary Lineage | X )
                                                      coef = .99332945, (robust) se = .21809748, t = 4.55                                                                                            coef = .80006445, (robust) se = .20367834, t = 3.93



                                                                           (c) Non-civil conflicts.                                                                                                                      (d) Intra-group conflict.

Figure 3: The figure reports partial correlation plots where the dependent variable is the natural log of
the number of conflict incidences of the reported conflict type. All specifications include country fixed
effects, geographic covariates, and historical covariates.


icant, the estimates are also quantitatively meaningful. For example, according to the estimates for

the number of deadly conflict incidents (columns 1–3 of panel A), a segmentary lineage society

experiences 104–116% more incidents than a society that does not have a segmentary lineage

organization. The estimated effects also remain very similar as we add additional covariates. This

is important since it informs the likelihood that unobservables are driving our estimates.18

   In Figure 3, we report partial correlation plots for each type of conflict, measured by number of

incidents, and from the specification that includes country fixed effects, the geographic controls,

and the historical controls (column 3). For each conflict type, the relationship appears general

and to not be driven by a small number of influential observations.
  18 Formal  tests of this are reported in Appendix Table B4 of the online Appendix. They indicate that it is unlikely
that the estimated effects are due to unobservable characteristics.



                                                                                                                                                  22
   An important assumption in our baseline estimates is that the fact that ethnic group i has

segmentary lineages only affects conflict within group i’s own territory. However, it is possible

that segmentary lineage groups could induce conflict not only in their homelands but also in

the land of adjacent groups (e.g., if they launch attacks into neighboring territories). We test for

such spillover effects by augmenting equation (1) with the addition of two variables intended to

capture such spillover effects. The first is SLN
                                               i
                                                 eighbor
                                                         = ∑k∈Ki IkSL , where k indexes neighbors, Ki
is the set of neighbors of ethnic group i, and IkSL is an indicator that equals one if neighbor k is

segmentary lineage. The second is Non SLN
                                        i
                                          eighbor
                                                  = ∑k∈Ki IkNon SL , where IkNon SL is an indicator
variable that equals one if neighbor k is not a segmentary lineage group. We are able to include

both measures in equation (1) due to ethnic groups that are uncoded and therefore not defined

as segmentary lineage or non-segmentary lineage. Thus, SLN
                                                         i
                                                           eighbor
                                                                   + Non SLN
                                                                           i
                                                                             eighbor
                                                                                     6= 1. The
measures capture the relationship between the average segmentary lineage status of an ethnic

group’s neighbors and conflict in the ethnic group’s territory. The estimates, which are reported

in Appendix Table A2, show no evidence that being next to a segmentary lineage group increases

conflict.19 In none of the 48 specifications that we estimate is either spillover measure statistically

different from zero. In addition, the direct effect of segmentary lineage on conflict remains very

similar in magnitude and significance when we account for spillovers.

   Our measure of segmentary lineage organization is comprised of three parts, each of which

must be satisfied for a group to be coded as having segmentary lineages. Thus, the variable can be

thought of as a triple interaction between three indicator variables, each of which measures one

of the three parts of the definition. We check the sensitivity of the estimated effects to explicitly

controlling for indicators for each of the components of the definition. The estimates, which are

reported in Appendix Table A3, show that the importance of segmentary lineage organizations

is robust to controlling for each component of the definition. This provides reassurance of the

importance of segmentary lineage organization itself and not just because it is correlated with,

for example, unilineal descent.

   Our construction of the segmentary lineage organization variable relied on direct coding using

existing ethnographic sources. In the end, we are able to identify whether or not segmentary

lineages were present for 145 ethnic groups. While the information needed for the coding is not
  19 The table has one fewer observation than for our baseline estimates. This is because one of the groups in our

sample is an island and so has no immediately adjacent ethnic groups.




                                                       23
present in the Ethnographic Atlas, an alternative strategy is to use what information is available

from the source to create an imputed proxy measure of segmentary lineage organization that

is available for a wider range of ethnic groups. To do this, we identified the variables in the

Ethnographic Atlas that most closely correspond to each component of the definition of segmen-

tary lineage organization: (1) variables v17 and v19, which report the largest matrilineal and

patrilineal kin group; (2) variable v15, which contains information about whether communities

are segmented and whether clans exist or not; and (3) variable v12, which contains information

about the local of post-marital residence.

   To construct a proxy measure of segmentary lineage organization from these variables, we

first create a set of indicator variables, one for each category of each chosen variable, including a

category for when the variable is coded as missing in the Ethnographic Atlas.20 We then estimate

the relationship between our ethnography-coded segmentary lineage variable and all fixed effects

and their interactions using the study’s sample of 145 ethnic groups. We use a restricted set

of predictors using LASSO with the extended Bayesian information criterion (EBIC) to predict

the prevalence of segmentary lineage organization for all African ethnic groups that are in the

Ethnographic Atlas.21 The correlation between our baseline measure and the imputed measure is

0.65, suggesting that the variables in the Ethnographic Atlas have predictive power. The distribution

of the imputed measure, which is continuous, is shown in Appendix Figure A1. The distribution

highlights a conceptual shortcoming of the measure. While for many ethnic groups the value

lies close to zero or close to one, for many the measure takes on an intermediate value close to

0.5. Given that the characteristic of interest is discrete, these are difficult to interpret. With this

shortcoming in mind, we estimate the relationship between conflict and our imputed segmentary

lineage measure, using an extended sample that includes all of Africa. The estimates, which are

reported in Appendix Table A4, show that using this alternative strategy yields estimates that are

qualitatively identical to our baseline OLS estimates.


B. Robustness and Sensitivity Checks

We now turn to an examination of the sensitivity and robustness of our baseline OLS estimates.

Our baseline estimates identify an ethnic group as participating in a conflict by the location of the
 20 This   is because a number of observations (68 of 473) have missing values for at least one variable.
 21 The    LASSO coefficients are reported in online Appendix Table B3.



                                                            24
conflict. An alternative strategy is to identify a group as participating in a conflict if the ethnic

group is explicitly mentioned in the description of the participants of the conflict or conflict

summary in the ACLED data. Since the ACLED data infrequently mention the ethnicity of those

participating in the conflict, this strategy means that a large number of conflicts are not matched to

an ethnic group. Specifically, only 9.1% of the conflicts in our baseline can be matched using this

method. With this important caveat in mind, we report estimates using this alternative method

in columns 1–3 of Appendix Table A5. We also check the robustness of our estimates to the use

of data from an alternative source, the Uppsala Conflict Data Program - Georeferenced Event Dataset

(UCDP GED), which has also been widely used in studies of conflict in sub-Saharan Africa (e.g.,

Miguel et al., 2004, Brückner and Ciccone, 2010).22 The estimates are reported in columns 4–6 of

Appendix Table A5. For both alternative strategies for measuring conflict, we continue to find a

sizeable positive and significant relationship between segmentary lineage and conflict.

   We next check the sensitivity of our estimates to measures of historical conflict, which we

construct using data from Besley and Reynal-Querol (2014) or Jaques (2007). Our estimates of

interest, which are reported in Appendix Table A6, remain significant and their magnitudes

similar when we account for the historical conflict.

   Another potential concern is that our results may be driven by a small number of events

with very intensive fighting that may be particularly influential in the regressions. Although

the partial correlation plots reported in Figures 3a–3d do not appear to show that the estimates

are due to a small number of influential observations, we test this formally by re-estimating our

baseline specification after dropping observations identified as influential using Cook’s distance

or observations with values of conflict in the top five percent. The estimates, which are reported

in panels A and B of Appendix Table A7, show that both strategies yield estimates that are similar

to the baseline estimates. Given our use of location to link conflicts to ethnic groups, in panel C,

we check the robustness of our estimates to omitting conflicts for which the location is known

only at the province level and not a smaller administrative unit. Such conflicts comprise 4.75% of

conflicts. The estimates of interest remain robust.

   An alternative estimation strategy to OLS is to use propensity-score matching to compare each
  22 There are a number of differences between this data source and the ACLED source that we use. First, this source
begins in 1991, six years earlier than the ACLED data. Second, unlike the ACLED data, this source has a minimum
mortality threshold (25 fatalities in a calendar year) that has to be met for the conflict to appear in the dataset. Thus,
checking the robustness of our findings to this alternative data source also checks the robustness of our estimates to
using a slightly different time period and a higher death threshold.



                                                           25
segmentary lineage society to the non-segmentary lineage society that is most similar, based on

a range of observable characteristics.23 Estimates, matching using either location, the baseline set

of geographic and historical controls, or the baseline set of controls with the added condition that

the matched pair must have the same level of jurisdictional hierarchy, are reported in Appendix

Table A8. The matching procedure generates estimates that are very similar to our baseline OLS

estimates. The last check that we perform is to use negative binomial and Poisson models in our

estimation. The estimates, which are reported in Appendix Table A9, show that these alternative

estimators yield very similar estimates.


C. Heterogeneous effects

We now turn to the question of whether the effects of segmentary lineage organization are

differential depending on the characteristics of the country that the ethnic group is predomi-

nantly within. The estimates are reported in Appendix Table A10. Examining heterogeneity

by a country’s British legal origin, being a former British colony, having a rural independence

movement, per capita income, its polity measure, rule of law, and ethnic homogeneity, we fail to

find evidence of heterogeneity.

   We also test for differential effects depending on ethnicity characteristics. We examine: an

ethnic group’s historical intensity of slave exports, its traditional level of jurisdictional hierarchy

beyond the local community, the presence of traditional village elections, an indicator for the

ethnic group being split by a national border, the presence of colonial missions, the presence of

a colonial railway, an indicator for Islam being the majority religion, the presence of a capital

city, the presence of diamond deposits, and the presence of petroleum. The estimates, which are

reported in Appendix Table A11, indicate heterogeneity for one of the eleven characteristics. If

there is a capital city within the ethnic group’s territory, then the effect of segmentary lineage

organization is not statistically different from zero. This is consistent with Michalopoulos and

Papaioannou (2014)’s finding that traditional ethnic characteristics are less important close to

capital cities, where national institutions matter more.

   The final form of heterogeneity that we examine is motivated by prior evidence of a rela-

tionship between rainfall and conflict within sub-Saharan Africa (e.g., Miguel et al., 2004, Rogall,

2014, Konig et al., 2017). Building on these findings, we test whether the effects of adverse rainfall
 23 We   use nearest neighbor matching based on Mahalanobis distance.


                                                        26
shocks differ by segmentary lineage status. Using rainfall data from the Tropical Rainfall Mea-

suring Mission (TRMM) satellite, which beginning in 1998, are available at a 0.25-by-0.25-degree

spatial resolution and at three-hour intervals, we calculate the average daily precipitation (in

thousands of millimeters per day) experienced by each ethnic group in each month of our sample

period. We then estimate:
                  6
        yi,t =   ∑ γ j yi,t−j + β1 Neg Shocki,t + β2 IiSL + β3 Neg Shocki,t × IiSL + Xe0 Ω + αt + εi,t ,   (2)
                 j =1

where i continues to index ethnic groups and t months from January 1998 to December 2014. yi,t

denotes one of our measures of conflict intensity in the territory of ethnic group i during month t.

Neg Shocki,t is a measure of adverse rainfall shocks experienced by ethnic group i in month t. This

is calculated as the average monthly rainfall of ethnic group i over the sample period minus the

rainfall experienced by ethnic group i in month t; thus, a higher number means less rainfall. IiSL

is our segmentary lineage indicator variable. Equation (2) also includes time-period fixed effects

αt and six lags of the dependent variable, ∑6j =1 γ j yi,t−j . Given the high frequency of the panel, it

is important to account for lagged conflict. We include all lags of the dependent variable that are

statistically significant, which is six. The coefficient of interest is β3 , which tells us whether the

effects of adverse rainfall shocks are different for segmentary lineage societies.

   Estimates of equation (2) are reported in Appendix Table A12. Consistent with previous

estimates, we find that adverse rainfall shocks are associated with greater conflict (e.g., Miguel et

al., 2004). However, in line with other studies, we also find that this relationship is not always

significant (e.g., Ciccone, 2013, Buhaug, Nordkvelle, Bernauer, Bohmelt, Brzoska, Busby, Ciccone,

Fjelde, Gartzke, Gleditsch, Goldstone, Hegre, Holtermann, Koubi, Link, Link, Lujala, O’Loughlin,

Raleigh, Scheffran, Schilling, Smith, Theisen, Tol, Urdal and van Uexkull, 2014). Importantly, we

find that the weak positive relationship between adverse rainfall and conflict masks systematic

heterogeneity. The estimated effect of adverse rainfall is much stronger for segmentary lineage

groups. For non-segmentary lineage groups, the estimated relationships are not statistically

different from zero.




                                                       27
                         !    Conflict Incidence

                              Segmentary Lineage = 0

                              Segmentary Lineage = 1
                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                            !!

                              10km Grid Cell                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                !                               !           !
                                                                                                                                                       !                                                    !
                                                                                                                                          !             !
                                                                                                                               ! !       !                                           !
                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                       !   ! !                     !                                                                        !
                                                                                                                           !       !
                                                                                                                             !                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                             !                            !                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !     !
                                                                                            ! !
                                                                                            !
                                                                                            !                                     !                                                                                          !!
                                                                                            !               !           !!         !!
                                                                                                 !         !                                 !                                                                              !!
                                                                                          !
                                                                                          !     !        !              ! !         !               !
                                                                                        !!!                                                                                      !                                                !
                                                                                        !            ! !!              ! ! !                                                                                        !
                                                                                       !! ! !                          ! !!     !!!
                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                          !                         ! !!
                                                                                      !                   ! !!      !     !           !! !                                      !                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                      !                        !                      !
                                                                                                                !
                                                                                     !                        ! !!           !! !! !              !                         !                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                            !               !
                                                                         !           !                   !!!
                                                                                                         !                    !        !                                !
                                                                                     !
                                                                                     !                                       !!
                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                   !
                                                         !                         !!              ! !                           !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                    !                ! !                                  !
                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                         !
                                                                     !        !                            ! !!               !! !      !
                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                           !           !!                          !!!          !
                                                                  !!        !                                              !
                                                     ! !         !             !              !
                                                        !             !          !                 !                                              !
                                                                                                                ! !                          !!! !
                                                           ! !                                                       !! !!
                                                                        !!                                           !                       !
                                                                         !!      !                !
                                                                                                  !               !                        !
                                                                                                  ! !
                                                                                                  !                    !
                                                             !           !                                           !
                                                             !                 !                 ! !!! !
                                                                              !!                           !              !
                                                            !                                         !              !
                                                                                            !      !    !!                       !
                                          !                              !            !
                                                              !                                                                                   !
                                                                             !          !                 !                                       !
                                                      !             !!                                                                              !
                                                       ! !                                                                   !
                                                   !                !!!
                                                        !                                                            !     !! !                                                                             !
                                                                   !
                                                                !!
                                                                                                              !                                                                                 !
                                              !                 !        !!              !                                                                                              !
                                                          !!! ! !          !                           !
                                                  !               !                                                           !                                                          !
                                                                                                                            ! !                                                 !                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                      !         !
                                                                                                                                        ! !
                                                           !          !!                                                        !
                                                          ! !                   !                        !                                              !
                                                                              ! !!                                 !                          !!
                                                                 !  !
                                                                 !! !                                                       !                                       !           !
                                                                 !                           !   !                                                                      !
                                                                                                         !     !                                                                 !
                                                                                         !                                                !




                              Ê
                                                             !        !                 !!
                                                                                        !            !     !                                                !                   !
                                                                                                         !!! ! !           !
                                                                 !!       !    !
                                                                               !                                                    !                                                                   !
                                                                                        !                !!!
                                                                                            !                                             !     !                       !
                                                                          !                  !                                                 !
                                                                                    !
                                                                                        ! !! !
                                                                          ! !
                       0 510 20 30 40 50 60
                                                                                     !! !                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                !           !!                                                                                      !
                                                                                      !
                                                                                      !
                                                                                        !                                                                        !!                 !
                                                                              ! ! !   ! !
                                                                                   ! !    !
                             Kilometers
                                                                                    !!! ! ! !
                                                                                    ! !! ! !                                                                !
                                                                                  ! !




Figure 4: An illustration of the RD setting: ethnicity pairs, deadly conflict incidents, and 10km grid-
cells. The two segmentary lineage ethnic groups shown are Ambo (top) and Konjo (bottom), and the two
non-segmentary lineage groups shown are Toro (top) and Nkole (bottom) (all in Western Uganda).



5. Spatial Regression-Discontinuity Estimates

A. Baseline Estimates

Despite the robustness of our OLS estimates and the fact that our findings are similar when

we account for a range of observable characteristics, there remains the concern that there are

unobservables that may be biasing our estimates. For example, if ethnic groups have a persistent

unobservable propensity to engage in conflict and if this affected whether ethnic groups adopted

a segmentary lineage form of social organization in the past, then this unobservable trait could

bias our estimates of interest. In this case, we would observe a relationship between segmentary

lineage systems and conflict today even if no causal relationship exists. These unobservable traits

could originate from a range of different sources, including the physical environment or historical

experiences. Similarly, there may be unobservable contemporary factors, like the extent to which

the rule of law is able to reach more remote locations from the capital city or the quality of

transportation and communication infrastructure. These, and similar factors, might have direct

effects on conflict.


                                                                                                                           28
   Given this possibility, we also implement an alternative estimation strategy. Since unobservable

factors are, by definition, unobservable, the strategy we undertake is to examine and compare

locations that are geographically close, but where one location is inhabited by a segmentary

lineage society and the other by a society without segmentary lineages. For this analysis, a

10km-by-10km grid-cell is the unit of observation and the sample consists of grid-cells within

pairs of contiguous ethnic groups where one ethnicity has segmentary lineages and the other

does not. Figure 4 illustrates the setup, showing grid-cells and pairs of contiguous ethnic groups,

one of which has segmentary lineages and the other does not. The figure also shows the locations

of deadly conflict incidents.

   Our strategy is to use a regression discontinuity (RD) estimation method that restricts the sam-

ple to grid-cells that are sufficiently close to the ethnic boundaries and estimates the causal effect

of segmentary lineage organization on the incidence of conflict using the estimated difference in

conflict at the ethnic boundary. The benefit of this strategy is that it accounts for unobservable

factors that vary smoothly across space. Therefore, as long as the determinants of unobservable

traits – like geography, history (including the effects of historical conflict), idiosyncratic shocks,

state presence etc. – vary smoothly, the unobservable traits will be accounted for by the RD

strategy.

   Our RD estimating equation is as follows:

                                                                     0
                                            (i) + f (locationip ) + Zi Γ + εip
                             yip = ωp + γIeSL                                                          (3)


where i indexes a 10-kilometer grid-cell, e ethnicities (80 in total), and p ethnicity pairs where

one ethnic group has segmentary lineages and the other does not (68 in total). yip is a measure

of the extent of conflict in grid-cell i which is within ethnicity pair p. IeSL
                                                                              (i) is an indicator variable

that equals one if cell i belongs to the ancestral homeland of an ethnic group e that traditionally

had a segmentary lineage organization. f (locationip ) denotes a polynomial that controls for a

smooth function of the geographic location of grid cells. In our baseline specification, we use a

location’s Euclidian distance from the border as the running variable, and, following Gelman and

Imbens (2014), use a local linear specification, estimated separately on both sides of the border.

We also report estimates using several other functional forms. ωp denotes fixed effects for each

ethnicity-pair. The vector Zi0 denotes a vector of covariates that includes country fixed effects, as

well as the following set of grid-cell level geographical controls: elevation, agricultural suitability,


                                                    29
and an indicator if the grid-cell is intersected by a national border.24 The sample includes all grid

cells of all pairs of ethnic groups that share a border and where one has segmentary lineages

and the other does not.25 The sample is further restricted to grid-cells that are within a certain

distance of the border of the two ethnic groups, either 60, 80, or 100 kilometers.

    As with the OLS, the RD strategy estimates the effects of a group’s social organization on

conflict in its territory. Therefore, the estimation will not capture, and might even be biased by,

effects on conflicts that occur outside of the ethnic group’s territory. Given this, as before, we will

examine the effects on the same range of conflict types, including localized conflicts for which we

expect all fighting to occur within the territory of the participants. At first glance, it might seem

unclear as to whether an RD estimator is appropriate for civil conflicts since the fighting might

not occur in the territory of the ethnic group participating in the conflict. While our view is that

we should let the data speak on this issue, ex ante, there is reason to expect civil conflicts to occur

in the territory of the insurgents. Anecdotal accounts suggest that segmentary lineage groups

are able to better mobilize against the government and more effectively attacks on government

forces (e.g., Stearns, 2013). The government forces then retaliate, which tends to be within the

territory of the segmentary lineage groups. Thus, even with civil conflicts, one may observe a

discontinuity at the boundaries of segmentary lineage groups.

    As a first step, we first verify the validity of the Murdock (1959) ethnic boundaries that we

use in the RD analysis. An important assumption when using the ethnic boundaries is that they

coincide with actual discontinuities in ethnic affiliation today. We verify this by examining how

ethnic affiliation changes at ethnicity boundaries using data from rounds 3–6 of the Afrobarom-

eter Surveys, which record the ethnicity of respondents, as well as their location of residence.

Combining this with the ethnicity map from Murdock (1959), we examine whether there is a

discontinuity ethnic affiliation at the boundaries of the ethnicity pairs in our sample. Estimates

of this are reported in Figure 5. The y-axis displays the fraction of the population in a bin that

are a member of the segmentary lineage society whose border we are examining and the x-axis

is distance in kilometers from the border, with positive numbers indicating distances inside of

the segmentary lineage territory and negative numbers indicating distances outside of it. We find

that there is a discontinuous change in the fraction of the population that report that they are
  24 Details,
            including sources of these measures, are provided in the online Appendix.
  25 If
      an ethnic group is adjacent to more than one ethnic group of different treatment status, then the ethnic group
can be a part of multiple pairs.



                                                        30
                            Share Respondents Belonging to the Pair's SL Society
                              0         .2          .4          .6           .8



                                                                                   -150   -100   -50          0          50   100   150
                                                                                                   Distance to Border (km)



Figure 5: This graph presents the relationship between self-reported ethnicity and geographic location
based on survey data from Rounds 3–6 of the Afrobarometer Survey. Data are aggregated for all borders
between segmentary lineage and non-segmentary lineage societies in our sample. The x-axis reports
geographic distance. Positive values imply kilometers into the territory of the segmentary lineage society
and negative values are kilometers into the non-segmentary lineage society. The y-axis measures the
fraction of the population at each distance that identifies as being a member of the segmentary lineage
group.



members of the segmentary lineage group precisely at the border.26

   The next step of the analysis is to examine the raw data for the RD sample. Figures 6a–6d show

bin scatterplots (with 20 bins) of the unconditional relationship between each of the four types of

conflict and the distance from the ethnicity boundary. Even in the raw data, a discontinuity at the

border is apparent. We observe a discontinuous increase in conflict on the segmentary lineage

side of the border.

   We next turn to the full RD estimates. Estimates of equation (3), for each of our three conflict

measures (incidents, deaths, and months), are reported in Table 3. For each outcome, we report

three specifications, each in a different column. In the first, we only include ethnicity pair

fixed effects; in the second, we add country fixed effects; and in the third, we add the set of

geographic controls. Each panel of the table reports estimates for a different type of conflict,

either all conflicts, civil conflict, non-civil conflicts, and within-group conflicts. All estimates

use a restricted sample of grid cells within 60km of the ethnicity-pair border. We find that in

every specification, and irrespective of the measure of conflict, the estimated effect of segmentary

lineage systems on conflict is positive and statistically significant. We also find that for each

  26In Appendix Figure A2, we report the relationship for each round of the Afrobarometer separately. In all rounds,
we see a sharp discontinuity at the ethnic boundaries.



                                                                                                         31
                                                                                                                                       .12
                                  .14




                                                                                                                   log(1+Deadly Civil Conflict Incidents)
                                                                                                                                                     .1
              log(1+Deadly Conflict Incidents)
                                         .12




                                                                                                                                        .08
                              .1




                                                                                                                             .06
                     .08




                                                                                                                     .04
            .06                   .04




                                                                                                                                       .02
                                                         -150   -100     -50          0          50   100   150                                             -150   -100      -50          0          50   100   150
                                                                           Distance to Border (km)                                                                             Distance to Border (km)


                                                                       (a) All conflicts.                                                                                 (b) Civil conflicts.
                                  .07




                                                                                                                                       .03
            log(1+Deadly Non-Civil Conflict Incidents)
                                               .06




                                                                                                                   log(1+Deadly Intra-Group Conflict)
                                                                                                                                             .025
                                    .05




                                                                                                                                     .02
                          .04




                                                                                                                           .015
                 .03




                                                                                                                   .01
                                  .02




                                                                                                                                       .005




                                                         -150   -100     -50          0          50   100   150                                             -150   -100      -50          0          50   100   150
                                                                           Distance to Border (km)                                                                             Distance to Border (km)


                                                                   (c) Non-civil conflicts.                                                                        (d) Within-group conflict.

Figure 6: This figure presents a binscatter plot (with 20 bins) of the unconditional relationship between
conflict incidence and distance from the border. The y-axis reports the natural log of one plus the number
of deadly conflict incidents for each of the four different types of conflict. The x-axis reports distance
(in kilometers) from the borders between segmentary lineage and non-segmentary lineage societies. The
border is at kilometer 0, and positive values indicate kilometers in the territories of segmentary lineage
societies.


outcome, the magnitude of the estimated effect is similar in the different specifications.27

   According to the estimated RD coefficients, segmentary lineage organization is associated

with an increase in conflict of 0.08 to 0.10 standard deviations.28 These estimates are smaller

than those from the cross-ethnicity OLS regressions (reported in Table 2). According to the OLS

estimates, segmentary lineage organization is associated with an increase in conflict of 0.33 to 0.62

standard deviations. Thus, the magnitudes of the OLS estimates are much larger than those from

the RD estimates. One explanation for this difference is that the local estimate of segmentary

lineage organization close to the border is smaller due to spillover effects. Being close to a
 27 The   partial correlation plots for the RD estimates are reported in Appendix Figure A3.
 28 See   online Appendix Tables B1 and B2 for summary statistics.




                                                                                                              32
                              Table 3: Segmentary lineage and conflict: RD estimates.
                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)
                                                  Sample: Observations Less Than 60 km from Ethnic Boundary
                                                   Linear Running Variable in Euclidean Distance to the Border
 Dependent Variable:       ln (1+Deadly Conflict Incidents)            ln (1+Conflict Deaths)           ln (1+Months of Deadly Conflict)


                                                                      Panel A: All Conflicts
 Segmentary Lineage       0.0420***    0.0373**     0.0378**     0.0862*** 0.0791*** 0.0805***           0.0323**    0.0283**     0.0287**
                          (0.0158)     (0.0153)     (0.0152)     (0.0283) (0.0283) (0.0278)              (0.0128)    (0.0126)     (0.0124)
 R-squared                  0.095        0.122       0.122         0.084        0.088       0.088         0.094        0.116        0.116


                                                                      Panel B: Civil Conflicts
 Segmentary Lineage       0.0301**     0.0263**     0.0263**     0.0563**     0.0503**     0.0505**      0.0237**    0.0201** 0.0200**
                          (0.0134)     (0.0125)     (0.0124)     (0.0238)     (0.0238)     (0.0235)      (0.0102)    (0.00981) (0.00979)
 R-squared                  0.103        0.139        0.139        0.088        0.092        0.092         0.101       0.132     0.132


                                                                    Panel C: Non-Civil Conflicts
 Segmentary Lineage       0.0253*** 0.0237*** 0.0241***          0.0600*** 0.0570*** 0.0579***          0.0223***    0.0211**    0.0214***
                          (0.0088)     (0.0087)     (0.0086)     (0.0175)     (0.0168)     (0.0166)      (0.0082)    (0.0081)     (0.0080)
 R-squared                  0.047        0.050        0.050        0.044        0.047        0.048         0.050       0.052        0.052


                                                                 Panel D: Within Group Conflicts
 Segmentary Lineage       0.0133**     0.0130**     0.0130**     0.0302**     0.0286**     0.0288**      0.0103*     0.0100*      0.0100*
                          (0.0058)     (0.0059)     (0.0058)     (0.0129)     (0.0126)     (0.0124)      (0.0052)    (0.0053)     (0.0052)
 R-squared                  0.035        0.036        0.036        0.034        0.035        0.036         0.036       0.037        0.038
 Ethnicity Pair FE            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
 Country FE                   No           Yes          Yes           No          Yes           Yes          No           Yes          Yes
 Geographic Controls          No           No           Yes           No           No           Yes          No           No           Yes
 Ethnic Groups                80           80           80            80           80           80            80          80            80
 Observations               10,739       10,739       10,739        10,739       10,739       10,739        10,739     10,739        10,739
 Notes: The unit of observation is a 10km-by-10km grid cell. In columns 1-3, the outcome variable is the number of conflicts that
 resulted in at least one death; in columns 4-6, the dependent variable is the number of conflict deaths; and in columns 7-9, the
 dependent variable is the number of months during the sample period with at least one conflict, all parameterized as ln(1+x). All
 regressions include a linear polynomial in distance to the border and ethnic group pair fixed effects (68 pairs total). Columns 2-3, 5-
 6, and 8-9 also include country fixed effects and columns 3, 6, and 9 include a set of geographic controls: elevation, agricultural
 suitability, and an indicator variable that equals one if a grid cell intersects with a national border. In Panel A, the dependent
 variables are constructed using all conflicts in the ACLED data; in Panel B, they are constructed using civil conflicts; in Panel C, they
 are constructed using non-civil conflicts; and in Panel D, they are constructed using within-group conflicts. Standard errors,
 clustered at the ethnicity level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.




segmentary lineage group may also increase conflict. Consistent with this interpretation, Figure

6 and Appendix Figure A3 show that it is often the case that within the non-segmentary lineage

territory conflict is higher closer to the boundary. However, we found no evidence of spillover

effects in our OLS analysis. Thus, it remains unclear to what extent spillovers can explain this

difference.

   The difference might also be explained by the fact that, as shown in Figure 5, close to the border

within segmentary lineage territory, much less than 100% of the population actually belongs

to a segmentary lineage group. We investigate this by estimating the relationship between the


                                                                     33
share of the population that belongs to a segmentary lineage society and conflict using a “fuzzy”

RD design, where the segmentary lineage indicator IeSL
                                                     (i) is used as an instrument for the actual

population share. Because we require information on ethnic distribution of the population, the

sample is restricted to grid-cells that individuals from the Afrobarometer. The 2SLS fuzzy RD

estimates, which are reported in Appendix Table A13 along with the baseline RD estimates using

the same sample, imply much larger causal effects of segmentary lineage organization. The

fuzzy RD estimates are consistently 3.5 times larger than the OLS estimates. Thus, much of

the difference between the RD and OLS estimates can be explained by imperfect compliance of

individuals to the ethnicity boundaries.


B. Validity and Sensitivity Checks

We now check the sensitivity of our estimates to a range of robustness checks, which include:

alternative specifications for the running variable, different restrictions on the window of ob-

servations that are included in the sample, and estimation using Poisson or negative binomial

models. The estimates are reported in Appendix Table A14, where each column reports estimates

using a different restriction on the range of observations included in the sample (60km, 80km,

or 100km), and each panel reports different running variables and estimators.29 In panel A, for

reference, we report estimates for the baseline specification from Table 3. In panels B and C, we

use the baseline running variable, but use a negative binomial and Poisson estimator. In panels

D to I, we report estimates using a series of additional running variables, including latitude and

longitude (and their interaction) instead of Euclidean distance, which allows us to control more

directly for features that vary over two-dimensional space. In panel D, we include the baseline

running variable interacted with 14 cluster indicator variables, where a cluster is defined as a set

of contiguous ethnic groups. Thus, in this specification, the coefficient on the running variable

is allowed to differ for different ethnic groups in the same region. In panel E, rather than using

the distance from the border as the running variable, we use latitude and longitude and interact

both with the 14 cluster indicator variables. In panel F, we include quadratic polynomials in

latitude and longitude, with each component of the polynomial interacted with the 14 cluster

indicators. Panels G–I are equivalent to panels D–F, except instead of interacting distance or
  29 The estimates are for total conflicts. The estimates for civil conflicts, non-civil conflicts, and within-group conflicts
are similarly robust.




                                                             34
latitude and longitude with 14 cluster indicator variables, we interact them with 68 pair indicator

variables. Although these are demanding specifications (the running variable in Panel I, for

example, consists of 340 variables) by allowing the running variable to vary for each ethnicity

pair we are able to control for specific conflict patterns around each border segment. In the

end, the estimates using any of these alternative specifications are similar to the baseline RD

estimates. The estimated coefficients all remain positive and similar in magnitude, and in nearly

every specification, they remain statistically significant.

   An additional robustness check that we perform concerns the precision of the location data

for conflicts. This is particularly important for the RD estimates since they are derived from

differences in conflict intensity between areas that are geographically close. Thus, we re-estimate

equation (3) after excluding conflict incidents for which only the province of the conflict is known

and nothing finer. These low-precision conflicts comprie 4.75% of observations in the ACLED

dataset. The estimates, which are reported in Appendix Table A15, show that our estimates are

nearly identical when these observations are omitted.

   One assumption of the RD approach is that unobservables vary smoothly across the borders.

Although this is impossible to test directly, we glean evidence about the validity of this assump-

tion by estimating whether there appears to be a discontinuity at the border for the following

observable variables: elevation, slope, average temperature, the presence of a body of water,

suitability for the cultivation of cereals,30 the percentage of land that is currently under cultivation,

the presence of petroleum, the presence of diamonds, the number of mission stations during the

early colonial period, an indicator for the presence of a colonial railway, and an indicator for the

presence of a pre-colonial explorer route.31 We check for discontinuities by estimating equation (3)

with each variable as the dependent variable. Table A16 reports estimates using the specification

from column 2 of Table 3. For each of the eleven variables, the coefficient on the segmentary

lineage indicator is always small in magnitude and it is never statistically different from zero.

   Although we find no evidence of discontinuities in geographic or historical factors, there

remains the concern that other ethnic characteristics, besides segmentary lineage organization,

may also vary discontinuously at the boundaries. To threaten the validity of our RD estimates,

any other ethnic differences must have an independent effect on contemporary conflict. To check
  30 Cereals include: wheat, wetland rice, dryland rice, maize, barley, rye, pearl millet, foxtail millet, sorghum, oat, and

buckwheat.
  31 See the online Appendix for the details of each measure.




                                                            35
                                  Table 4: RD estimates for other ethnicity-level characteristics.
                                  (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)          (11)          (12)
                                                                                                                                                            First Principal Component of
                                                                                                                   First Principal Component of              Jurisdictional Hierarchy FE,
Placebo Characterisic:
                                                                                                                   Jurisdictional Hierarchy FE &             Settlement Complexity FE &
                                    Jurisdictional Hierarchy             Historical Settlement Complexity            Settlement Complexity FE                    Patrilineal Indicator
Dependent Variable:            Incidents     Deaths       Months        Incidents      Deaths     Months        Incidents      Deaths      Months        Incidents      Deaths       Months

Ethnicity with Larger Value      -0.0293       -0.0162       -0.0119       -0.0291      -0.0711      -0.0232        -0.0132      -0.0226        -0.0121     0.0238       0.0211       0.0103
                                (0.0255)      (0.0308)      (0.0141)      (0.0229)     (0.0434)     (0.0189)       (0.0125)     (0.0180)       (0.0097)    (0.0195)    (0.0267)      (0.0119)
Ethnicity Pair FE                  Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes
Country FE                         Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes
Ethnic Groups                       74            74            74             79          79           79             98           98             98          98           98           98
Observations                      9,174         9,174         9,174         10,441      10,441       10,441         15,250       15,250         15,250      15,250       15,250       15,250
R-squared                         0.221         0.175         0.171          0.191       0.125        0.127          0.200        0.145          0.142      0.199         0.144        0.142
Notes: The unit of observation is a 10km-by-10km grid cell. All regressions include a linear running variable in distance to the border and both ethnicity-pair fixed effects and country
fixed effects. The dependent variables are our baseline measures of conflict, each parameterized as ln(1+x). In columns 1-3, the independent variable of interest is an indicator variables
that equals one if an ethnic group has a greater number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy than its pair; in columns 4-6, it is an indicator variable that equals one if an ethnic group has
greater historical settlement complexity; in columns 7-9, it is an indicator variable that equals one if an ethnic group has a greater first principal component estimated using jurisdictional
hierarchy fixed effects and historical settlement complexity fixed effects; in columns 10-12, it is an indicator variable that equals one if an ethnic group has a greater first principal
component estimated using jurisdictional hierarchy fixed effects, settlement complexity fixed effects, and an indicator for patrilineal societies. Standard errors, clustered at the ethnicity
level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.




for this possibility, we conduct a series of ‘placebo’ estimates where we undertake the same

procedure as for our baseline RD estimates except that ethnicity pairs are created, and treatment

and control defined, using ethnicity characteristics other than segmentary lineage. We then

re-estimate equation (3) to obtain estimates of the impact of the characteristic on conflict. To

ensure that the estimates do not reflect the effect of segmentary lineages on conflict, the sample

only includes ethnicity pairs for which both ethnicities of the pair have the same classification of

segmentary lineage organization.

     The RD estimates are reported in Table 4 for our three measures of all conflicts. The estimates

for civil conflicts, non-civil conflicts, and localized conflicts are qualitatively identical. Each triplet

of columns reports estimates examining a different set of ethnic characteristics. In columns 1–

3, we compare adjacent ethnic pairs with the same segmentary organization coding, but with

different levels of jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community. We define the ‘treated’

ethnicity to be the ethnicity of the pair with more levels of jurisdictional hierarchy. We find no

estimated effect of this characteristic on conflict. Columns 4–6 report the same estimates but using

historical settlement complexity as the characteristic of interest. In columns 7–9, we use the first

principal component from a factor analysis that uses indicator variables for each category of the

jurisdictional hierarchy and the settlement pattern variables. In columns 10–12, we use the first

principal component from a factor analysis that, in addition to the variables from columns 7–9,

also includes our baseline set of historical control variables (see Table 2).32

     We find that in each of the 36 specifications reported, the estimated effects of the alternative
  32 The     factor loadings for both principal components are reported in Table B5 in the paper’s online appendix.



                                                                                              36
                                    Table 5: Segmentary lineage and retaliation.
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)
                                                           Dep Var: Number of Deadly Incidents that are:
                                             Retaliatory Conflicts                          Non-Retaliatory Conflicts
                                    One Month Three Month          Six Month          One Month Three Month       Six Month
                                     Window        Window           Window             Window      Window          Window


           Segmentary Lineage        1.594***         1.349***        1.346***          0.995***        0.964***        0.958***
                                     (0.436)          (0.404)         (0.404)           (0.223)         (0.210)         (0.204)


           Country FE                   Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes
           Geographic Controls          Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes
           Historical Controls          Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes
           Observations                 141              141              141               141             141             141
           Notes : The unit of observation is an ethnic group. All columns include country fixed effects, the full set of
           geographic controls, and the full set of historical controls. All reported coefficients are negative binomial
           estimates. A retaliatory conflict is defined as a conflict event that is between conflict actors who fought in the past
           month, three months or six months, depending on the window used. In columns 1-3, the dependent variable is the
           number of retaliatory conflict events in the ethnic group. In columns 4-6, it is the number of non-retaliatory
           conflict events in the ethnic group. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
           significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.




ethnic characteristics are all small in magnitude and statistically insignificant. Thus, although our

RD estimates find a strong relationship between segmentary lineage organization and conflict

today, we do not find that other factors, like historical political centralization or economic

development, affect conflict.


6. Mechanisms

A. Escalation and Retaliation

The estimates from the OLS and RD analysis suggest that segmentary lineage organization is

associated with more conflict. We now turn to an examination of specific causal mechanisms

that could explain this finding. Our analysis starts by exploring mechanisms that have been the

central focus of the anthropological literature; namely, retaliation and escalation, which arise due

to the obligations to come to the defense of the members of one’s lineage.

   As a test of the retaliation mechanisms, we examine whether segmentary lineage organizations

experience more conflicts that are retaliatory. We define a conflict as being a retaliation if it occurs

within a fixed amount of time (1, 3, or 6 months) of a previous conflict that involved the same

actors. We use a negative binomial model to estimate equation (1) separately for conflicts that

are retaliations and those that are not. The estimates, which are reported in Table 5, show that

while segmentary lineage organization has a positive effect on both types of conflict, it is greater


                                                                      37
                       Table 6: Segmentary lineage and conflict of different scales.
                                                      (1)             (2)                (3)                 (4)
                                                                 Number of Conflict Incidents with:
                                                   0 Deaths       1-10 Deaths      11-100 Deaths        100+ Deaths


              Segmentary Lineage                   0.758***           1.139***          1.333***           2.254***
                                                    (0.255)           (0.263)            (0.331)            (0.501)

              Mean of Dependent Var.                  131.11             40.57              12.41            2.54
              Country FE                                Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes
              Geographic Controls                       Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes
              Historical Controls                       Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes
              Observations                              141               141                141              141
              Notes : The unit of observation is an ethnic group. The dependent variables are the number of conflict
              events with zero deaths (column 1), the number of conflict events with 1-10 deaths (column 2), the
              number of conflict events with 11-100 deaths (column 3), and the number of conflict events with over
              100 deaths (column 4). All columns report negative binomial estimates. All specifications include
              country fixed effects and the full set of geographic and historical controls. Robust standard errors are
              reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.




for retaliatory conflicts than not. We also find that these differences are statistically significant

(see Appendix Table A17). Thus, consistent with the focus of the anthropological literature,

segmentary lineage organization does appear to have a particularly strong effect on increasing

the incidence of conflicts that are retaliatory.

   Following a similar logic, we also examine the effect of segmentary lineage organization on

conflicts of different sizes. If retaliation and escalation are important mechanisms, then we expect

that segmentary lineage organization will lead to a disproportionate increase in the incidence of

larger-scale conflicts. To examine this, we use a negative binomial model to estimate equation

(1) with the number of conflict incidents of each of the following sizes as dependent variables:

incidents with 0 deaths, 1-10 deaths, 11-100 deaths, or 100+ deaths. The estimates, which are

reported in Table 6, show that the magnitude of the coefficient increases systematically with the

scale of the conflict. That is, consistent with escalation being important, the largest effects are for

larger-scale conflicts.

   We further test for both mechanisms by studying the effect of segmentary lineage organization

on conflict duration, estimated using a duration model where the dependent variable is conflict

offset. While our primary interest is in the effects of segmentary lineage organization on conflict

offset, for completeness, we also examine affects on conflict onset. Both are estimated using the

following discrete-time logistic hazard model (Jenkins, 1995):
                              "            #
                                  hevent
                                   i,t                            0
                          log                              (i) + Xe(i) Ω + i,t ,
                                             = ψ (t) + γIeSL                                                             (4)
                                1 − hevent
                                       i,t


                                                                 38
where e indexes ethnic groups, i episodes of interest (either conflict or peace), and t years into

the episode. The sample comprises all episodes of either conflict or peace, depending on whether

we are examining offset or onset. hevent
                                   i,t   is the discrete-time hazard rate: hevent
                                                                            i,t   = prob(Ti = t|Ti ≤
t; X), where Ti denotes the time at which the episode ends (i.e., event of interest occurs). We

assume that hevent
             i,t   follows a logistic distribution and estimate ψ (t) using a third-order polynomial.

   While the expected value of γ in equation (4) is clear for conflict offset, this is less clear for

conflict onset. The anthropological literature has not highlighted onset as being a particularly

important mechanism. Intuitively, the effects on onset might be ambiguous. As an example,

one could reason that if segmentary lineage organization causes conflicts to escalate, then this

might be foreseen and conflicts prevented from starting in the first place. On the other hand, if

individuals know their lineage will mobilize on their behalf should a conflict start, segmentary

lineage organization might also lead to higher levels of conflict onset. Similarly, within the civil

conflict context, segmentary lineage groups might be more willing to initiate conflict against

the government, knowing that they have large numbers of combatants due to their ability to

effectively mobilize. In a separate note Moscona, Nunn and Robinson (2019), we formalize these

ideas and show that, in a standard conflict model, the effect of segmentary lineage organization on

conflict size/duration is unambiguously positive, while its effect on conflict onset can be positive

or negative. Thus, in the end the relationship between segmentary lineage and conflict onset is

an empirical question.

   The estimates, which are reported in Table 7, indicate that segmentary lineage organization

is associated with greater escalation of conflict. We find a robust negative relationship between

segmentary lineage organization and conflict offset. Once a conflict starts, in segmentary lineage

societies, each year, it is less likely to end and, therefore, tends to last longer. We also find

some evidence, although much weaker, that segmentary lineage organization might be associated

with the start of new conflicts. We estimate a positive relationship between segmentary lineage

organization and conflict onset. However, relative to the escalation effects, the estimated onset

effects are smaller in magnitude, less robust, and less precisely estimated.

   We turn next to evidence for the social obligations that underlie the retaliation and escalation

mechanisms; namely, that individuals have strong obligations to help out and avenge wrong-

doings towards family members. While we do not have direct measures of the strength of

obligations pertaining to participation in conflict, we do have measures of the strength of ties


                                                 39
                 Table 7: Segmentary lineage and conflict offset (duration) or conflict onset.
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)          (7)             (8)
                                                             Conflict Offset                                            Conflict Onset
                                              All           Civil      Non-civil        Local            All           Civil      Non-civil        Local


Segmentary Lineage                         -0.828***     -1.021***      -0.743***     -0.662**          0.325        0.496*        0.530**        0.393
                                            (0.238)       (0.270)        (0.255)       (0.259)         (0.283)       (0.259)       (0.238)       (0.249)

Marginal Effect at Mean                      -0.083        -0.186        -0.125        -0.127          0.049          0.060         0.072         0.042


Third-degree polynomial of duration           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Country FE                                    Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Geographic Controls                              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Historical Controls                              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Mean of Dep. Var.                               0.18          0.28          0.23           0.30          0.23            0.20          0.21          0.17
Ethnic Groups                                    125          115            116           112           113             130           126           131
Observations                                    1,164         937            893           725          1,094           1,410         1,346         1,600
Notes : The unit of observation is an ethnic group and year. Columns 1-4 report estimates of a discrete time hazard model for the incidence of
conflict offset. In this context, survival is continued conflict. Columns 5-8 report estimates of a discrete time hazard model for incidence of
conflict onset. In this setting, survival is continued peace. Coefficient from the logistic model are reported, along with marginal effects evaluated
at the mean in italics. Standard errors, clustered at the ethnicity level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% levels.




to family and lineage as measured by one’s self-reported trust of family members relative to

non-family members. This relationship has been previously documented in by Moscona, Nunn

and Robinson (2017), but we revisit the findings here. The estimates, which are reported in

Appendix Table A18, show that segmentary lineage groups have a larger (positive) difference in

their trust of family members relative to their trust in various non-family individuals. This shows

that, as expected, members of segmentary lineage groups have particularly strong ties with family

members relative to their ties with non-kin.

   Overall, the estimates reported here (retaliation, scale, duration, and trust in family) are

consistent with the emphasis on the escalation and retaliation channels that are emphasized in

the ethnographic literature. Because segmentary lineage societies mobilize a large number of

combatants, they have particularly large effects on the duration and scale of conflicts. Once

a conflict starts, it is much more likely to escalate and turn into a large, prolonged conflict

with many battle deaths. As well, our retaliation estimates suggest that an important part of

the escalation may be due to retaliatory conflicts, which are disproportionately higher among

segmentary lineage groups.




                                                                            40
B. Other potential mechanisms

To gain a deeper understanding of the importance of other mechanisms, we now examine

additional outcomes that could be affected by segmentary lineage organization and themselves

be important for conflict.

   The first set of outcomes that we examine are proxies of the economic prosperity of ethnic

groups. If ethnic groups that have segmentary lineage organization tend to be less developed

economically, with lower incomes, less wealth, less education, and less access to public goods,

this might affect the likelihood that they participate in conflict. The first strategy that we employ

is to measure economic prosperity using the household wealth index from the Demographic and

Health Surveys (DHS). We link households to ethnic groups using the ethnicity of the household

head. In our regressions, we examine cross-household variation, controlling for the age and age

squared of the household head, and clustering at the ethnicity level. The second strategy is

to use the average density of nightlights in the territory of each ethnic group as a measure of

prosperity.33 The third strategy is to use respondents’ years of education as a proxy of economic

prosperity and to estimate individual level regressions linking individuals to ethnic groups using

their self-reported ethnicity. All three strategies generate similar conclusions. As reported in

Appendix Table A19, we find no evidence that segmentary lineage groups are less economically

prosperous. If anything, they tend to have more wealth, higher nightlight density, and are more

educated (both men and women), although these estimates are often imprecise and not different

from zero.

   We also examine individual-level variation in the presence of public goods using data from

the Afrobarometer. The estimates, which are reported in Appendix Table A20, show that there is

no relationship between an individual’s belonging to a segmentary lineage ethnic group and the

presence of public goods in their location of residence. The coefficients for some public goods are

positive and some are negative and the average effect across all public goods is close to zero and

statistically insignificant.

   Another potential mechanism is economic inequality, which could lead to greater conflict,

particularly within group conflict. We consider this possibility using two measures of an ethnic

group’s inequality: the standard deviation of night light density within an ethnic group’s territory
 33 The use of nightlights as a proxy for economic development follows, among others, Henderson, Storeygard and

Weil (2012), Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013), and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2014).



                                                      41
and the Gini coefficient of the wealth index of households in the DHS. The estimates, which

are reported in Appendix Table A21, indicate no consistent relationship with inequality. Some

estimates are positive and other are negative and they are insignificant in all cases but one. Thus,

it is unlikely that greater inequality is an important channel.

   A factor that is related to wealth and inequality is risk-sharing. It is possible that segmentary

lineage groups are particularly successful at facilitating risk-sharing due to strong social con-

nections within lineages, and this may affect conflict. Although information needed to measure

risk-sharing is difficult to obtain there is one question in the Afrobarometer that does provide

some information that is relevant. They ask respondents whether they have received remittances

from “friends or relatives outside of the country” in the past year. While the question includes

“friends” in addition to “family”, evidence indicates that within Africa, the vast majority of

overseas remittances are between family members (e.g., Bloch, 2005). Thus, the question provides

some indication of international risk-sharing between family members. The estimates, which are

reported in Appendix Table A22, show that although segmentary lineage groups are more likely

to have received overseas remittances, the estimated effects are imprecisely estimated and are

never statistically significant.

   The next mechanism that we consider is an ethnic group’s involvement in national politics.

If segmentary lineage groups tend to have less access to national power, then this might explain

the greater prevalence of civil conflicts among these groups. We use two measures to test for

this. The first measure is constructed using the Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) database, which

identifies the extent to which each “politically relevant” ethnic group is “excluded from state

power at the national level.” It further categorizes excluded groups into those who are powerless

due to active discrimination by the government and those who are powerless but not because

of active discrimination. We examine the relationship between segmentary lineage and the

share of years from 1960–2017 that the ethnic group was: excluded from power for any reason,

powerless because of active discrimination, or powerless but not because of discrimination. The

second measure is Francois, Rainer and Trebbi (2015), who provide annual information from

ten African countries since independence on the share of all cabinet positions in the national

government (and the share of top cabinet positions) that are held by each ethnic group. With

this measure, we examine the determinants of each ethnic group’s representation in government

while conditioning on their representation in the total population.


                                                 42
   The estimates are similar regardless of which measures we use. We do not find a relationship

between segmentary lineage organization and representation in national politics. The estimated

relationships, which are reported in Appendix Tables A23 and A24, are all small in magnitude

and statistically insignificant


7. Implications of Findings and External Relevance

Our findings provide insight into a previously untested determinant of conflict. Although our

findings hold for all forms of conflict, they are potentially the most informative for civil conflicts,

which helps us to better understand why some armed non-state actors have been better able to

recruit soldiers than others. As an example of a group that has been successful in this dimension

consider Boko Haram in Northern Nigeria. It is very difficult to explain their success using

standard determinants. Our findings suggest that a missing element may be the social structure

of the societies involved. Boko Haram has recruited primarily from the Kanuri people who

historically constituted a segmentary lineage society. This connection has been highlighted by

Akbar Ahmed (2013b, p. 129), who documents that they tend to recruit where segmentary lineage

structures are most prominent.

   Our analysis has been restricted to Africa because of the rich ethnographic data and geo-

coded sub-national conflict data. However, it is possible that the documented relationship is also

present outside of Africa. For example, Osama bin Laden and many individuals recruited to

Al Qaeda were, and are, Yemeni, which are also “are organized around a segmentary lineage

system, with elders and councils, a spirit of egalitarianism, and a code of honor guiding society

that emphasizes courage, loyalty, hospitality, and revenge” (Ahmed, 2013b, p. 110). The same

logic of lineage-based obligation and revenge among segmentary groups in Africa also applies to

the Yemeni. According to Paul Dresch (1989), “If a man from a village in Khamis Abu Dhaybah or

Kharif kills someone from Arhab [a district in Yemen]. . . a debt exists between the two tribes. . . a

man’s immediate kin are involved (those who Islamic law recognizes as always al-dam), but men

much further from the particular antagonist may also be drawn in. If a man from section A of

our tribe kills someone from another tribe, that other tribe might perhaps kill someone in a quite

different section of ours, section B” (pp. 84–85).

   It is possible that a better understanding of segmentary lineage societies will shed new light

on key international security issues. Ahmed (2013b) points out a broad correlation between areas

                                                  43
of high-intensity Islamist violence and areas where society is structured based on segmentary

lineage organization. In a 2013 speech, Ahmed claimed the following: “Here is a correlation for

you. Ask yourselves: where are [US] drones most used? They are really segmentary lineage

systems: the Pashtuns in Afghanistan and Pakistan tribal areas, mainly in Waziristan; among

the Somali segmentary lineage system; the Yemenis’ segmentary lineage system; the Kurds in

eastern Turkey, segmentary lineage system; the Tuareg in West Africa, segmentary lineage system.

An immediate correlation. So there is some connection that we can identify. . . Take a look at

these mutant militant groups that are emerging: the TTP (Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan), for example.

Where is it coming out of? It’s coming out of a specific tribe, a specific clan. Al Shabaab: tribal.

Tribal: Boko Haram in West Africa. Again, because we tend to jump on Islam as the explanation

for what’s going on, we are missing this whole tribal basis of the discussion. All of these are

coming out of straight segmentary lineage system backgrounds.” (Ahmed, 2013a)

   Philip Salzman extends this reasoning and argues that Islam, at its inception, was structured as

an amalgamation of segmentary lineage societies and was designed to unite these tribes against

outsiders (Salzman, 2007, pp. 137–138). Thus, the entire Islamic world comprises the largest

tribal segment that is compelled to unite against any non-Muslim – infidels, the West, or the dar

al-harb. For Salzman, an understanding of segmentary organization is crucial to understanding

all Islam-fueled violence.

   Such arguments are not confined to the writings of academics.          Philip Zeman (2009), a

strategist with the U.S. Marine Corps, has argued that there is a strong relationship between

segmentary organization and “terror.” Members of Islamist extremist groups commonly come

from societies with strong segmentary traditions, and there are explicit links between tribal

organization and violent extremism. Thus, for national-security purposes, there is a “need for

in-depth understanding of tribal systems and influences” (Zeman, 2009, p. 682).


8. Conclusion

We have tested a long-standing hypothesis from the field of anthropology about the relationship

between segmentary lineage organization and conflict. A rich ethnographic literature suggests

that this organizational form creates an obligation to come to the defense of one’s lineage mates

when they become involved in a conflictual situation. Thus, segmentary lineages result in large

numbers of men being mobilized for warfare any time there is a dispute or conflict. To investigate

                                                44
these ideas, we collected information from existing ethnographic sources on the social structure

of 145 ethnic groups within sub-Saharan Africa.

   We began our analysis by examining the cross-ethnicity relationship between the historical

presence of a segmentary lineage system and conflict today. We found a strong positive rela-

tionship between the presence of segmentary lineages in a society and all measures of conflict

examined; namely, all conflicts, civil conflicts, conflicts other than civil conflicts, and localized

within-group conflicts. We then examined pairs of neighboring ethnic groups where one ethnic

group is traditionally organized into segmentary lineages and the other is not. Examining varia-

tion across 10km-by-10km grid-cells, we estimated the effect of segmentary lineage organization

on conflict using a regression discontinuity (RD) estimator. The strategy allowed us to better

control for any omitted factors that change smoothly over space, such as geographic factors,

ecological characteristics, or historical shocks. Consistent with the OLS estimates, here too we

found a strong positive relationship between segmentary lineage organization and all measures

of conflict.

   Motivated by the ethnographic literature which suggests that the primary mechanisms through

which segmentary lineages affect conflict is retaliation and the escalation of conflicts, we then

turned to an examination of these mechanisms. We tested for the importance of retaliation by

identifying conflicts that appear to be retaliations against previous conflicts. They occur shortly

after a previous conflict involving the same actors. We found that while segmentary lineage

is associated with more conflicts that are retaliatory and non-retaliatory, the magnitude of the

association is larger for retaliatory conflicts. To examine the escalation mechanism we studied

the effect of segmentary lineage on conflict onset and offset (i.e., duration). We found strong

evidence that segmentary lineage organization tends to prolong conflicts after they start. By

contrast, the estimated effects on conflict onset, although positive, were smaller in magnitude

and often insignificant. Consistent with this, we also found that the effect of segmentary lineage

on larger-scale conflicts with more battle deaths was greater than smaller-scale conflicts with

fewer battle deaths.

   Although our analysis has focused specifically on the African context, our results are po-

tentially applicable outside of Africa, where segmentary lineage organization is also common.

Outside of Africa, and especially in the Middle East, there are many examples of prolonged

conflicts involving groups that are traditionally organized in segmentary lineages. Thus, it is


                                                 45
possible that segmentary lineage organization may be an important determinant of conflict not

just within Africa but globally.



References
Ahmed, Akbar, “Muslim Tribes and the War on Terror,” 2013. Transcript of speech delivered on June 25,
  2013. Chatham House, London, U.K.

  , The Thistle and the Drone: How America’s War on Terror Became a Global War on Tribal Islam, Washington,
  D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2013.

Akbari, Mahsa, Duman Bahrami-Rad, and Erik Kimbrough, “Kinship, Fractionalization and Corrup-
  tion,” 2017. Working paper.

Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano, “Family Ties,” in Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds.,
  Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 2A, Netherlands: North Holland, 2014, pp. 177–215.

  , Stelios Michalopoulos, and Elias Papaioannou, “Ethnic Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, 2016,
  124 (2), 428–488.

Allen, Tim and Koen Vlassenroot, The Lord’s Resistance Army: Myth and Reality, London: Zed Books, 2010.

Ansell, Christopher K. and John F. Padgett, “Robust Action and the Rise of Medici, 1400-1434,” American
  Journal of Sociology, May 1993, 98 (6), 1259–1319.

Banfield, Edward C., The Moral Basis of a Backward Society, Glencoe IL: The Free Press, 1958.

Barth, Fredrik, “Descent and Marriage Reconsidered,” in Jack Goody, ed., The Character of Kinship, Cam-
  bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973, pp. 3–19.

Bau, Natalie, “Can Policy Crowd Out Culture?,” 2016. Working paper.

Becker, Anke, “On the Economic Origins of Constraints on Women’s Sexuality,” 2019. Working paper,
  Harvard University.

Besley, Timothy and Marta Reynal-Querol, “The Legacy of Historical Conflict: Evidence from Africa,”
  American Political Science Review, 2014, 108 (2), 319–336.

Blattman, Christopher and Edward Miguel, “Civil War,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2010, 48 (1), 3–57.

Bloch, Alice, “The Development Potential of Zimbabweans in the Diaspora,” 2005.            IOM Migration
  Research Series, No. 17. Switzerland: International Organization for Migration.

Bo, Ernesto Dal, Pedro Dal Bo, and Jason Snyder, “Political Dynasties,” Review of Economic Studies, 2009,
  76 (1), 115–142.

Bohannon, Laura, “Political Aspects of Tiv Social Organization,” in John Middleton and David Tait, eds.,
  Tribes Without Rulers, London: Routledge Keegan & Paul, 1958, pp. 33–67.

Brückner, Markus and Antonio Ciccone, “International Commodity Prices, Growth, and the Outbreak of
  Civil War in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Economic Journal, 2010, 120, 519–534.

Buhaug, H., J. Nordkvelle, T. Bernauer, T. Bohmelt, M. Brzoska, J.W. Busby, A. Ciccone, H. Fjelde,
  E. Gartzke, N.P. Gleditsch, J.A. Goldstone, H. Hegre, H. Holtermann, V. Koubi, J.S.A. Link, P.M.
  Link, P. Lujala, J. O’Loughlin, C. Raleigh, J. Scheffran, J. Schilling, T.G. Smith, O.M. Theisen, R.S.J.
  Tol, H. Urdal, and N. van Uexkull, “One Effect to Rule Them All? A Comment on Climate and Conflict,”
  Climate Change, 2014, 127, 391–397.



                                                    46
Butt, Audrey J., The Nilotes of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan and Uganda, London: International African Institute,
  1952.

Cederman, Lars-Erik, Kristian Skrede Gleditsch, and Halvard Buhaug, Inequality, Grievances, and Civil
  War, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.

Ciccone, Antonio, “Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: A Comment,” American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 2013, 3 (4), 215–227.

Collier, Paul and Nicholas Sambanis, Understanding Civil War: Evidence and Analysis, Volume 1. Africa,
  Washington: World Bank Publications, 2005.

Colson, Elizabeth, “The Plateau Tonga of Northern Rhodesia,” in Elizabeth Colson and Max Gluckman,
  eds., Seven Tribes of British Central Africa, New York: Oxford University Press, 1951, pp. 94–102.

Combs-Schilling, M. Elaine, “Family and Friend in a Moroccan Boom Town: The Segmentary Debate
  Reconsidered,” American Ethnologist, 1985, 12 (4), 659–675.

Crost, Benjamin, Joseph Felter, and Patrick Johnston, “Aid under Fire: Development Projects and Civil
  Conflict,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (6), 1833–1856.

Cruz, Cesi, Julien Labonne, and Pablo Querubin, “Politician Family Networks and Electoral Outcomes:
  Evidence from the Philippines,” 2017. American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Debos, Mariella, “Living by the Gun in Chad: Armed Violence as a Practical Occupation,” Journal of
  Modern African Studies, 2011, 49 (3), 409–428.

Debos, Marielle, Living by the Gun in Chad, London: Zed Books, 2016.

Depetris-Chauvin, Emilio, “State History and Contemporary Conflict: Evidence from Sub-Saharan
  Africa,” 2014. Mimeo, Brown University 2679594.

Dresch, Paul, Tribes, Government and History in Yemen, New York: Oxford University Press, 1989.

Dube, Oeindrila and Juan F. Vargas, “Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Conflict: Evidence from
 Colombia,” Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80 (4), 1384–1421.

Dunning, Thad and Lauren Harrison, “Cross-Cutting Cleavages and Ethnic Voting: An Experimental
 Study of Cousinage in Mali,” American Political Science Review, 2010, 104 (1), 21–39.

Eldredge, Elizabeth A., Creation of the Zulu Kingdom, 1815-1828: War, Shaka, and the Consolidation of Power,
  New York: Cambridge University Press, 2014.

Enke, Benjamin, “Kinship Systems, Cooperation, and the Evolution of Moral Systems,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 2019, 134 (2), 953–1019.

Esteban, Joan, Laura Mayoral, and Debraj Ray, “Ethnicity and Conflict: An Empirical Study,” American
  Economic Review, 2012, 102 (4), 1310–1342.

Evans-Pritchard, E. E., The Nuer, Oxford: Clarendon, 1940.

  , “The Nuer of Southern Sudan,” in E. E. Evans-Pritchard and Meyer Fortes, eds., African Political Systems,
  New York: Oxford University Press, 1940, pp. 272–297.

  , The Nuer: A Description of the Modes of Livelihood and Political Institutions of a Nilotic People, New York:
  Oxford University Press, 1969.

   and Meyer Fortes, “Introduction,” in E. E. Evans-Pritchard and Meyer Fortes, eds., African Political
  Systems, New York: Oxford University Press, 1940, pp. 1–25.

Fearon, James D. and David D. Laitin, “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War,” American Political Science
  Review, 2003, 97 (1), 75–90.


                                                      47
Forde, Daryll, “The Conditions of Social Development in West Africa: Retrospect and Prospect,” Civilisa-
  tions, 1953, 3 (4), 471–489.

  , “Ecology and Social Structure,” Proceedings of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and
  Ireland, 1970, pp. 15–29.

Fortes, Meyer, “The Structure of Unilineal Descent Groups,” American Anthropologist, 1953, 55 (1), 17–41.

Francois, Patrick, Ilia Rainer, and Francesco Trebbi, “How is Power Shared in Africa?,” Econometrica,
  2015, 83 (2), 185–234.

Gelman, Andrew and Guido Imbens, “Why High-Order Polynomials Should not be Used in Regression
  Discontinuity Designs,” 2014. NBER Working Paper No. 20405.

Gennaioli, Nicola and Ilia Rainer, “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa,” Journal
  of Economic Growth, 2007, 12 (3), 185–234.

Gleditsch, Kristian Skrede and Andrea Ruggeri, “Political Opportunity Structures, Democracy, and Civil
  War,” Journal of Peace Research, 2010, 47 (3), 299–310.

Gluckman, Max, “The Kingdom of the Zulu in South Africa,” in E. E. Evans-Pritchard and Meyer Forter,
  eds., African Political Systems, New York: Oxford University Press, 1940, pp. 25–55.

  , “Kinship and Marriage among the Lozi of Northern Rhodesia and the Zulu of Natal,” in A. R. Radcliffe-
  Brown and Daryll Forde, eds., African Systems of Kinship, New York: Oxford University Press, 1950,
  pp. 166–206.

  , “The Lozi of Barotseland in North-Western Rhodesia,” in Elizabeth Colson and Max Gluckman, eds.,
  Seven Tribes of British Central Africa, New York: Oxford University Press, 1951, pp. 1–93.

Gneezy, Uri, Kenneth L. Leonard, and John A. List, “Gender Differences in Competition: Evidence from
 a Matrilineal and a Patriarchichal Society,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (5), 1637–1664.

Greif, Avner, “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical Reflection on
  Collectivist and Individualist Societies,” Journal of Political Economy, 1994, 102 (5), 912–950.

  and Guido Tabellini, “Cultural and Institutional Bifurcation: China and Europe Compared,” American
  Economic Review, 2010, 100 (2), 135–140.

Grosjean, Pauline, “A History of Violence: The Culture of Honor and Homicide in the U.S. South,” Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 2014, 12 (5), 1285–1316.

Hamilton, W.D., “The Evolution of Altruistic Behavior,” American Naturalist, 1963, 97 (896), 354–356.

Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil, “Measuring Economic Growth from Outer
  Space,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (2), 994–1028.

Henrich, Natalie and Joseph Henrich, Why Humans Cooperate, New York: Oxford University Press, 2007.

Hoehne, Markus V., Between Somaliland and Puntland: Marginalization, Militarization and Conflicting Political
 Visions, London: Rift Valley Institute, 2015.

Hoffman, Danny, The War Machines: Young Men and Violence in Sierra Leone and Liberia, Durham, NC: Duke
 University Press, 2011.

Jaques, Tony, Battles and Sieges: A Guide to 8,500 Battles from Antiquity through the Twenty-First Century,
  Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2007.

Jenkins, Stephen P., “Easy Estimation Methods for Discrete-Time Duration Models,” Oxford Bulletin of
  Economics and Statistics, 1995, 57 (1), 129–138.

Kelly, Raymond C., “A Note on Nuer Segmentary Organization,” American Anthropologist, 1983, 85 (4),
  905–906.

                                                     48
  , The Nuer Conquest: The Structure and Development of an Expansionist System, Ann Arbor: University of
  Michigan Press, 1985.

Konig, Michael D., Dominic Rohner, Mathias Thoenig, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Networks in Conflict:
  Theory and Evidence from the Great War of Africa,” Econometrica, 2017, 85, 1093–1132.

Kurimoto, Eisei and Simon Simonse, Conflict, Age and Power in North East Africa: Age Systems in Transition,
  Oxford: James Currey, 1998.

La Ferrara, Eliana, “Descent Rules and Strategic Transfers. Evidence from Matrilineal Groups in Ghana,”
  Journal of Development Economics, 2007, 83 (2), 280–301.

  and Annamaria Milazzo, “Customary Norms, Inheritance and Human Capital. Evidence from a Reform
  of the Matrilineal System in Ghana,” 2011. Working paper.

Lewis, Ioan M., A Pastoral Democracy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1961.

  , “The Ogaden and the Fragility of Somali Segmentary Nationalism,” African Affairs, 1989, 88 (353),
  573–579.

  , Blood and Bone: The Call of Kinship in Somali Society, Trenton: The Red Sea Press, 1994.

Lienhardt, Godfrey, “The Western Dinka,” in John Middleton and David Tait, eds., Tribes Without Rulers,
  London: Routledge Keegan & Paul, 1958, pp. 97–136.

Lowes, Sara, “Kinship Systems, Gender Norms, and Household Bargaining: Evidence from the Matrilineal
  Belt,” 2016. Working paper, Harvard University.

McGovern, Michael, Making War in the Cote d’Ivoire, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011.

Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou, “Precolonial Ethnic Institutions and Contemporary
 African Development,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (1), 113–152.

   and , “National Institutions and Subnational Development in Africa,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2014, 129 (1), 151–213.

   and , “The Long-Run Effects of the Scramble in Africa,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (7),
  1802–1848.

Middleton, John and David Tait, “Introduction,” in John Middleton and David Tait, eds., Tribes Without
 Rulers, London: Routledge Keegan & Paul, 1958, pp. 1–32.

Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Sebastian Saiegh, “Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: An
 Instrumental Variables Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (4), 725–753.

Montalvo, Jose and Marta Reynal-Querol, “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Conflict, and Civil Wars,”
 American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (3), 796–816.

Moscona, Jacob, Nathan Nunn, and James A. Robinson, “Keeping It in the Family: Lineage Organization
 and the Scope of Trust in Sub-Saharan Africa,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2017,
 107 (5), 565–571.

  , , and , “Theoretical Note for “Kinship and Conflict: Evidence from Segmentary Lineage Societies
  in Sub-Saharan Africa,” 2019. Mimeo, Columbia University.

Murdock, George Peter, Africa: Its Peoples and Their Cultural History, New York: McGraw-Hill Book
 Company, 1959.

Naidu, Suresh, James A. Robinson, and Lauren Young, “Social Origins of Dictatorship: Theory and
  Application to Haiti,” 2015. Mimeo, Columbia University.

Nisbett, Richard E. and Dov Cohen, Culture of Honor: The Psychology of Violence in the South, Boulder:
  Westview Press, 1996.

                                                     49
Nunn, Nathan, “The Long-Term Effects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123
 (1), 139–176.

   and Nancy Qian, “U.S. Food Aid and Civil Conflict,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (6), 1630–1666.

Querubín, Pablo, “Family and Politics: Dynastic Persistence in the Philippines,” Quarterly Journal of
 Political Science, 2016, 11 (2), 151–181.

Radcliffe-Brown, A. R., “Introduction,” in A. R. Radcliffe-Brown and Daryll Forde, eds., African Systems of
  Kinship and Marriage, 1950: Oxford University Press, 1950, pp. 1–60.

Ree, Joppe De and Eleonora Nillesen, “The Impact of Foreign Aid on the Risk of Civil Conflict in Sub-
  Saharan Africa,” Journal of Development Economics, 2009, 88 (2), 301–313.

Richards, Paul, Fighting for the Rain Forest: War Youth and Resources in Sierra Leone, New York: Heinemann,
  1996.

Rogall, Thorsten, “Mobilizing the Masses for Genocide,” 2014. Working paper.

Rohner, Dominic, Mathias Thoenig, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “War Signals: A Theory of Trade, Trust, and
  Conflict,” Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80, 1114–1147.

Ross, Michael L., “What Do We Know About Natural Resources and Civil War?,” Journal of Peace Research,
  2004, 41 (3), 337–356.

  , “A Closer Look at Oil, Diamonds and Civil War,” Annual Review of Political Science, 2006, 9, 265–300.

Sahlins, Marshall D., “The Segmentary Lineage: An Organization of Predatory Expansion,” American
  Anthropologist, 1961, 63 (2), 322–345.

Salzman, Philip C., “Ideology and Change in Middle Eastern Tribal Societies,” Man, 1978, 13 (4), 618–637.

  , Culture and Conflict in the Middle East, New York: Prometheus Books, 2007.

Schulz, Jonathan F., “The Churches’ Bans on Consanguineous Marriages, Kin-Networks and Democracy,”
  2017. Working paper.

Smith, M.G., “On Segmentary Lineage Systems,” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain
  and Ireland, 1956, 86 (2), 39–80.

Stearns, Jason, Raia Mutomboki: The Flawed Peace Process in the DRC and the Birth of an Armed Franchise,
  London: Rift Valley Institute, 2013.

Verdon, Michel, “Where Have All Their Lineages Gone?,” American Anthropologist, 1982, 84 (3), 566–579.

Weinstein, Jeremy M., Inside Rebellion: The Politics of Insurgent Violence, New York: Cambridge University
 Press, 2006.

Wood, Elizabeth, Insurgent Collective Action and Civil War in El Salvador, New York: Cambridge University
 Press, 2003.

Zeman, Phillip M., “Tribalism and Terror: Report from the Field,” Small Wars & Insurgencies, 2009, 20 (3–4),
  681–709.




                                                     50
