                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        SOURCES OF DISPLACED WORKERS’ LONG-TERM EARNINGS LOSSES

                                       Marta Lachowska
                                        Alexandre Mas
                                     Stephen A. Woodbury

                                      Working Paper 24217
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24217


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 2018, Revised June 2019




For comments on an earlier draft, we thank Katharine Abraham, David Card, Henry Farber,
Patrick Kline, Pawel Krolikowski, Peter Kuhn, Matthew Notowidigdo, Moritz Ritter, Jesse
Rothstein, Isaac Sorkin, Desmond Toohey, Till von Wachter, and participants in several
seminars, including Delaware, IZA, SOLE, the 2017 NBER Summer Institute, and the 2018 IRP
Summer Workshop. We are especially grateful to Jeff Robinson of the Washington Employment
Security Department for his help, to Ken Kline for superb research assistance, and to the
Washington Center for Equitable Growth and the Russell Sage Foundation for supporting the
research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Marta Lachowska, Alexandre Mas, and Stephen A. Woodbury. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sources of Displaced Workers’ Long-Term Earnings Losses
Marta Lachowska, Alexandre Mas, and Stephen A. Woodbury
NBER Working Paper No. 24217
January 2018, Revised June 2019
JEL No. J0

                                        ABSTRACT

We estimate the magnitudes of reduced earnings, work hours, and wage rates of workers
displaced during the Great Recession using linked employer-employee panel data from
Washington State. Displaced workers’ earnings losses occurred mainly because hourly wage rates
dropped at the time of displacement and recovered sluggishly. Lost employer-specific premiums
explain only 17 percent of these losses. Fully 70 percent of displaced workers moved to
employers paying the same or higher wage premiums than the displacing employers, but these
workers nevertheless suffered substantial wage rate losses. Loss of valuable specific worker-
employer matches explain more than half of the wage losses.

Marta Lachowska                               Stephen A. Woodbury
W.E. Upjohn Institute for                     Department of Economics
Employment Research                           Michigan State University
300 S. Westnedge Avenue                       486 West Circle Drive, Room 110
Kalamazoo, MI 49007                           East Lansing, MI 48824
martalachowska@gmail.com                      and W.E. Upjohn Institute for
                                              Employment Research
Alexandre Mas                                 woodbur2@msu.edu
Industrial Relations Section
Simpson International Building
Princeton University Princeton,
NJ 08544
and NBER
amas@princeton.edu
1 Introduction

Permanent loss of a long-term job—worker displacement—leads to earnings losses that are

enduring, even permanent.5 Longitudinal data on workers’ earnings have established the

magnitude of displaced workers’ earnings losses, but little evidence exists on the reasons

underlying these losses, which are important both theoretically and from the standpoint of

mitigating the losses. In this paper we decompose earnings losses into changes in hourly wages

and changes in work hours, and further decompose the changes in hourly wages into components

attributable to employer effects (workers moving from higher- to lower-paying employers),

match effects (the loss of valuable specific worker-employer matches), and a residual direct

displacement effect that includes scarring due to job loss and the costs of lost seniority or any

other aspect of wages that evolved over time in the previous employment relationship.

        Job ladder models inspired by Burdett and Mortensen (1998) predict that on-the-job

search will move workers to higher paying employers over their careers, with pay differences

among firms representing differences in the division of surplus between workers and employers.

Haltiwanger, Hyatt, Kahn, and McEntarfer (2018) find empirical support for the job ladder

hypothesis, with workers tending to flow from low-wage to high-wage firms in job-to-job

moves. In this framework, the typical displaced worker will experience wage losses due to

employer effects, as he or she moves down the job ladder to a lower-paying employer.




5
  See, for example, Topel (1990), Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993a, 1993b), Farber (1993, 1997, 2015,
2017), Stevens (1997), von Wachter, Song, and Manchester (2009), Couch and Placzek (2010), Davis and von
Wachter (2011), Jarosch (2015), Jung and Kuhn (2018), Krolikowski (2018), Fackler, Mueller, and Stegmaier
(2017), Schmieder, von Wachter, and Heining (2018), and the reviews by Hamermesh (1996), Fallick (1996),
Kletzer (1998), von Wachter (2010), and Carrington and Fallick (2017). Worker displacement has also been shown
to reduce household expenditure (Stephens 2001), lead to poorer health (Schaller and Stevens 2015), reduce
happiness (Kalil and DeLeire 2013), increase mortality (Sullivan and von Wachter 2009), and harm children
affected by parental job loss (Oreopoulos, Page, and Stevens 2008; Stevens and Schaller 2011).



                                                       2
         Worker-employer match effects encompass all time-invariant factors specific to an

employment relationship that increase the value of a job match. Match effects may arise when a

worker’s skill set is intrinsically a good fit for a given employer’s skill requirements, so the same

worker has different productivity with different employers (Gibbons and Katz 1992). They may

also arise as a result of the workings of internal labor markets (Doeringer and Piore 1971; Lazear

1992; Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom 1995a,b), where firm compensation policies prescribe

wages that deviate from a worker’s opportunity wage. For example, implicit contracts could have

immediate (and time-invariant) effects on worker productivity and compensation. The match

effects estimator we implement captures these time-invariant effects (sections 3.3 and 5.4).

         A direct displacement effect implies that workers who lose their jobs experience wage

loss irrespective of employer type or time-invariant quality of the previous job match. They

could result from post-displacement wage penalties (“scarring”) due to negative signaling or

asymmetric information (Gibbons and Katz 1991). Direct effects may also result from features of

internal labor markets that lead to wage growth with job tenure—seniority, delayed-payment

contract, or the return to specific human capital—any of which could lead to wage losses after

job displacement, independent of any change in employer wage premium or match quality.6

         The decomposition of wages into these three components can be summarized by the

equation E[Δln(wageijkt) | displacement] = E[Δψijkt] + E[Δμijkt] + d, where Δln(wageijkt) is the

change in wages for displaced worker i who moves from employer j to employer k, Δψijkt is the

change in the employer wage premium, Δμijkt is the change in the match-specific wage

component, and d denotes the residual direct effect of displacement on wages.



6
 Note that the workings of internal labor markets can lead to either time-invariant or time-varying compensation
patterns over the life of an employment relationship, and that both match effects and direct effects of displacement
ultimately arise because workers and jobs are heterogeneous.


                                                          3
       We use linked employer-employee panel data based on administrative records from the

unemployment insurance (UI) system of Washington State during 2002–2014 to examine the

sources of long-term earnings losses for displaced workers. To examine the role of employers in

generating displaced workers’ earnings losses we estimate employer-specific fixed effects, as

suggested by Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999; hereafter AKM), then use these estimated

employer effects to quantify whether displaced workers’ losses result from displacement by

employers who pay earnings premiums followed by reemployment with employers who do not.

An extension of the AKM model suggested by Woodcock (2015) allows us to perform a similar

exercise to examine the role of match effects.

       In addition to allowing us to quantify the importance of employer effects in displaced

workers’ losses, the Washington administrative records are unusual because they report the

quarterly paid work hours of all UI-covered workers in the state, not just quarterly earnings. The

availability of both work hours and earnings allows us to calculate hourly wage rates on a

quarterly basis, and to decompose displaced workers’ long-term earnings losses into components

due to reduced hours and lower hourly wages. The decomposition is important because we want

to know whether the earnings losses of displaced workers who remain attached to the labor force

result from an inability to find full-time work or from a drop in the return to their human capital.

       Workers displaced in Washington during the Great Recession suffered earnings losses

similar to those in Pennsylvania during the 1980s (Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan 1993a,

1993b; hereafter JLS), in Connecticut during 2000–2001 (Couch and Placzek 2010; hereafter

CP), and in the U.S. (nationally) over the 1980–2005 period (Davis and von Wachter 2011;

hereafter DvW). Specifically, five years after job loss, displaced workers’ earnings were 16




                                                 4
percent less than those of a stably employed comparison group.7 A decomposition of these losses

into hours and wage rates shows that virtually all earnings losses in the year following

displacement resulted from lost work hours. But five years after displacement, only about 30

percent of lost earnings were due to reduced work hours, whereas about 70 percent were due to

lower hourly wage rates. An unexpected finding is that the pattern of displaced workers’ wage

rate losses differ strikingly from that of earnings losses: whereas earnings follow a familiar

pattern of “dip, drop, and partial recovery,” wage rates drop suddenly at the time of displacement

and recover far more sluggishly.

        Overall, employer fixed effects played only a limited role in explaining these losses,

accounting for about 9 percent of the average earnings losses of displaced workers five years

after displacement, and for about 17 percent of average hourly wage rate reductions. Hence,

employer premium losses, as measured by lost employer effects, were small. Two factors are

behind the relative unimportance of employer fixed effects. First, only 30 percent of displaced

workers moved to employers paying lower wage rate premiums, limiting the scope for fixed

effects to play a role in displaced workers’ losses. Second, the majority of displaced workers—

those who moved to an employer paying the same or higher wage premium—suffered substantial

wage rate losses that are perforce unrelated to employer wage premiums and must be attributed

to other sources.

        Moves down the job ladder are not a very important vehicle for wage rate losses after

displacement, but changes in match effects are: They account for about 57 percent of wage rate

reductions five years after displacement. The remaining 26 percent of the hourly wage reduction


7
  Like JLS and CP, we examine administrative data from a single state and a specific period, so we will draw
frequent comparisons between their estimates and ours. Labor market conditions in Washington appear to have been
similar to those nationally during the Great Recession (Appendix A.2), so we believe our estimates are informative
and add to the evidence on displaced workers’ losses, although they should not be heedlessly generalized.


                                                        5
can be attributed to the residual direct effect of displacement, the part unrelated to changes in

employer effects or match quality. We conclude that match-specific factors are the main

mechanism behind displaced worker wage losses, with direct displacement effects playing an

important but secondary role.

         The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data, and section 3 describes

the empirical strategy. We extend JLS’s seminal approach to a decomposition of earnings losses

into components attributable to lost work hours and reduced wage rates. We then combine the

JLS approach with the AKM model to examine the importance of employer effects and match

effects in explaining displaced workers’ losses. Section 4 presents the main results on earnings

losses and their decomposition into lost work hours and reduced wage rates. Section 5 examines

the role of employer effects, match effects, and direct effects in explaining displaced workers’

losses and elaborates on why employer effects play a limited role. The final section reviews the

estimates and discusses their implications. Appendix A describes additional analyses referred to

in the main text, and Appendix B describes the AKM analysis underlying section 5’s estimates.

2 Data

The data we use come from the records maintained by the Employment Security Department of

Washington State to administer the state’s UI system: quarterly earnings records from all UI-

covered employers in Washington from 2002:I through 2014:IV; and the UI claims records of all

individuals who claimed UI in Washington at any time during the same period.

         The administrative earnings records of most states include a worker’s quarterly earnings

by employer; in addition, UI-covered employers in Washington are required to report each




                                                  6
worker’s quarterly work hours.8 Hence, a record appears for each quarter-worker-employer

combination that includes the worker’s earnings and work hours during the quarter with that

employer. This allows us to construct an hourly wage rate in quarter t for most workers in

Washington’s formal labor market. We focus on the wage rate with the primary employer in each

quarter (that is, the employer from whom the worker had the largest share of earnings in the

quarter), dividing earnings from that employer by hours worked with that employer.9

        Each worker’s quarterly earnings record includes an employer identifier and the

employer’s four-digit North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code, making it

possible to construct employment at both the employer and industry level by summing over the

records associated with a given employer or industry in each quarter. At the worker level, the

linked employer identifiers and NAICS codes, along with the panel nature of the administrative

records, allow us to observe worker transitions between employers. The panel nature of the

earnings records also allows us to observe each worker’s tenure with a given employer.

        We use the Washington administrative records just described for two distinct analyses: an

AKM analysis, which estimates individual employer and worker fixed effects for earnings, work

hours, and wage rates using data on all UI-covered workers and employers in Washington; and

an analysis of displaced workers’ earnings losses, part of which makes use of the AKM analysis.

In the rest of this section, we describe the sample used in the displaced worker analysis.



8
  Washington is the only state that uses work hours in the year before claiming UI to determine UI eligibility, so
employers are required to report hours, including overtime and hours of paid leave. Actual hours of salaried,
commissioned, and piecework employees are reported unless those hours are not tracked, in which case employers
are instructed to report 40 hours per week—see Unemployment Insurance Tax Information, Employment Security
Department, Washington State, October 2014 (Revised). Our examination of the hours data starting in 2001 suggests
they are reliable and of high quality—see Lachowska, Mas, and Woodbury (2018). For further discussion of
Washington’s UI system, see Lachowska, Meral, and Woodbury (2016).
9
  All earnings are converted to constant 2010 dollars using the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers
(CPI-U). We handle outliers by winsorizing positive earnings at the 99th percentile (about $69,000 per quarter),
work hours at 2,000 hours per quarter, and wage rates at the 99th percentile (about $150 per hour).


                                                        7
Appendix B describes the dataset used in the AKM analysis, along with further discussion of the

Washington administrative records and the AKM analysis itself.

2.1 Construction of the displaced worker analysis sample

We define a displaced worker by three criteria. First, a worker must have at least six years of job

tenure (24 consecutive quarters of positive earnings) with the same primary employer during

2002–2007.10 We refer to these as long-tenure workers. Second, we define a long-tenure worker

as displaced if, at any time during 2008–2010,11 that worker separated from her primary

employer within four quarters of a quarter in which the employer experienced a mass layoff.12

An employer is counted as having a mass layoff in a quarter during 2008–2010 if (i) employment

dropped by 30 percent or more compared with the quarter of 2007 in which employment was

greatest and (ii) maximum employment in 2007 was less than 130 percent of maximum

employment in 2006. The latter condition helps to avoid classifying employers in steady decline

as experiencing a mass layoff (DvW).13,14

         Third, for all quarters starting with 2008:I, we require displaced workers to have at least

one quarter per calendar year with positive earnings to remain in the sample. This follows JLS


10
   This criterion follows JLS and CP. In Appendix A.1, we describe estimates for displaced workers with shorter
pre-displacement job tenures.
11
   We focus on separations during 2008–2010 because, although the Great Recession contraction officially lasted
from December 2007 until June 2009, the recovery of the labor market lagged substantially: Washington’s
unemployment rate did not fall below 10 percent until June 2010, and had fallen only to 9.6 percent by December
2010. See Appendix A.2.
12
   A worker’s displacement is dated to the quarter of his or her separation (not the quarter of the separating
employer’s mass layoff). Workers who separated, but not in connection with a mass layoff, are dropped from the
displaced worker treatment group because, for these workers, the decision to separate is more likely to have been the
result either of worker choice or employer selection.
13
   Because mass layoffs are defined by percentage changes in employment, small employers may be counted as
having a mass layoff with only a small absolute change in employment. Accordingly, we drop any worker who at
any time had a primary employer whose employment dropped below 50 workers in any quarter during 2002–2007.
14
   The data do not include an employer “successor file” for employers who have ceased to exist. Instead, we apply
the worker-flow approach developed by Benedetto, Haltiwanger, Lane, and McKinney (2007) and drop displaced
workers who appeared to separate in connection with an employer identification number change, merger,
acquisition, spin off, or break up.



                                                         8
and implies that the estimates should be interpreted as effects of displacement on workers who

remain attached to the Washington labor force.15 (In Appendix A.3, we estimate the effects of

displacement without imposing this requirement.)

         The comparison group consists of long-tenure workers who were not displaced and who

continued to have positive earnings with the same primary employer in every quarter from

2008:I through 2014:IV. The comparison, then, is between the outcomes of long-tenure

displaced workers and long-tenure non-displaced (or “stably employed”) workers who retain

employment with the same primary employer for another seven years.16,17

         For two reasons, we restrict the main analysis to workers who claimed UI at least once

during 2002–2014. First, we observe demographic characteristics—age, gender, race, and

education—only for this subset of workers (about 33 percent of the displaced workers).18

Observing workers’ characteristics allows us to make our analysis similar to previous research

by restricting attention to displaced workers aged 20–50 at the time of displacement. Second,

restricting attention to workers who claimed UI implies that all workers in the non-displaced

comparison group experienced at least one UI-covered temporary layoff (with recall to the same

employer) during the 2002–2014 period. [It is common for workers to receive UI benefits during


15
   Workers who drop out of the labor force, become self-employed, work in the underground economy, or move out
of state will not appear in the Washington earnings records. (Self-employed workers are not covered by UI,
underground earnings are not reported, and out-of-state earnings will be picked up in the earnings records of another
state.)
16
   For estimates based on an alternative comparison group that need not remain with the same primary employer
from 2008:I through 2014:IV, see Appendix A.4.
17
   We have conducted a robustness check that excludes the non-displaced co-workers of displaced workers from the
comparison group. This exclusion drops about 20 percent of the original comparison group, and produces slightly
larger estimates of displaced workers’ earnings, hours, and wage rate losses.
18
   State UI agencies typically record workers’ characteristics only when they claim UI. For gender and race, we
assign an indicator with a constant value over the 13-year period. We assign the age of a worker in each quarter
based on the worker’s age in the quarter he or she was observed. For education, we assign a constant level if we
observe the worker only once (that is, if he or she claimed UI more than once); however, if we observe the worker
more than once , we assign the first observed value of education for all quarters until the quarter in which we
observe a change.



                                                         9
temporary layoffs lasting less than one quarter (Anderson and Meyer 1994). The median UI

claim duration of non-displaced workers in the sample we use was two weeks.] Selecting non-

displaced workers who have experienced one or more temporary layoffs should result in a

comparison group at greater risk of displacement, and hence more comparable to the displaced

treatment group.19

2.2 Summary statistics for displaced workers and the comparison group

Table 1 displays descriptive statistics of variables for the full UI claimant sample (columns 1 and

2) and for the sample excluding workers in NAICS industries 51–56 (information, finance and

insurance, real estate, professional, scientific, and technical services, management of companies;

administrative, support, and waste management and remediation services—see columns 3 and 4).

The full sample includes 2,690 displaced workers and 13,290 non-displaced workers.

        In the pre-displacement years 2002–2005,20 the displaced workers had somewhat higher

quarterly average earnings and work hours, and higher hourly wage rates, than did the non-

displaced comparison group (Table 1, top panel). This likely reflects a comparison group

consisting of workers who experienced temporary layoff unemployment at some time. These

differences nearly disappear when workers in NAICS industries 51–56 are dropped from the

sample (columns 3 and 4). The demographic characteristics of the sample fit the well-known

profile of displaced workers: 71 percent male, 78 percent white, 47 percent with a high school

education but no post-secondary education, 11 percent with less than high school or a GED, and

averaging almost 40 years of age.

        The bottom panel of Table 1 shows two substantial differences between the displaced



19
  Appendix A.5 describes estimates using a broadened sample not restricted to UI claimants.
20
  We omit 2006–2007 to avoid including lower earnings and hours that may occur due to pre-displacement
“Ashenfelter’s dips.”


                                                      10
worker treatment group and the non-displaced comparison group. First, the employers of

displaced workers were smaller on average than those of non-displaced workers. This difference

arises because, as noted in footnote 13, small employers are more likely than large employers to

satisfy the definition of a mass layoff. Second, the distribution of displaced and non-displaced

workers differs by major industry of employment in 2007:IV. About 82 percent of displaced

workers came from just three major industries: NAICS codes 31–33 (manufacturing; 28 percent),

42–49 (trade; 16 percent), and 51–56 (described above; 38 percent). In contrast, only two-thirds

of the non-displaced comparison group worked in these industries. The imbalance results mainly

from NAICS industries 51–56, which employed 38 percent of the displaced workers, but only 6

percent of the non-displaced comparison group.

       The composition of displaced workers in the Washington sample differs sharply from the

composition of the Pennsylvania workers examined by JLS, 75 percent of whom came from

manufacturing; however, the Connecticut sample analyzed by CP is more like the Washington

sample: 16 percent from manufacturing, 19 percent from trade, and 23 percent from NAICS

codes 51–56. (As a check on the estimates using all displaced workers, we estimate the losses of

workers displaced from all industries except NAICS 51–56 in Appendix A.6.)

3 Estimation methods

We begin with a description of methods used to estimate earnings losses following displacement

and to decompose those losses into components due to lost work hours and reduced hourly wage

rates. We then describe the use of AKM methods to estimate the importance of employer effects

and match effects in displaced workers’ employment outcomes.

3.1 Estimated displacement effects on earnings, hours, and wage rates




                                                11
To estimate displaced workers’ earnings losses, we apply an estimator similar to JLS’s multi-

period difference-in-differences estimator, which compares the employment outcomes of

displaced workers before, during, and after displacement with observationally similar long-

tenure workers who were not displaced. The effect of displacement can be obtained by

estimating a worker fixed-effects model of the following form:

        Yijt = ci + γt + Zit θ1 + Wit θ2 + Xj(i,t) β + ∑20
                                                        k = –20(δk ∙Ditk ) + eijt                          (1)

where Yijt is an employment outcome (earnings, hours, or wage rate) of worker i (with primary

employer j) in quarter t; ci is a worker-specific fixed effect; γt is a vector of calendar quarter

indicators; Zit includes the worker’s age and age squared, and a vector of gender, race, and

education indicators, interacted with the worker’s age; Wit includes averages of the worker’s pre-

displacement (2002–2005) earnings and pre-displacement hours with the primary employer, both

interacted with a vector of yearly indicators21; and Xj(i,t) consists of the characteristics of worker

i’s pre-layoff employer j (log of employer size and one-digit NAICS code in 2007:IV interacted

with a vector of yearly indicators). Each Ditk is an indicator equal to one if the worker is observed

in quarter k relative to displacement, zero otherwise (k = 0 is the quarter of displacement).22

        Interest lies mainly in the estimates of δk, which are regression-adjusted differences in

outcomes between displaced and non-displaced workers before (k < 0), at the time of (k = 0), and

after (k > 0) the quarter of displacement. Interpreting the estimated δk as causal effects of

displacement requires the assumption that, absent displacement, displaced workers’ outcomes




21
  Similar interaction terms were used by DvW and are intended to control for differential earnings and hours trends.
22
  The omitted reference category consists of non-displaced workers and all observations recorded in quarters 21, 22,
23, and 24 before the displacement (k < –20); hence, we limit the analysis sample to observations recorded between
–24 and 20 quarters relative to the quarter of displacement.



                                                         12
would have paralleled those of non-displaced workers. Given parallel trends, negative estimated

δks after displacement are taken as evidence of a displacement effect.23

        Figure 1 illustrates the parallel-trends assumption using unconditional earnings and hours

data for workers displaced in 2009:I and for workers who remained stably employed (that is, had

the same primary employer throughout 2002–2014). During the first 5–6 years of the seven years

before displacement, the earnings and hours of workers who will be displaced parallel those of

workers who will remain stably employed. Also, the earnings and hours profiles in Figure 1 give

a first impression that, following displacement, work hours come closer to recovering to their

pre-displacement levels than do earnings.

3.2 Employer fixed effects

A growing body of research has examined the importance of employers in earnings

determination and has shown that premiums paid by employers are an important component of

earnings (e.g., Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis 1999; Abowd, Creecy, and Kramarz 2002; Card,

Heining, and Kline 2013; Card, Cardoso, and Kline 2016; Barth, Bryson, Davis, and Freeman

2016; Sorkin 2018; Song, et al. 2019). The Washington data allow us to construct a linked

employer-employee panel of 22.9 million worker-year observations and estimate AKM models

of earnings, hours, and hourly wages using data for 2002–2014—see Appendix B for details.24

The resulting estimated employer fixed effects allow us in turn to observe the extent to which the

earnings, hours, and wage rate losses of displaced workers result from working for post-

displacement employers with policies regarding earnings, hours, and wage rates that differ

systematically from the pre-displacement employer.


23
   As a robustness check of the parallel-trends assumption, we estimate a version of the model with worker-specific
trends (a random trends model)—see Appendix A.7.
24
   As described in Appendix B, we omit both the sample of displaced workers and the comparison group when we
estimate the AKM model.


                                                        13
         The AKM models we estimate can be written:

         logYijt = αi + ψj(i,t) + θt + uijt ,                                                                (2)

where Yijt denotes earnings, hours, or the wage rate of worker i with employer j in year t; αi is a

worker-specific fixed effect (reflecting the productive characteristics of the worker that can be

transferred among employers); ψj(i,t) is an employer-specific fixed effect (reflecting employer

characteristics that result in above- or below-average earnings, hours, or wage rates for all

workers at employer j); θt is a vector of calendar year indicators; and uijt is the error component.

The function j(i,t) indexes the employer j effect for worker i in year t. Equation (2) applies to the

full Washington labor market, and the administrative records available to us include

demographic characteristics only for workers who claimed UI at some point during 2002–2014,

so we cannot include demographics in equation (2).

         Estimation of equation (2) for each of the three outcomes results in three vectors of

                                  % j ), one each for the log of earnings, log of hours, and log of
estimated employer fixed effects (ψ

wage rates (all necessarily conditional on employment). Most generally, these fixed effects

represent time-invariant policies of a given employer with respect to compensation—such as

incentive pay, delayed compensation, and wage compression—or work hours (Baker, Gibbs, and

Holmstrom 1994b; Lazear and Shaw 2009). A more specific interpretation, applicable only to

                                             %j is a measure of the advantages derived from being
earnings and wage rates (not hours), is that ψ

employed by a given employer (Card, Heining, and Kline 2013). Still another interpretation,

                                       % j is an estimate of employer j’s position on a job ladder
albeit somewhat controversial, is that ψ

(Engbom and Moser 2017).25


25
  Interpretation of the employer fixed effect as a measure of an employer’s position on the job ladder is consistent
with Moscarini and Postel-Vinay’s (2016) view of the job ladder as a stable ranking of jobs agreed upon by all



                                                         14
                                                        %j , as additional outcomes of the
         We treat the estimated employer fixed effects, ψ

displacement process. The goal is to estimate the proportion of earnings, hours, and wage rate

losses following displacement that can be attributed to a displaced worker’s reemployment by an

                          % j than the employer from which she was displaced.26 To do this, we
employer with a different ψ

                       %j s (for employer j) to each worker-quarter observation in the data, which
assign the appropriate ψ

is possible for all worker-quarter observations in the pre-displacement period (2002–2007) and to

all but 643 worker-quarter observations in the post-displacement period.27

         To estimate the importance of employer fixed effects in explaining the adverse outcomes

                                               % s (once each for earnings, hours, and wage rates)
of displaced workers, we regress the estimated ψ

on pre- and post-displacement indicators, along the lines of equation (1):

         % ijt = ci + γt + Zit θ1 + Wit θ2 + Xj(i,t) β + ∑20
         ψ                                                k = –20(δk ∙Ditk ) + eijt                           (3)

The estimated δks are regression-adjusted differences in employer effects realized by displaced

workers relative to non-displaced workers and relative to before displacement. Equation (3)


workers. However, Eeckhout and Kircher (2011) show that a structural model with worker-employer sorting does
not produce a wage equation that is log-linear (or even monotone) in employer fixed effects. This limits the ability
to interpret AKM employer effects as a ranking of firms, at least from the standpoint of their structural model. See
also Bonhomme, Lamadon, and Manresa (2018) and Hagedorn, Law, and Manovskii (2017). Card, Cardoso,
Heining, and Kline (2018, p. S44) provide an economic interpretation of the AKM employer effects as rents
captured by inframarginal workers through asymmetric information about workers’ reservation wages.
26
   Goldschmidt and Schmieder (2017) take a similar approach to estimating the loss of employer effects due to
outsourcing of jobs, and Fackler, Mueller, and Stegmaier (2017) and Schmieder, von Wachter, and Heining (2018)
examine employer effects for displaced workers. Fackler, Mueller, and Stegmaier (2017) focus on workers displaced
in connection with employer bankruptcy. All use data on Germany.
27
   These 643 observations are from a total of 67,216 worker-quarter observations of displaced workers after
displacement. The unmatched cases occur when the employer of a displaced worker was not in the connected set
used to estimate the AKM ψ   %j s. There are 118 such employers, who employed altogether 149 unique displaced
workers for at least one quarter after displacement. If we estimate the AKM model using data only from the pre-
displacement years (2002–2007), rather than from all available years (2002–2014), we are unable to match 17,499
worker-quarter observations for 1,424 unique displaced workers who were employed by 786 employers in the post-
displacement period. For these 786 employers, ψ    % j s could not be estimated either because they were not in the
connected set or because they did not exist before 2008. (As with the 2002–2014 data, the 2002–2007 data produces
%j s for all pre-displacement employers.) The correlation coefficients between ψ
ψ                                                                                   %j s estimated using 2002–2014 data
and ψ %j s estimated using 2002–2007 data are 0.97 for log earnings, 0.93 for log hours, and 0.95 for log wage rates.




                                                          15
includes individual worker fixed effects, so the estimated δks represent within-worker changes in

employer effects (for earnings, hours, and wage rates) following pre- to post-displacement

employer transitions. For earnings and wage rates, negative estimated δks represent evidence of

lost employer-specific premiums. For hours worked, negative estimated δks are evidence of

reduced hours due to the differing working time policies of post-displacement employers.28

3.3 Match effects

As discussed in the introduction, worker-employer match effects occur when a worker’s

productivity differs among employers, either intrinsically, or through contractual arrangements

that enhance a worker’s productivity. We estimate time-invariant worker-employer match effects

using Woodcock’s (2015) fixed effects estimator, then use these estimated match effects to infer

the portion of displaced workers’ full losses that can be attributed to their loss.29

        We implement Woodcock’s method for each of the three outcomes (earnings, work

hours, and wage rates). For each outcome, we net out the contribution of years of job tenure and

year effects.30 Then for each unique worker-employer match, we compute the average of the

                                      &&&&&&ij 31 Finally, we estimate a model similar to the
residualized outcome variable—denoted logY

AKM model in equation (2), but using these within-match averages as dependent variables:

        &&&&&&ij = ai + φj(i,t) + μij,
        logY                                                                                               (4)



28
   A possible alternative is to include employer fixed effects in equation (1), as in Schmieder, von Wachter, and
Heining (2018). When we take this approach, we obtain results similar to those based on equation (3) and reported
in section 4; that is, the employer dummies are weakly related to displaced workers’ earnings losses. As Schmieder,
von Wachter, and Heining point out, including employer fixed effects in equation (1) conditions on an outcome of
displacement—employment by a given post-displacement employer—and could produce bias if characteristics of
the post-displacement employer are correlated with unobserved determinants of displaced workers’ losses.
Accordingly, we prefer to model employer effects as an outcome of displacement, as in equation (3).
29
   See also the useful implementation of Woodcock’s estimator by Sørensen and Vejlin (2013).
30
   Because job tenure is endogenous, we also perform the same exercise without adjusting for tenure—see Appendix
A.10. The estimates are quite similar.
31
   Specifically, we first remove calendar-year effects from the outcome variable, then regress this adjusted outcome
on years of job tenure and worker-employer match indicators. Finally, we compute within-match averages of the
outcome after subtracting the contribution of job tenure from the outcome variable.


                                                        16
where ai denotes the worker fixed effect, φj(i,t) denotes the employer fixed effect, and μij is an

error, independent of individual worker and employer fixed effects. By definition, the vector of

residuals from the estimated equation (4) represents the variation in &&&&&&
                                                                      logYij that remains after

accounting for worker and employer fixed effects:

               &&&&&&ij – 𝑎*i – 𝜑*j(i,t).
        𝜇̂ ij =logY                                                                                        (5)

It follows that these residuals can be interpreted as estimated worker-employer match effects,

averaged over the years we observe a given worker-employer match.

        We estimate equation (4) using the same sample used to estimate the AKM model (as

described in Appendix B), except that we retain displaced workers and the comparison group in

the sample along with all other job movers. This is necessary because individual fixed effects for

displaced workers need to be estimated in order to calculate their match effects (𝜇̂ s)—see

equation (5).32 To estimate the effect of displacement on the estimated match effects, we use the

𝜇̂ s for log earnings, log hours, and log wage rates as dependent variables in equation (3); that is,

we replace the employer fixed effects in equation (3) with the estimated match effects.

4 Estimated effects of displacement on earnings, work hours, and wage rates

This section describes estimates of the magnitude of displaced workers’ earnings losses and

decomposes those losses into their work-hour and hourly wage rate components.

4.1 Estimates of lost earnings

Figure 2 displays estimated effects of displacement on unconditional earnings (top) and log

earnings (bottom) over a period of 5 years, and Table 2 summarizes the estimates for the quarter

following displacement (Q1), eight quarters after displacement (Q8), and the average of quarters


32
   The estimated employer fixed effects (φ) from equation (4) are highly correlated with the estimated employer
fixed effects (ψ) from the AKM model in equation (2); the correlation coefficients equal 0.984 for log wages, 0.988
for log earnings, and 0.995 for log hours.



                                                        17
17–20 following displacement (Q17–Q20).33 The graphs are obtained by estimating equation (1)

and plotting the estimated δks, along with 95-percent confidence intervals (which are very small

and at times hard to see). The vertical line in each graph marks the quarter of displacement; that

is, the last quarter in which a displaced worker is observed with earnings or hours with the

employer of the previous six years.

        Soon-to-be-displaced workers’ earnings drifted downward in roughly the year before

displacement (Ashenfelter’s dip), dropped sharply in the quarter of displacement and the quarter

immediately after (quarters 0 and 1), then recovered, but never to their pre-displacement level, as

gauged relative to earnings of the comparison group. The top graph in Figure 2 shows that, in the

quarter following displacement, workers earned on average $6,531 less than non-displaced

workers. Dividing this by pre-displacement (2002–2005) average earnings with the former

primary employer ($13,349, from Table 1) implies a loss of about 49 percent in the quarter

following displacement. The estimate in logs conditions on positive earnings and is somewhat

smaller, suggesting a loss of about 42 percent [exp(–0.552) – 1] in the quarter after

displacement.34

        Figure 2 and Table 2 also show that, five years after displacement, workers earned on

average $2,026 less per quarter from their primary employer than did comparable non-displaced

workers, which translates to lost earnings of about 15 percent (dividing by $13,349). The log

earnings estimates suggest long-term losses of about 16 log points.35



33
   Columns 1 and 3 of Appendix Table A5 display the estimates on which Figure 2 is based. Zero values are dropped
from the analysis when using outcomes in logarithmic form, resulting in an unbalanced panel.
34
   Inclusion of worker-specific trends in the model produces similar profiles of earnings, hours, and wage rates—see
Appendix A.7.
35
    The estimates in Figure 2 and Table 2 are based on earnings from the primary employer only. If we instead use
earnings from all employers, estimated earnings losses are similar, although somewhat smaller (see Appendix Table
A5, columns 2 and 4). That is, accounting for the presence of multiple employers does not substantially change the
conclusions drawn from focusing solely on outcomes from primary employers.


                                                        18
        Table 3 compares the estimates in Figure 2 and Table 2 with those obtained by JLS, CP,

and DvW, the studies most similar to ours. Where possible, we report estimates of earnings

losses for both displaced UI claimants and for all displaced workers (in our case, the broadened

sample discussed in Appendix A.5), along with the present discounted value (PDV) of average

losses in terms of years of pre-displacement annual earnings.36

        Using data on Pennsylvania UI claimants, JLS (1993b, Figure 5.5) estimated lost

earnings of about 66 percent at the time of displacement, and about 24 percent six years later.

Using data on Connecticut UI claimants, CP (Figure 4) estimated lost earnings of about 49

percent at the time of displacement, and about 32 percent six years later, implying about 1.7

years of lost pre-displacement earnings after six years. The earnings losses we estimate for

Washington UI claimants displaced in 2008–2010 are smaller than those reported by either JLS

or CP—about 16 percent and one year of lost pre-displacement earnings after five years—but in

view of the differences in time and place, the similarities are perhaps more striking than the

differences.37

        For all displaced workers (not just UI claimants), JLS (1993b) estimate lost earnings of

about 40 percent at the time of displacement, and about 25 percent six years later, implying about


36
   Following DvW, we use a 1.227 percent quarterly (5 percent annual) discount rate. The PDVs are computed using
quarters 1–20 post displacement. The PDVs for CP’s estimates are computed using estimates for quarters 1–24
reported in Web Appendix K of their paper and using a 1.227 percent rate. The PDV from JLS is computed as
$50,000 (reported in Chapter 7 of their book) divided by pre-displacement earnings reported in Table 5.1. The figure
from DvW, 2.5 years of pre-displacement earnings, is reported in Table 1 of their article.
37
   As noted in section 2.1, the comparison group for the UI claimant sample consists of workers who experienced at
least one temporarily layoff during 2002–2014, likely attenuating the estimated displacement effects. JLS and CP
compare the losses of UI claimants to all non-displaced, continuously employed workers. The JLS sample consisted
largely of workers displaced from manufacturing in Pennsylvania during the decline of the U.S. steel industry, and
the CP sample, although more diverse, consisted disproportionately of workers displaced from shipbuilding. No
single industry in Washington imploded during the Great Recession, although Washington clearly experienced a
severe contraction. Appendix A.2 compares the national unemployment rate with the unemployment rates in
Washington, Connecticut, and Pennsylvania, during the years studied by us, CP, and JLS. The unemployment rate in
Washington tracked the national rate more closely during the Great Recession than did the unemployment rates in
Connecticut around the 2001 recession or in Pennsylvania around the dual recessions of the early 1980s.



                                                        19
2 years of lost pre-displacement earnings after six years. CP estimate lost earnings of about 33

percent at the time of displacement, and about 15 percent six years later, implying about 0.8

years of lost pre-displacement earnings after six years. The earnings losses we estimate for the

broadened sample of Washington workers displaced in 2008–2010—1.1 years of lost pre-

displacement earnings after five years—are similar to those reported by both JLS or CP.38 39

         Based on a much longer post-displacement period—20 years—DvW report that in a

typical recession, the PDV of losses of the average displaced worker equal about 2.5 years of

pre-displacement annual earnings. If we extrapolate the earnings losses of the Washington

displaced claimants over 20 years post displacement, we find losses equal to about 2.5 years of

pre-displacement earnings. For the broadened sample of displaced workers, we find losses equal

to about 3.5 years of pre-displacement earnings.

4.2 Estimates of lost work hours and reduced hourly wage rates

Figure 3 displays estimated effects of displacement on unconditional work hours (top) and log

hours (bottom), again based on equation (1).40 As was true for earnings, the work hours of soon-

to-be-displaced workers dip somewhat in roughly the year before displacement, drop greatly in

the quarter of displacement and the following quarter, then partially recover. Although the

recovery of work hours is more robust than the recovery of earnings, work hours of the displaced

workers remain below those of the non-displaced comparison group five years after

displacement.


38
   Unlike JLS and CP, our estimates of long-term earnings losses of UI claimants are smaller than those of the
broadened sample (16 percent vs. 23 percent). Again, this is likely due to the comparison group consisting of
workers who at some point were temporarily laid off. JLS and CP compare the losses of UI claimants to all non-
displaced, continuously employed workers.
39
   Note that rate of recovery of earnings losses is more rapid for UI claimants (lower panel of Figure 2) than for the
broader group of displaced workers (lower panel of Appendix Figure A11). This accounts for the small difference
between the two groups in years of lost pre-displacement earnings (1 year vs. 1.1 years) compared with the larger
difference between the two groups in earnings losses after five years (15 percent vs. 23 percent).
40
   The estimates underlying Figure 3 are shown in columns 1 and 3 of Appendix Table A6.


                                                          20
        Specifically, hours lost in the quarter after displacement amount to 217 on a base of 519

hours (42 percent, estimated in levels, or 42 log points). The corresponding earnings losses are

about 49 percent (in levels, or 55 log points), so lost work hours are responsible for roughly 76

percent (= 42/55) of lost earnings at the time of displacement. Five years after displacement (in

quarters 17–20), the average displaced worker still works 14 fewer hours per quarter than

otherwise (about 3 percent, estimated in levels, or 5 log points). The corresponding earnings

losses are about 15 percent (in levels, or 16 log points), so reduced work hours account for about

28.8 percent (= 4.72/16.4) of the long-term earnings losses of displaced workers. As we confirm

below, the remainder of long-term earnings losses are attributable to lower hourly wage rates.41

        Qualitatively, these estimates are similar to work by Topel (1990) and Stevens (1997)

using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, which showed that reduced work time plays a

relatively minor role in explaining the long-term losses of displaced workers. Several papers

using German administrative data also show this pattern: Schmieder, von Wachter, and Bender

(2009), Jarosch (2015), and Schmieder, von Wachter, and Heining (2018) find that five years

after displacement, earnings losses are explained mainly by reduced daily wages rather than

fewer days employed. (Days employed and the daily wage rate are the work time and wage rate

measures available in German administrative data.)

        It is also useful to examine displacement’s effects on work hours at different points in the

hours distribution. We do this using unconditional quantile regression (Firpo, Fortin, and

Lemieux 2009) with a specification like equation (1). The dependent variable for each regression



41
  The estimates are consistent with Farber’s (2017) finding that short-term movements from full-time to part-time
employment explain part of the cost of displacement during and after the Great Recession. Farber’s (1993, 2015,
2017) studies are based on the Displaced Worker Supplement to the Current Population Survey, so they pertain to a
broader group of workers than those we are considering.



                                                       21
is the re-centered influence function transformation of quarterly work hours at a specified

quantile. Figure 4 shows the estimated displacement effects (as proportional changes in quarterly

work hours) at quantiles 10, 25, 50, 75, and 90.42 Figure 4 also shows the estimated displacement

effect on the probability of working a positive number of hours in each quarter, obtained using a

linear probability model based on equation (1).

        Figure 4 suggests that non-employment (i.e., a higher probability of 0 work hours) is not

the driver of displaced workers’ lost work hours. Displacement does reduce the probability of

any work by about 2.5 percentage points in quarters 17–20, but this is a small reduction in

proportional terms (0.025 on a base of 0.996). Rather, the main effect of displacement is a large

reduction in the probability of hours worked at the 10th quantile (418 hours per quarter ≈ 32

hours per week) and more moderate reductions at the 25th and 50th quantiles (480 hours per

quarter ≈ 37 hours per week; and 525 hours per quarter ≈ 40 hours per week). Because

displacement implies lost seniority, which would imply a loss of overtime hours, it is surprising

that displacement appears to lead to a modest increase in work hours at the 90th quantile.

        Estimates of hourly wage rate losses due to displacement, based on equation (1), are

displayed in Figure 5. Five years after displacement, hourly wage rates remained depressed by

about 11.5 log points (top panel of Table 2). Comparing these wage loss estimates with those for

earnings and hours implies that about 29 percent (4.7 log points) of the long-term earnings deficit

of 16.4 log points were due to fewer work hours, and about 70 percent (= 11.5/16.4) to lower




42
  Proportional effects are obtained by dividing each estimated displacement effect by pre-displacement baseline
hours at each quantile. Appendix Table A7 presents the point estimates and the baseline hours at each quantile.



                                                        22
hourly wage rates.43 (An increase of 1.1 percent in the covariance between the log of work hours

and the log of hourly wage rates accounts for the remaining earnings loss.)

         The estimated hourly wage-loss profile in Figure 5 differs strikingly from both the

earnings and work hour profiles (Figures 2 and 3). Following displacement, wage rates drop by

about 13 log points and remain permanently lower by nearly 12 log points. (The sluggish

recovery of wage rates is even more apparent in the broadened sample that includes workers who

did not claim UI—see Appendix A.5.) In contrast, earnings and hours show notably more

recovery after just two years.

5 Employer and match effects

Section 3.2 described an approach to estimating whether some portion of displaced workers’

losses are due to employer fixed effects. For earnings or wage rates, this would imply loss of a

job with an employer offering premium earnings or wage rates, and reemployment with an

employer that did not. For hours worked, it would imply loss of a job with systematically longer

hours than the job obtained after displacement. Section 3.3 described a way of estimating

worker-employer match effects and the portion of displaced workers’ losses due to loss of these

effects. This section presents the results of both approaches. We first examine the overall

importance of employer effects in generating displaced workers’ reduced earnings, work hours,

and wage rates (section 5.1). The estimates suggest that employer effects play a quite limited role

overall, and we examine closely why this is the case in sections 5.2 and 5.3. Section 5.4 then

presents our analysis of match and direct displacement effects.


43
  Figure 5 also shows a clear 8 log-point spike in hourly wage rates in the quarter of displacement (quarter 0). This
spike results from a greater drop in work hours than in earnings in the quarter of displacement: for example, Figure 2
shows a drop in earnings of about 41 log points in quarter 0, whereas Figure 3 shows a drop in work-hours of about
47 log points. Payments for accumulated leave time (sick leave and vacation) and severance paid in the quarter of
separation are the most likely cause of this pay bump. Severance payments are included with earnings in
administrative earnings records and would inflate reported earnings relative to work hours in the quarter of
separation, leading to an apparent increase in the hourly wage around the time of displacement.


                                                         23
5.1 Estimated average losses due to employer fixed effects

                                                                                            %j )
The three panels of Figure 6 show estimated displacement effects on employer fixed effects (ψ

for log earnings, log hours, and log of the hourly wage rate for the sample average displaced

worker—see the time paths marked with circles, which plot the δ, k s from equation (3). For

comparison, the time paths marked with squares in Figure 6 repeat the estimated full effects of

displacement on log earnings, log hours, and log hourly wage rate (from Figures 2, 3, and 5).44

          For each of the three outcomes, lost employer effects explain a small (but statistically

significant) fraction of the average losses following displacement—see the summary in row 2 of

Table 2. In the quarter following displacement (Q1), 3.3 log points of the average earnings loss

of 55 log points (6 percent) are due to working for an employer that pays less to all its workers,

controlling for worker fixed effects. For work hours, differing employer hours policies account

for 1.8 points of the overall 42 log-point loss (about 4 percent), and lost wage rate premiums

account for 1.5 points of the overall 13 log-point reduction (about 11 percent).

          Five years after displacement, the role of employer effects in explaining the lost earnings,

hours, and wage rates of the average displaced worker remains minor. Specifically, employer

effects account for 9 percent (1.5/16.4) of the overall 16.4 log-point earnings loss, virtually none

of the 14.2 log-point hours loss, and 17 percent (2.0/11.5) of the 11.5 log-point reduction in

hourly wage rates. Overall, employer effects are of relatively minor importance in explaining the

average long-term losses from displacement.

          The limited role of employer effects in explaining displaced workers’ losses is surprising

both because much recent research has found that employer effects are important to earnings




44
     The estimates underlying Figure 6 are reported in Appendix Table A8.



                                                         24
determination in general (notably Card, Heining, and Kline 2013; Card, Cardoso, and Kline

2016; Barth, Bryson, Davis, and Freeman 2016; Sorkin 2018; Song, et al. 2019) and because

work by Schmieder, von Wachter, and Heining (2018) has found that lost employer-specific

premiums almost wholly explain the losses of displaced workers in Germany. In Appendix A.8,

we show that the small role for employer effects that we estimate does not result from

differences between Schmieder, von Wachter, and Heining and us in sample selection or model

specification. We can only speculate, but the greater importance of formal occupational training

in Germany would be consistent with a reduced importance of job-specific effects (Acemoglu

and Pischke 1998).

5.2 Transitions of displaced and non-displaced job changers

We can gain further insight into the losses of displaced workers—and why employer effects play

such a limited role—by examining changes in the hourly wage rates of displaced workers as they

                                                                              %). For this
transition to employers with different fixed effects (or premiums) for wages (ψ

analysis, we focus on changes in wage rates because reduced wage rates are mainly responsible

for displaced workers’ long-term earnings losses, although the analyses for changes in earnings

and work hours point to similar conclusions—see Appendix A.9. We also examine the job

transitions and associated changes in wage rates and employer effects of the 1.46 million “non-

displaced job changers” who provide the variation allowing estimation of the AKM model

described in Appendix B.

        We first classify employers into quintiles by their AKM-estimated employer effects for

wage rates.45 We then assign the job transition of each displaced worker and each non-displaced


45
  The employer fixed effects come from the AKM analysis described in Appendix B and are based on the largest
connected set from the 2002–2014 Washington data. Thresholds for the quintiles are obtained after sorting on
worker-year records.



                                                      25
job changer to one of 25 quintile-to-quintile transition cells, based on the employer effect

quintiles of each transition’s origin employer and the destination employer two years later.46

Specifically, we calculate the average change in wage rates and the associated change in

employer effects for each of the 25 quintile-to-quintile transitions. We do this once for displaced

workers and once for non-displaced job changers.47 This results in a matrix for each group

showing changes in wage rates and employer fixed effects associated with each inter-quintile

transition.

        Tables 4A and 4B show the results of this process for the hourly wage rates of displaced

workers and non-displaced job changers, and Figure 7 illustrates the inter-quintile transition

probabilities (as percentages) of displaced workers (top) and non-displaced job changers

(bottom). Each quintile-i to quintile-j transition cell in Tables 4A and 4B contains five entries: (i)

the percentage of workers who made the transition, (ii) the mean log-point change in hourly

wages experienced by workers who made that transition, (iii) the mean change in the employer

effect associated with the transition, (iv) the mean change in match effect associated with the

transition, and (v) the mean direct effect associated with the transition. (We discuss the match

effects and direct effects associated with each transition in section 5.4.) For example, 4.2 percent

of displaced workers lost a job with a fourth-quintile employer and were employed two years

later by a third-quintile employer. These workers on average suffered an earnings loss of 26.8



46
   For displaced workers, we focus on the transition from the pre-displacement employer to the employer two years
after displacement, at which time 96 percent of displaced workers were employed. For non-displaced job changers,
we select workers from 2008–2010 who had the same primary employer for at least two years, were observed with a
different primary employer the following year, and remained with that primary employer for at least two years; see
Card, Heining, and Kline (2013) for a similar event study. We have also produced results for non-displaced job
changers using all available data—that is, transitions from 2004 through 2012. (Transitions starting in 2002–2003
and 2013–2014 cannot be used because we need to observe two years of job tenure before and after each transition.)
The transition probabilities and associated changes in outcomes and employer effects for 2004–2012 are quite
similar to those for 2008–2010.
47
   The pre-displacement wage rate is computed as an average over the pre-displacement years 2002–2005.


                                                       26
log points, 10.3 points of which could be attributed to lost employer effects, 6 points to lost

match effects, and 10.4 point to direct displacement effects.

       Three points are evident from Tables 4A and 4B. First, the distributions of transition

probabilities for displaced workers and non-displaced job changers differ markedly—as

illustrated in Figure 7. Whereas 42 percent of displaced workers originated with fifth-quintile

employers, fewer than 10 percent originated in each of the bottom two quintiles (see the row

sums in Table 4A). In contrast, roughly 20 percent of non-displaced job changers originated in

each of the five employer effect quintiles (see the row sums in Table 4B). Also, over two-thirds

(28.2/42.0) of the displaced workers originating in the fifth quintile moved to other fifth-quintile

employers. In fact, moving from one fifth-quintile employer to another was the modal transition

for displaced workers.

       This observation leads to a second point: For both displaced workers and non-displaced

job changers, within-quintile transitions were more common than moves to higher- or lower-

quintile employers. To makes this clear, Table 5 shows sums and weighted averages of the

below-diagonal, on-diagonal, and above-diagonal elements of Tables 4A and 4B. The “on-

diagonal sums and averages” column shows that more than half of displaced workers and more

than two-fifths of non-displaced job changers moved from one employer to another within the

same quintile. A corollary is that, compared with non-displaced job changers, displaced workers

were somewhat more likely to move to lower-quintile employers (30 percent versus 25.7

percent) and much less likely to move to higher-quintile employers (17.8 percent versus 32.4

percent).

       Third, for the 30 percent of displaced workers who moved to lower-quintile employers,

the loss of an employer-specific premium accounts for most of the wage loss: The average




                                                 27
displaced worker who moved to a lower-quintile employer suffered a wage rate loss of 29.3 log

points, and nearly 19 points of this loss (64 percent) could be attributed to employer effects

(Table 5). For displaced workers who moved to lower fixed effect employers, wage changes

tended to move in parallel with employer effect changes.

         Nevertheless, fully 70 percent of displaced workers moved to an employer in the same or

a higher quintile, which implies that the typical displaced worker was not being knocked off a

job ladder and starting again at the bottom. This is the case even though more than 60 percent of

displaced workers lost jobs at fourth- or fifth-quintile employers and could potentially fall far.

Rather, most displaced workers were reemployed with an employer paying a premium at least as

large as the displacing employer’s—but at a lower wage rate.

         Figure 8A illustrates the point by plotting the inter-quintile changes in wage rates

[Δln(wage)] and changes in employer effects (Δψ) for displaced workers (triangles) and non-

displaced job changers (circles). For non-displaced job changers, the fit of a linear regression of

Δln(wage) on Δψ is excellent (R2 = 0.997) and suggests that a 0.25 log-point increase in the

employer effect following a job change is associated with a 0.22 log-point increase in the wage

rate. (The regression and standard regression statistics are in the note to Figure 8A.)

         For displaced workers, the regression of Δln(wage) on Δψ gives a looser fit (R2 = 0.824)

and suggests that a 0.25 log-point increase in the employer effect following job loss is associated

with no change in the wage rate. Equally telling is that, according to the regression, a displaced

worker who moves to an employer with the same fixed effect is expected to suffer a 0.17 log-

point decrease in the wage rate.48



48
   Note also that, for non-displaced job changers, the correlation between inter-quintile changes in wage rates and
changes in employer effects (Δψ) is nearly perfect (ρ = 0.998); whereas for displaced workers, that correlation is less
strong (ρ = 0.908).


                                                          28
       The scatterplots and fitted regressions in Figure 8A suggest that the AKM model, with

additive worker and employer effects, is a reasonable description of wage rate changes that

accompany job mobility for non-displaced job changers: wage rate changes tend to match

predicted changes following transitions across employers with different fixed effects. The close

correspondence between wage changes and changes in employer fixed effects in the AKM

sample is consistent with the symmetry test of Card, Heining, and Kline (2013). For displaced

workers, the relationship between wage changes and changes in employer effects remains

positive, but the relationship is no longer on the 45-degree line. Instead, it is shifted downward

and has a flatter slope, implying smaller wage changes for a given quintile-to-quintile move,

particularly for displaced workers who move upward.

5.3 Decomposing displaced workers’ losses

It is helpful to use the data in Tables 4A and 4B (quintile-to-quintile transition probabilities,

along with associated changes in wage rates and employer effects) to decompose displaced

workers’ average wage losses into portions attributable to (i) changes tied to employer effects

accompanying transitions between quintile-i and quintile-j employers and (ii) losses not

explained by employer effects following a quintile-i to quintile-j transition. Begin by writing the

mean log change in the hourly wage rate of displaced workers as:

       &&&&          /
       ∆𝑤 / = Σ2 Σ3 𝑚23 ∆𝑤23/                                                                 (6)

       /
where 𝑚23 and ∆𝑤23/ denote transition probabilities and mean wage rate changes of displaced

workers moving from quintile-i to quintile-j employers. This mean change can be decomposed
                                        /    /
by first adding then subtracting Σ2 Σ3 𝑚23 ∆𝜓23 on the right-hand side of equation (4):

       &&&&          /
       ∆𝑤 / = Σ2 Σ3 𝑚23   /
                        ∆𝜓23          /
                             + Σ2 Σ3 𝑚23 7∆𝑤23/ − ∆𝜓23
                                                    /
                                                       9                                      (7)




                                                  29
        /
where ∆𝜓23 denotes the mean change in employer effects for wage rates of displaced workers

moving from quintile-i to quintile-j employers. (Analogous decompositions can be written for

changes in earnings and work hours; the data needed to calculate the decompositions appear in

Appendix A.9. See Fortin, Lemieux, and Firpo [2011] for a comprehensive discussion of similar

decompositions.)

         The first term of the decomposition in equation (5) will be larger, the larger is the

tendency of displacement to move workers from higher-quintile to lower-quintile employers—

moves accompanied by lost employer effects. The second term will be larger, the larger are the

gaps between the actual wage changes of displaced workers and the employer effect changes

accompanying a given quintile-i to quintile-j move.

         Results of the decompositions are summarized in Table 6. Consider the mean hourly

wage loss of displaced workers two years after displacement—13.0 log points. If displaced

workers’ hourly wage changes had reflected only the differences between the wage premiums

paid by their origin and destination employers, their hourly wages would have been lower by

only 1.9 log points (less than 15 percent of the total).49 The remaining loss of more than 11 log

points represents an “excess” wage rate loss—greater than expected following transitions to

employers paying different wage premiums than the origin employers. Movements to employers

with different fixed effects can explain even less of displaced workers’ earnings losses (10

percent) and work hour losses (less than 7 percent).

         To summarize, employer fixed effects play a limited role in displaced workers’ losses

because the tendency of displaced workers to move to employers with lower fixed effects is



49
  Note that, five years after displacement, the mean hourly wage loss is slightly smaller and equals 11.5 log points;
see Table 2. Table 2 also indicates that five years after displacement, employer effects account for a slightly larger
share, 17.4 percent, of the losses (= 2.00/11.5).


                                                          30
modest: Fully 70 percent of displaced workers find reemployment with an employer in the same

or a higher fixed effect quintile (see again Figure 7). The decompositions in Table 6 suggests that

85 percent of displaced workers’ wage rate losses (and an even smaller percentage of earnings

and hours reductions) stem from losses exceeding those explainable by changes in employer

effects associated with job transitions.

5.4 Match effects and direct effects of displacement

The three panels of Figure 9 display the estimated effects of displacement on the match effects

(𝜇̂ ) for log earnings, log hours, and log hourly wage rate, described in section 3.3. For

comparison, the three panels also present the effects of displacement on log earnings, log hours,

and log hourly wage rate overall (repeated from the lower panels of Figures 2, 3, and 5).

        The estimates in Figure 9 suggest that on average, lost match effects play a major role in

explaining reduced earnings and wage rates five years post-displacement (see also row 3 of

Table 2). Specifically, the estimated match effects account for about 59 percent (= 8.48/16.4) of

the overall 16 log-point long-term earnings loss, and 57 percent (= 6.54/11.5) of the overall 11.5

log-point reduction in long-term hourly wage rates. For long-term work-hour reductions (which

are relatively small), match effects account for about 40 percent (= 1.88/4.72) of the overall 5

log-point loss.50 The share of match effects in explaining earnings losses grows following

displacement, suggesting that displaced workers do not find better matches over time.

        Lost match effects account for the majority of the average displaced workers’ losses, but

they are less important for displaced workers who move to employers paying lower premiums

than for the majority who move laterally or upward. This can be seen in Tables 4A and 5, and

Figure 8B illustrates the point by plotting the relationship between changes in match effects (Δμ)


50
  The match effects control for tenure. In Appendix A.10, we present estimates for match effects not accounting for
tenure. The results are very similar.


                                                        31
and changes in employer effects (Δψ) for displaced workers (triangles) and non-displaced job

changers (circles). For displaced workers, the regression of Δμ οn Δψ suggests that moving to an

employer paying a premium that is higher by 0.25 log-point is associated with a match effect loss

of 6–7 log points (see the regression in the note to Figure 8A). So for displaced workers who

move up, lost match effects tend to offset increased employer premiums. For non-displaced job

changers, the relationship between Δμ and Δψ is much weaker, as expected, because for these

workers employer effects play a dominant role in explaining wage changes (Figure 8B).

       The direct effects of displacement (d) show little systematic variation with moves across

employers paying different premium levels (Δψ). Figure 8C (and the fitted regression shown in

the figure note) shows that displaced workers face average direct displacement losses of about 8–

9 log points (the intercept), and the relationship between direct effects and Δψ is noisy and

insignificant (both statistically and economically). The estimates suggest that direct displacement

losses vary greatly among workers, but not systematically with respect to the type of job

transition. Non-displaced job changers also face substantial direct penalties when they move:

about 4–5 log points on average (the estimated intercept), and varying between about 2.5 log

points for a worker with Δψ = –0.5 and 6.5 log points for a worker with Δψ = +0.5. So non-

displaced job changers also face a cost of starting over, but on average it is about half that faced

by displaced workers.

       Figure 10 summarizes the sources of displaced workers’ wage reductions over the five

years following displacement. The direct effects of displacement are initially large, but they

diminish over time, which makes sense because they include scarring effects and the loss of

time-varying features of the former worker-employer relationship, such as lost seniority, value of

specific human capital, or dissolution of a delayed payment contract. Lost match effects explain




                                                 32
the majority of wage losses after five years; that is, most of displaced workers’ long-term wage

reductions can be attributed to loss of the kind of time-invariant worker-employer match effect

that Woodcock’s method is intended to capture.

6 Discussion and Conclusions

The failure of displaced workers’ earnings to recover to their pre-displacement trajectory is a

consequence mainly of the sluggish recovery of hourly wage rates. At the time of displacement,

wage rates drop by about 13 log points on average, and they remain nearly 12 log points below

their pre-displacement level five years later (Figure 5). In contrast, paid hours drop by 42 log

points at the time of displacement and rebound substantially (Figure 3). As a result, five years

after displacement lower hourly wages account for 70 percent of displaced workers’ earnings

losses (section 4.2 and Table 2).

       Figure 10 shows the division of displaced workers’ hourly wage rate losses into the three

components we have considered—employer effects, match effects, and direct displacement

effects (see also Table 2). Overall, the loss of jobs with employers paying premiums accounts for

only 17 percent of long-term reduced hourly wage rates; that is, lost employer-specific premiums

(employer fixed effects) play a quite limited role, suggesting that displaced workers’ losses

should not be attributed mainly to lost employer-specific rents. In fact, fully 70 percent of

displaced workers move to employers with similar or more favorable wage policies, yet despite

their lateral or upward transitions, displaced workers generally experience lower wage rates. It

follows that, for displaced workers, the evidence rejects the predictions of job ladder models.

       The results may seem surprising in light of estimates using German data that have found

an important role for employer fixed effects in explaining displaced workers’ earnings losses

(Fackler, Mueller, and Stegmaier 2017; Schmieder, von Wachter, and Heining 2018). However,




                                                 33
the relative unimportance of employer effects is consistent with findings from the macro-labor

literature documenting the inability of job ladder models to account for long-term earnings losses

(DvW; Jarosch 2015; Krolikowski 2017).51

        As discussed in section 5, the failure of wage rates to recover is attributable mainly to the

dissolution of favorable specific worker-employer relationships—see again Figure 10, which

illustrates the 57 percent of displaced workers’ long-term losses stemming from lost time-

invariant match effects. These lost match effects seem difficult to explain in light of canonical

search and matching models (Mortensen 1982; Pissarides 1985; Burdett and Mortensen 1998).

Why doesn’t job search over the subsequent five years lead to improved matches that eliminate

the losses? A simple explanation is that long-tenure displaced workers had unusually good

matches that were durable and long-lasting precisely because they were unusually valuable,

consistent with Abraham and Farber (1987). The evidence suggests that finding an equally good

match is a long and difficult process, especially in the aftermath of a recession.

        The direct effects of displacement account for about 26 percent of displaced workers’

long-term wage losses (Figure 10)—more important than employer effects, but less important

than match effects. These direct effects may come from “scarring” (negative signaling or

asymmetric information) or from the dissolution of implicit contracts that both shield a worker

from the outside labor market and bind a worker and employer in a relationship that enhances the

value of that relationship. These contracting mechanisms include seniority systems, specific

human capital investment, and delayed-payment contracts, all of which lead to wage growth over

the life of a job. They represent the time-varying aspects of the specific worker-employer

relationship that are lost with displacement. Direct displacement effects—the effects of starting


51
   Also, Moore and Scott-Clayton (2018) have replicated parts of our analysis using Ohio administrative data, and
find that employer fixed effects play a minor role in explaining displaced workers’ losses.


                                                        34
over—explain most of the early wage loss of displaced workers, but diminish over time,

consistent with concavity of the tenure-wage profile as well as diminishing effects from scarring.

       The evidence suggests that most displaced workers were especially well matched with an

employer over many years. Displacement ended the match and eliminated the value created by

the relationship. As Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993, p. 706) speculated based on their

estimates, “something intrinsic to the employment relationship itself … is lost when workers are

displaced.” Finding a limited role for employer effects, and a more important role for job specific

match effects, allows us to be more confident about the accuracy of this conjecture.

       Commenting on DvW, Robert Hall (2011, p. 56) remarked that “if workers who are

highly paid relative to their productivity suffer layoffs and are immediately hired elsewhere at

normal wages and the same productivity, it is a private loss—a transfer of rents—but not a social

loss.” The importance of match effects, and possibly scarring, in explaining post-displacement

wage losses suggests a large portion of these losses likely represents a social loss.




                                                 35
References

Abraham, Katherine, and Henry S. Farber. 1987. “Job Duration, Seniority, and Earnings.”
American Economic Review 77(3): 278–297.

Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis. 1999. “High Wage Workers and
High Wage Firms.” Econometrica 67(2): 251–333.

John M. Abowd, John, M., Robert H. Creecy, and Francis Kramarz. 2002. “Computing Person
and Firm Effects Using Linked Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data.” U.S. Census Bureau,
LEHD Program, Technical Paper No. TP-2002-06, April.

Acemoglu, Daron, and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, 1998. “Why Do Firms Train? Theory and
Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(1): 79–119.

Anderson, Patricia M., and Bruce D. Meyer. 1994. “The Extent and Consequences of Job
Turnover.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics (1994): 177–236.

Baker, George P., Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstrom. 1994a. “The Internal Economics of the
Firm: Evidence from Personnel Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(4): 881–919.

Baker, George P., Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstrom. 1994b. “The Wage Policy of a Firm.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(4): 921–55.

Barth, Erling, Alex Bryson, James C. Davis, and Richard Freeman. 2016. “It’s Where You
Work: Increases in the Dispersion of Earnings across Establishments and Individuals in the
United States.” Journal of Labor Economics 34(S2): S67–S97.

Benedetto, Gary, John Haltiwanger, Julia Lane, and Kevin McKinney. 2007. “Using Worker
Flows to Measure Firm Dynamics.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 25(3): 299–
313.

Bonhomme Stéphane , Thibaut Lamadon, and Elena Manresa. 2018. “A Distributional
Framework for Matched Employer Employee Data.” Working paper.

Burdett, Kenneth, and Dale T. Mortensen. 1998. “Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and
Unemployment.” International Economic Review 39(2): 257–273.

Card, David, Joerg Heining, and Patrick M. Kline. 2013. “Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise
of West German Wage Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3): 967–1015.

Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick M. Kline. 2016. “Bargaining, Sorting, and the
Gender Wage Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 131(2): 633–86.




                                              36
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Joerg Heining, and Patrick M. Kline. 2018. “Firms and Labor
Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory.” Journal of Labor Economics 36(S1): S13–
S70.

Carrington, William, J., and Bruce C. Fallick. 2017. “Why Do Earnings Fall with Job
Displacement?” Industrial Relations 56(4): 688–722.

Couch, Kenneth A., and Dana W. Placzek (CP). 2010. “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers
Revisited.” American Economic Review 100(1): 572–589.

Davis, Steven J., and Till von Wachter (DvW). 2011. “Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 43(2): 1–55.

Doeringer, Peter B., and Michael J. Piore. 1971. Internal Labor Markets and Manpower
Analysis. Lexington, MA: Heath.

Eeckhout, Jan, and Philipp Kircher. 2011. “Identifying Sorting—in Theory.” Review of
Economic Studies 78(3): 872–906.

Engbom, Niklas, and Christian Moser. 2017. “Earnings Inequality and the Minimum Wage:
Evidence from Brazil.” Manuscript.

Fackler, Daniel, Steffen Mueller, and Jens Stegmaier. 2017. “Wage Losses after Job
Displacement: Productivity Depreciations or Lost Firm Rents?” Manuscript.

Fallick, Bruce C. 1996. “A Review of the Recent Empirical Literature on Displaced Workers.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 50(1): 5–16.

Farber, Henry S. 1993. “The Incidence and Costs of Job Loss, 1982–91.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity: Microeconomics (1993): 73–132.

Farber, Henry S. 1997. “The Changing Face of Job Loss in the United States, 1981–1995.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics (1997): 55–128.

Farber, Henry S. 2015. “Job Loss in the Great Recession and its Aftermath: U.S. Evidence from
the Displaced Workers Survey.” NBER Working Paper No. 21216.

Farber, Henry S. 2017. “Employment, Hours, and Earnings Consequences of Job Loss: U.S.
Evidence from the Displaced Workers Survey.” Journal of Labor Economics 35(S1): S235–
S272.

Firpo, Sergio, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 2009. “Unconditional Quantile
Regressions.” Econometrica 77(3): 953–973.
Fortin, Nicole, Thomas Lemieux, and Sergio Firpo. 2011. “Decomposition Methods in
Economics.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, 4th edition, edited by David Card and Orley
Ashenfelter, 1–102. Elsevier North Holland.


                                              37
Gibbons, Robert, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. “Layoffs and Lemons.” Journal of Labor
Economics 9(4): 351–380.

Gibbons, Robert, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. “Does Unmeasured Ability Explain Inter-Industry
Wage Differentials?” Review of Economic Studies 59(3): 515–535.

Goldschmidt, Deborah, and Johannes F. Schmieder. 2017. “The Rise of Domestic Outsourcing
and the Evolution of the German Wage Structure.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (3):
1165–1217.

Hagedorn, Marcus , Tzuo Hann Law, and Iourii Manovskii. 2017. “Identifying Equilibrium
Models of Labor Market Sorting.” Econometrica 85(1): 29–65.

Hall, Robert E. 2012. “Comment.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 43(2): 56–61.

Haltiwanger, John C., Henry R. Hyatt, Lisa B. Kahn, and Erika McEntarfer. 2018. “Cyclical Job
Ladders by Firm Size and Wages.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 10(2): 52–85.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1996. “What Do We Know About Worker Displacement in the U.S.?”
Industrial Relations 28(1): 51–59.

Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan (JLS). 1993a. “Earnings Losses
of Displaced Workers.” American Economic Review 83(4): 685–709.

Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan (JLS). 1993b. The Costs of
Worker Dislocation Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Jarosch, Gregor. 2015. “Searching for Job Security and the Consequences of Job Loss.”
Manuscript, December.

Jung, Philip, and Moritz Kuhn. 2018. “Earnings Losses and Labor Mobility over the Lifecycle.”
Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.

Kalil, Ariel, and Thomas DeLeire. 2013. “Involuntary Job Transitions and Subjective Well-
Being.” In Lifecycle Events and Their Consequences: Job Loss, Family Change, and Declines in
Health, edited by Kenneth A. Couch, Mary C. Daly, and Julie M. Zissimopoulos, 76–96.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Kletzer, Lori G. 1998. “Job Displacement.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(1): 115–136.

Krolikowski, Pawel. 2017. “Job Ladders and Earnings of Displaced Workers.” American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9(2): 1–31.

Krolikowski, Pawel. 2018. “Choosing a Control Group for Displaced Workers.” Industrial Labor
and Relations Review 71(5): 1232–1254.



                                              38
Lachowska, Marta, Merve Meral, and Stephen A. Woodbury. 2016. “Effects of the
Unemployment Insurance Work Test on Long-Term Employment Outcomes.” Labour
Economics 41: 246–265.

Lachowska, Marta, Alexandre Mas, and Stephen A. Woodbury. 2018. “How Reliable Are
Administrative Data on Paid Work Hours?” Manuscript, March. Available at
www.martalachowska.com/research.

Lazear, Edward P. 1992. “The Job as a Concept.” In Performance Measurement, Evaluation, and
Incentives, edited by William J. Bruns, Jr., 183–215. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.

Lazear, Edward P. 2009. “Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach.” Journal of
Political Economy 117(5): 914–940.

Lazear, Edward P., and Kathryn L. Shaw. 2009. “Wage Structure, Raises, and Mobility: An
Introduction to International Comparisons of the Structure of Wages within and across Firms.” In
The Structure of Wages: An International Comparison, edited by Edward P. Lazear and Kathryn
L. Shaw, 1–57. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Moore, Brendan, and Judith Scott-Clayton. 2018. “Displaced Workers’ Earnings Losses and
Educational Investment Decisions: Evidence from Ohio.” Manuscript, May.

Mortensen, Dale T. 1982. “Property Rights and Efficiency in Mating, Racing, and Related
Games.” American Economic Review 72(5): 968–79.

Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2016. “Did the Job Ladder Fail after the Great
Recession?” Journal of Labor Economics 34(1, part 2): S55–S93.

Neal, Derek. 1995. “Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers.”
Journal of Labor Economics 13(4): 653–677.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2008. “The Intergenerational Effects
of Worker Displacement.” Journal of Labor Economics 26(3): 455–483.

Pissarides, Christopher A. 1985. “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment,
Vacancies, and Real Wages.” American Economic Review 75(4): 676–690.

Schaller, Jessamyn, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2015. “Short-Run Effect of Job Loss on Health
Conditions, Health Insurance, and Health Care Utilization.” Journal of Health Economics 43:
190–203.

Schmieder, Johannes F., Till von Wachter, and Stefan Bender. 2009. “The Long-Term Impact of
Job Displacement in Germany during the 1982 Recession on Earnings, Income, and
Employment.” Discussion Paper 0910-07, Department of Economics, Columbia University.




                                              39
Schmieder, Johannes F., Till von Wachter, and Joerg Heining. 2018. “The Cost of Job
Displacement over the Business Cycle and Its Sources: Evidence from Germany.” Paper
presented at NBER Labor Studies Program Meeting, February 2018.

Song Jae, David Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nick Bloom, and Till von Wachter. 2019. “Firming Up
Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(1): 1–50.

Sørensen, Torben and Rune Vejlin. 2013. “The Importance of Worker, Firm and Match Effects
in the Formation of Wages” Empirical Economics 45: 435–464.

Sorkin, Isaac. 2018. “Ranking Firms Using Revealed Preference.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 133(3): 1331–1393.

Stephens, Melvin Jr. 2001. “The Long-Run Consumption Effects of Earnings Shocks.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 83(1): 28–36.

Stevens, Ann Huff. 1997. “Persistent Effects of Job Displacement: The Importance of Multiple
Job Losses.” Journal of Labor Economics 15(1): 165–188.

Stevens, Ann Huff, and Jessamyn Schaller. 2011. “Short-Run Effects of Parental Job Loss on
Children’s Academic Achievement.” Economics of Education Review 30(2): 289–299.

Sullivan, Daniel G., and Till von Wachter. 2009. “Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis
using Administrative Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3): 1265–1306.

Topel, Robert. 1990. “Specific Capital and Unemployment: Measuring the Costs and
Consequences of Job Loss.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 33: 181–
214.

Von Wachter, Till. 2010. “Summary of the Literature on Job Displacement in the US and EU:
What We Know and What We Would Like to Know.” In Wage Structures, Employment
Adjustments and Globalization, edited by David Marsden and François Rycx, 64–121. Palgrave
Macmillan.

Von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. 2009. “Long-Term Earnings Losses due to
Mass-Layoffs During the 1982 Recession: An Analysis Using Longitudinal Administrative Data
from 1974 to 2004.” Manuscript.

Woodcock, Simon D. 2015. “Match Effects.” Research in Economics 69:100–121.




                                             40
Table 1
Sample descriptive statistics
                                                           (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)
                                                                                      UI claimant sample excluding
                                                            UI claimant sample
                                                                                             NAICS 51–561
                                                         Displaced    Non-displaced    Displaced     Non-displaced
 Quarterly average earnings, hours, and wage rates, 2002–2005
 Earnings (2010 dollars)                                  13,349         12,482         12,440          12,135
                                                          (6,466)        (5,996)        (6,259)         (5,490)
 Paid work hours                                            519            500            509             500
                                                            (82)           (95)           (85)            (97)
 Hourly wage rate (2010 dollars/hour)                      58.00          51.22          51.84           49.49
                                                          (43.12)        (38.96)        (39.04)         (37.69)
 Worker characteristics, 2007:IV
 Female (proportion)                                       0.286          0.359          0.271           0.353
 Race (proportions)
      White, not Hispanic                                  0.779          0.677          0.749           0.671
      Black, not Hispanic                                  0.030          0.033          0.027           0.032
      Hispanic                                             0.073          0.133          0.101           0.139
      Asian/Pacific Islander                               0.071          0.100          0.073           0.100
      American Indian or Alaskan Native                    0.013          0.014          0.014           0.015
      Missing, unknown, or not available                   0.035          0.044          0.034           0.044
 Schooling (proportions)
      less than high school                                0.080          0.129          0.104           0.135
      GED                                                  0.031          0.032          0.036           0.033
      high school graduate                                 0.465          0.462          0.471           0.472
      some college                                         0.149          0.161          0.152           0.158
      associate's degree                                   0.124          0.101          0.127           0.102
      bachelor's degree                                    0.125          0.093          0.094           0.081
      master's/PhD                                         0.026          0.023          0.016           0.019
 Age (years)                                               39.45          41.47          38.92           41.53
                                                           (6.46)         (6.44)         (6.56)          (6.44)
 Employer characteristics in 2007:IV
 Employer size (number of workers)                         2,042          8,478           824            8,400
                                                          (2,578)        (20,065)       (1,550)         (20,317)
 NAICS Industry (proportions)
      11 agriculture, forestry, fishing                    0.016           0.045         0.025            0.048
      21–23 mining, utilities, construction                0.088           0.082         0.141            0.087
      31–33 manufacturing                                  0.277           0.460         0.445            0.491
      42–49 trade, transportation                          0.160           0.145         0.258            0.155
      51–56 information, finance, prof. services           0.377           0.063          n/a              n/a
      61–62 educational and health care services           0.013           0.093         0.020            0.099
      71–72 arts, recreation, hospitality services         0.055           0.032         0.088            0.034
      81 other services                                    0.007           0.006         0.011            0.006
      92–99 public administration and unclassified         0.007           0.075         0.012            0.080
 Number of employers (pre- and post-displacement)          3,493           1,570          501             1,383
 Number of workers                                         2,690          13,290         1,676           12,447
Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. Categorical variables displayed in the table are mutually exhaustive, but
due to rounding errors may not add to 100 percent.
1. NAICS industries 51–56 include information, finance and insurance, real estate, professional, scientific, and
technical services, management of companies; administrative, support, and waste management and remediation
services.
Source: Authors’ tabulations of Washington administrative wage and claims records. See section 2.1 for details of
the sample construction.



                                                           41
Table 2
Summary of estimated quarterly losses at different quarters following displacement

                                       Earnings                        Hours                    Hourly wage rate ($)
                             Q1          Q8       Q17–Q20      Q1       Q8      Q17–Q20    Q1           Q8       Q17–Q20
 1. Full losses of displaced workers (sections 4.1 and 4.2)
     log change             –0.552      –0.256       –0.164   –0.423   –0.117   –0.047    –0.134     –0.140     –0.115
     level change          –$6,531      –$2,817     –$2,026    –217    –47.5     –14.2    –2.40       –2.82     –2.86
       as % of base          –48.9       –21.1       –15.2     –41.8    –9.2     –2.7      –4.1       –4.9       –4.9
 2. Changes due to employer fixed effects (section 5.1)
     log change          –0.033       –0.022        –0.015    –0.018   –0.007    0.005    –0.015     –0.015     –0.020
     % of full losses      6.0           8.6          9.1      4.3      6.0       0.0      11.2       10.7       17.4
 3. Changes due to lost match effects (section 5.4)
     log change           –0.062        –0.082      –0.085    –0.038   –0.027   –0.019    –0.024     –0.055     –0.065
     % of full losses      11.2          32.0        51.8      9.0      23.1     40.4      17.9       39.3       56.5

 4. Direct displacement effects (section 5.4)
     log change            –0.447        –0.152    –0.064     –0.376   –0.083   –0.033    –0.095     –0.070     –0-030
     % of full losses        82.8         59.4      39.0       86.8     70.9     59.6      70.9       50.0       26.1


Notes: Entries in panel 1 give estimated displacement effects on the indicated outcome in quarter 1 (Q1), quarter 8
(Q8), or the average of quarters 17, 18, 19, and 20 (Q17–Q20) following displacement. For the level changes in
panel 1, implied percentage changes relative to the non-displaced comparison group are shown in the “as % of base”
row. (For example, the estimated effect of displacement on average earnings in quarters 17–20 after displacement is
–$2,026, which is 15.2 percent less than the earnings of the non-displaced comparison group.) Panels 2, 3, and 4
show losses due to employer effects, match effects, and direct displacement effect as log points as a percentage of
full displacement losses. [For example, the percentage of full Q1 earnings losses accounted for by lost employer
fixed effects is (–0.033/–0.552) × 100 = 6.0%.]
Source: Summary of estimates displayed in Figures 2, 3, 5, 6, and 9.




                                                              42
Table 3
Estimated earnings losses due to displacement, selected studies using UI administrative records


                                                                                                     PDV of losses / pre-
                           Region and                            First year        Long-term         displacement annual
 Study                     time period      Sample               earnings losses   earnings losses   earnings
 Jacobson, Lalonde,        Pennsylvania,    All UI claimants     66%               24% at 6 years    not reported
 and Sullivan (1993b)      1974–1986
                           Pennsylvania,    All workers          40%               25% at 6 years    2 years after 6 years
                           1974–1986

 Couch and Placzek         Connecticut,     All UI claimants     49%               32% at 6 years    1.7 years after 6 years
 (2010)                    1993–2004
                           Connecticut,     All workers          33%               15% at 6 years    0.8 year after 6 years
                           1993–2004

 Davis and von             United           All workers          39% in            20% at 20         2.5 years after 20
 Wachter (2011)            States, 1974–                         recessions        years             years
                           2008
 Lachowska, Mas, and       Washington,      All UI claimants     49%               15% at 5 years    1 year after 5 years
 Woodbury (2019)           2002–2014                                                                 2.5 years after 20
                                                                                                     years
                           Washington,      Broadened sample     45%               23% at 5 years    1.1 years after 5 years
                           2002–2014        (Appendix A.5)                                           3.5 years after 20
                                                                                                     years

Notes: Percentage estimates for Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993b, Figure 5.5) are reported in Couch and
Placzek (2010, Table 1 and Web Appendix K). For Couch and Placzek, PDVs of losses are calculated using point
estimates for quarters 1–24 post-displacement shown in Web Appendix K, then applying a 5 percent annual (1.227
quarterly) discount rate. For Lachowska, Mas, and Woodbury, PDVs of losses are calculated using point estimates
for quarters 1–20 post-displacement, then applying a 5 percent annual (1.227 quarterly) discount rate. The 20-year
losses are calculated by extrapolating the Q20 earnings loss out to year 20 and discounting.




                                                          43
Table 4A
Displaced workers’ inter-quintile employer transitions, wage rate changes, employer effect
changes, match effect changes, and direct displacement effects, 2008–2010
                                                                                                                          Row sums
Fixed-effect quintile                                            Fixed-effect quintile of destination employer           and weighted
of origin employer                                         1            2               3             4            5        means
           1            % of displaced workers in cell     5.0          2.0             1.1           0.9          0.8        9.9
                        mean Δ wage                      -16.9        -21.1            -3.4         -10.8         29.0      -11.7
                        mean Δ employer effect            -1.1         10.8           23.4           37.6         56.4       12.5
                        mean Δ match effect               -7.5        -16.3          -20.1          -32.8        -17.3      -13.8
                        mean direct effect                -8.3        -15.6            -6.7         -15.7        -10.1      -10.4
           2            % of displaced workers in cell     2.0          3.9             1.8           1.3          0.4        9.4
                        mean Δ wage                      -44.7         -9.9          -10.3            6.4          3.1      -14.6
                        mean Δ employer effect           -19.9         -0.7             9.2          21.1         40.3        2.0
                        mean Δ match effect               -6.3         -4.3          -10.6          -11.3        -28.3       -8.0
                        mean direct effect               -18.4         -4.9            -9.0          -3.3         -8.9       -8.5
           3            % of displaced workers in cell     1.9          4.1             7.4           2.9          2.8       18.9
                        mean Δ wage                      -36.6        -28.1          -19.7           -9.3          0.3      -18.7
                        mean Δ employer effect           -29.9        -11.7            -0.9          10.7         30.4        0.3
                        mean Δ match effect               -2.0         -9.1            -7.8         -11.5        -13.0       -8.8
                        mean direct effect                -4.7         -7.4          -11.0           -8.5        -17.1      -10.1
           4            % of displaced workers in cell     1.5          2.6             4.2           7.8          3.8       19.8
                        mean Δ wage                      -55.4        -37.2          -26.8           -8.6          7.4      -16.6
                        mean Δ employer effect           -40.5        -21.3          -10.3           -1.2         20.1       -4.6
                        mean Δ match effect               -6.4         -8.4            -6.0          -2.3         -4.5       -4.6
                        mean direct effect                -8.4         -7.5          -10.4           -5.1         -8.2       -7.4
           5            % of displaced workers in cell     0.4          2.1             2.8           8.5         28.2       42.0
                        mean Δ wage                      -50.5        -48.2          -25.5          -14.6         -1.8       -8.8
                        mean Δ employer effect           -50.3        -36.8          -26.1          -10.7          0.7       -5.8
                        mean Δ match effect               10.0         -3.3             1.4           0.0         -0.4       -0.2
                        mean direct effect               -10.2         -8.1            -0.8          -4.0         -2.1       -2.8
Column sums and         % of displaced workers            10.8         14.6           17.3           21.3         36.0      100.0
 weighted means         mean Δ wage                      -32.0        -26.9          -20.3          -10.3          0.1      -13.0
                        mean Δ employer effect           -16.8        -11.1            -4.6          -0.4          6.8       -1.9
                        mean Δ match effect               -5.5         -7.8            -7.0          -4.4         -2.5       -4.8
                        mean direct effect                -9.7         -7.9            -8.7          -5.4         -4.2       -6.4

Notes: This transition matrix shows the movement (and associated outcomes) of displaced workers between
employers with different fixed effects for wage rates. Employers are classified into quintiles by their AKM-
estimated fixed effects for wage rates. (Thresholds for quintiles are obtained by sorting on worker-year records.) The
elements of each five-element cell show (i) the percentage of all displaced workers making the given quintile-to-
quintile transition, (ii) the mean log-point change in hourly wage rates of those making that transition, (iii) the mean
employer effect change associated with that transition; (iv) the mean match effect change associated with that
transition, and (v) the mean direct displacement effect associated that transition. Figures are based on a comparison
of employment two years before and after displacement. See the text for further discussion.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the displaced worker sample described in the text, and on employer effects
estimated for the sample described in Appendix B.




                                                                 44
Table 4B
Non-displaced job changers’ inter-quintile employer transitions, wage rate changes, employer
effect changes, match effect changes, and direct transition effects, 2008–2010

                                                                                                                        Row sums
 Fixed-effect quintile                                          Fixed-effect quintile of destination employer          and weighted
 of origin employer                                       1            2               3             4           5        means
            1            % non-displaced job changers    10.2          4.5             3.0           2.1         1.0       20.7
                         mean Δ wage                     -4.3         12.2           21.5           32.2        51.9        9.3
                         mean Δ employer effect          -3.3         15.3           26.6           38.3        58.2       12.1
                         mean Δ match effect              3.3          0.9            -1.0          -1.0         1.3        1.6
                         mean direct effect              -4.3         -4.0            -4.1          -5.1        -7.6       -4.5
            2            % non-displaced job changers     4.2          5.5             4.2           2.8         1.6       18.3
                         mean Δ wage                    -13.0         -1.0             6.7          16.5        36.6        4.0
                         mean Δ employer effect         -14.7         -0.6             9.6          21.7        42.8        5.7
                         mean Δ match effect              4.2          3.1             1.8           1.0         2.4        2.7
                         mean direct effect              -2.5         -3.5            -4.7          -6.2        -8.6       -4.4
            3            % non-displaced job changers     2.1          4.1             6.1           6.0         2.3       20.8
                         mean Δ wage                    -22.9         -8.1            -0.3           7.8        24.2        0.9
                         mean Δ employer effect         -27.3        -10.6            -0.3           9.4        30.3        1.1
                         mean Δ match effect              6.5          5.3             3.2           1.6         1.4        3.3
                         mean direct effect              -2.1         -2.7            -3.2          -3.1        -7.5       -3.4
            4            % non-displaced job changers     1.3          2.4             4.0           8.0         4.9       20.6
                         mean Δ wage                    -35.8        -18.6            -9.6          -0.2        14.0       -2.9
                         mean Δ employer effect         -39.0        -22.1          -11.0           -0.1        17.2       -3.0
                         mean Δ match effect              6.8          7.7             5.5           3.3         3.2        4.4
                         mean direct effect              -3.6         -4.2            -4.0          -3.3        -6.4       -4.3
            5            % non-displaced job changers     0.6          1.4             1.7           3.9        12.2       19.7
                         mean Δ wage                    -58.1        -39.8          -28.6          -14.3         0.1       -9.7
                         mean Δ employer effect         -59.6        -42.7          -30.3          -16.0         1.6       -9.5
                         mean Δ match effect              5.1          6.3             6.0           6.4         2.4        3.9
                         mean direct effect              -3.6         -3.4            -4.4          -4.7        -3.9       -4.0
 Column sums and         % non-displaced job changers    18.4         17.9           18.9           22.8        22.0      100.0
  weighted means         mean Δ wage                    -12.3         -4.7             0.2           4.5        10.7       0.33
                         mean Δ employer effect         -12.8         -5.1             1.1           5.8        13.7       1.28
                         mean Δ match effect              4.2          3.9             3.0           2.7         2.4       3.17
                         mean direct effect              -3.6         -3.5            -3.9          -4.0        -5.3       -4.1

Notes: This transition matrix shows the movement (and associated outcomes) of non-displaced job changers
between employers with different fixed effects for wage rates. Employers are classified into quintiles by their AKM-
estimated fixed effects for wage rates. (Thresholds for quintiles are obtained by sorting on worker-year records.) The
elements of each five-element cell show (i) the percentage of all non-displaced job changers making the given
quintile-to-quintile transition, (ii) the mean log-point change in hourly wage rates of those making that transition,
(iii) the mean employer effect change associated with that transition; (iv) the mean match effect change associated
with that transition, and (v) the mean direct displacement effect associated that transition. Figures are based on a
comparison of employment two years before and after a job change. See the text for further discussion.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the primary job changes taking place during 2008–2010 in the AKM sample
described in Appendix B, and on employer effects estimated for the sample described in Appendix B.




                                                                45
Table 5
Below-, on-, and above-diagonal sums and weighted averages of inter-quintile transitions of
displaced workers and non-displaced job changers, 2008–2010

                                    Below-diagonal       On-diagonal       Above-diagonal
                                    sums and means     sums and means      sums and means
% of displaced workers                   30.0               52.2                17.8
 mean Δ wage                            -29.3               -7.4                -2.1
 mean Δ fixed effect                    -18.8               -0.1                21.4
 mean Δ match effect                     -3.6               -2.7               -13.0
 mean direct effect                      -6.9               -4.6               -10.6
% of non-displaced job changers          25.7                42.0               32.4
 mean Δ wage                            -17.8                -1.2               16.7
 mean Δ fixed effect                    -20.1                -0.5               20.5
 mean Δ match effect                      5.8                 3.0                1.3
 mean direct effect                      -3.5                -3.7               -5.1

Notes: Figures in the “Below-diagonal sums and averages” column show sums (or weighted
means of) the cells in transition matrices in the Tables 4A and 4B representing moves to an
employer with a lower-quintile fixed effect for wage rates. Figures in the “On-diagonal” and
“Above-diagonal” columns show sums or weighted means of the cells in the transition matrices
representing moves to a same-quintile employer, or to a higher-quintile employer. Figures for
both displaced workers and non-displaced job changers are based on a comparison of
employment two years before and after displacement or job change.
Source: Authors’ calculations from data in Tables 4A and 4B.




                                                46
Table 6
Displaced workers’ losses two years after displacement decomposed into portions attributable to
(i) fixed effect changes from transitions to new employers and (ii) losses exceeding those
expected due to fixed effect changes

                                                            Portion attributable to:                Percentage
                               Mean loss of      fixed effect changes      losses exceeding       attributable to
 Outcomes (log points)      displaced workers     from job transitions fixed effect changes         transitions
   earnings                       –28.9                  –2.9                    –26.0                  10.0
   work hours                     –16.1                  –1.1                    –15.0                  6.8
   hourly wage rates              –13.0                  –1.9                    –11.2                  14.6

Notes: The table decomposes the mean losses of displaced workers into portions attributable to (i) transitions to
employers with different fixed effects and (ii) differences (larger losses or smaller gains) between the changes
actually experienced by displaced workers and the employer fixed effect changes that would be expected based on
the transitions they made. For example, displaced workers experienced an average wage rate loss of 13.0 log points,
and 1.9 log points (14.6 percent) occurred because displaced workers tended to move to employers with lower fixed
effects. The remaining 11.2 points of the average loss occurred because displaced workers had larger losses (or
smaller gains) than would be expected based on their transitions to new employers.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on data in Tables 4A and 4B.




                                                        47
Figure 1
Earnings (top) and hours (bottom) profiles of displaced and stably employed workers,
Washington State, 2009Q1
   Quarterly earnings (2010$, thousands)




                                           15




                                           10




                                            5

                                                2002:1    2003:1    2004:1   2005:1   2006:1     2007:1    2008:1    2009:1   2010:1   2011:1   2012:1   2013:1   2014:1   2015:1
                                                                                                           Year and quarter


                                           600
   Quarterly work hours




                                           500


                                           400


                                           300


                                           200

                                                 2002:1    2003:1   2004:1   2005:1   2006:1      2007:1    2008:1   2009:1   2010:1   2011:1   2012:1   2013:1   2014:1   2015:1
                                                                                                           Year and quarter


                                                                                               Displaced             Not displaced



Notes: The top figure shows the quarterly earnings profiles (constant 2010 dollars) of workers
displaced in Washington during the first quarter of 2009 (solid line) and the non-displaced
comparison group (dashed line). The bottom figure shows the work hour profiles of the same two
groups. Both earnings and hours are unconditional (that is, include observations of zero earnings
and hours). The dashed vertical lines denote the quarter of separation.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
sections 3.1, 4.1, and 4.2 of the text for details.




                                                                                                                     48
Figure 2
Estimated earnings losses due to displacement, Washington, 2008–2010


                                                                          Quarterly earnings (2010$, thousands)
                       2
    2010$, thousands




                       0

                       -2

                       -4

                       -6

                       -8

                            -5              -4        -3        -2             -1             0            1        2       3       4   5
                                                                              Year relative to displacement


                                                                                       Log quarterly earnings
                                 .2


                                  0
    log points




                                 -.2


                                 -.4


                                 -.6

                                       -5        -4        -3        -2               -1          0            1        2       3   4   5
                                                                                    Year relative to displacement




Notes: The top figure shows estimated δks—quarterly unconditional earnings lost due to
displacement (in constant 2010 $1,000s)—based on equation (1) with unconditional earnings
from the primary employer as the dependent variable. The bottom figure shows estimated δks—
logarithm of quarterly earnings lost due to displacement—based on equation (1) with the log of
earnings from the primary employer as the dependent variable. Whiskers (which are very small)
denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. The
vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement. For the quarterly earnings computations,
quarters of missing earnings are set to zero and included in the sample. For the log earnings
computations, zero values are necessarily dropped, resulting in an unbalanced panel.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
sections 3.1, 4.1, and 4.2 of the text for details.




                                                                                              49
Figure 3
Estimated work hour losses due to displacement, Washington, 2008–2010


                                                                                 Quarterly work hours
                           100
    Quarterly work hours




                             0


                           -100


                           -200


                                  -5         -4        -3        -2         -1            0             1       2       3   4   5
                                                                           Year relative to displacement


                                                                                 Log quarterly work hours

                                   0
    log points




                                  -.2


                                  -.4


                                  -.6

                                        -5        -4        -3        -2         -1           0             1       2   3   4   5
                                                                             Year relative to displacement




Notes: The top figure shows estimated δks—quarterly unconditional hours lost due to
displacement—based on equation (1) with unconditional hours at the primary employer as the
dependent variable. The bottom figure shows estimated δks—logarithm of quarterly hours lost
due to displacement—based on equation (1) with the log of hours at the primary employer as the
dependent variable. Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors
clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement. For the quarterly
hours computations, quarters of missing hours are set to zero and included in the sample. For the
log hours computations, zero values are necessarily dropped, resulting in an unbalanced panel.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
sections 3.1, 4.1, and 4.2 of the text for details.




                                                                                         50
Figure 4
Estimated displacement effects on the probability of positive work hours and the distribution of
quarterly work hours, Washington, 2008–2010



                   0



                 -.25



                  -.5
   Proportion




                 -.75


                                                                                Pr(hours > 0)
                   -1
                                                                                Quantile 10
                                                                                Quantile 25
                -1.25                                                           Quantile 50
                                                                                Quantile 75
                                                                                Quantile 90
                 -1.5

                        -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1        2   3   4   5
                                       Year since displacement


Notes: The line solid [Pr(hours > 0] shows estimated displacement effects on the probability of
working a positive number of hours in a given quarter [δks from a linear probability model
specified as equation (1)]. Lines labeled “Quantile n” show estimated displacement effects (in
proportional terms) at the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th, quantiles of the quarterly work hours
distribution. The re-centered influence function approach of Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2009) is
used with a specification like equation (1). Proportional effects are obtained by dividing each
estimated δk by the pre-displacement baseline hours of displaced workers at quantile n.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
Appendix Table A7 for the estimated δks and baseline hours underlying the proportional changes
shown in the figure, and section 4.2 of the text for further discussion.




                                                           51
Figure 5
Estimated hourly wage rate losses due to displacement, Washington, 2008–2010


                                                        Hourly wage rate
                       10
    Hourly wage rate




                        5



                        0



                       -5

                             -5   -4   -3   -2    -1            0             1   2   3   4   5
                                                 Year relative to displacement


                                                       Log hourly wage rate
                        .1
    log points




                        0



                       -.1



                       -.2

                             -5   -4   -3   -2    -1            0             1   2   3   4   5
                                                 Year relative to displacement




Notes: The figure shows estimated δks—the reduction in the log hourly wage rate due to
displacement—based on equation (1) with the log of hourly wage rate at the primary employer
(constant 2010 dollars per hour) as the dependent variable. Whiskers denote 95-percent
confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the
quarter of displacement.
For the hourly wage rate computations, quarters of missing earnings or hours are dropped from
the sample, and similarly for the log hours computations, resulting in an unbalanced panel.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
sections 3.1, 4.1, and 4.2 of the text for details.




                                                                52
Figure 6
Estimated displacement losses due to lost employer fixed effects, Washington, 2008–2010


                                                         Log earnings                                                                          Log hours
                            .2
                                                                                                                      0
                             0
    log points




                                                                                                      log points
                                                                                                                     -.2
                            -.2

                                                                                                                     -.4
                            -.4

                            -.6                                                                                      -.6

                                  -5   -4     -3   -2    -1       0       1       2       3   4   5                        -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1    2    3   4   5
                                               Year relative to displacement                                                          Year relative to displacement


                                                        Log wage
                 .1
    log points




                  0


                 -.1


                 -.2

                       -5         -4   -3     -2    -1        0       1       2       3       4   5
                                            Year relative to displacement


                                                                  ψ (employer fixed effect)                        log outcome variable



Notes: The figures show estimated displacement losses attributable to foregone employer fixed
         %, shown as dark circles) compared with the full losses due to displacement (light
effects (ψ
squares, repeated from Figures 2, 3, and 5). Losses attributable to foregone employer fixed
effects are estimates of δk from equation (3). For example, to obtain the estimates of earnings lost
due to foregone employer premiums, equation (3) was estimated with the AKM employer fixed
        % ) for log earnings as the dependent variable. Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence
effect (ψ
intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of
displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
sections 3.2 and 5.1 of the text for details.




                                                                                                      53
                                1                   2              3              4            5
                 1             5.0                 2.0            1.1            0.9          0.8             9.9
Origin
                 2             2.0                 3.9            1.8            1.3          0.4             9.4
employer
                 3             1.9                 4.1            7.4            2.9          2.8            18.9
fixed-effect
                 4             1.5                 2.6            4.2            7.8          3.8            19.8
quintile
                 5             0.4                 2.1            2.8            8.5          28.2           42.0
   Figure 7                    10.8                14.6           17.3           21.3         36.0           100.0
   Inter-quintile employer fixed effect transitions of displaced workers (top) and non-displaced job
   changers Figure
             (bottom), 2008–2010 employer fixed-effect transitions of displaced workers
                    1: Inter-quintile




Table 3             30.0
Inter-quintile transitions of job changers, percentage by transition type
                        25.0
                                          Fixed-effect quintile of destination employer
                        20.0
                             1                   2               3             4               5
                 1
      Percentage of        10.2                 4.5             3.0           2.1             1.0        20.7
Fixed-effect          15.0
    displaced workers
                 2          4.2                 5.5             4.2           2.8             1.6        18.3
quintile of
                 3    10.0 2.1                  4.1             6.1           6.0             2.3        20.8
origin                                                                                                 5
                 4          1.3                 2.4             4.0           8.0             4.9    4   20.6
employer                                                                                                  Quintile of origin
                 5     5.0 0.6                  1.4             1.7           3.9             12.2 3     19.7
                                                                                               2
                                                                                                              employer
                           18.4                 17.9           18.9           22.8            22.0       100.0
                                                                                          1
                       0.0
                                      1             2         3              4        5
                                       Quintile ofemployer
                        Figure 2: Inter-quintile   destination employer transitions of job changers
                                                            fixed-effect




                     14.0
                     12.0
                     10.0
    Percentage of     8.0
    non-displaced
    job-changers      6.0
                                                                                                             5
                      4.0                                                                                4
                                                                                                                 Quintile of origin
                                                                                                     3
                      2.0                                                                      2
                                                                                                                    employer
                                                                                          1
                      0.0
                                1              2          3              4        5
                                          Quintile of destination employer

   Notes: The top histogram shows the percentage of displaced workers making each quintile-to-
   quintile transition.
   Source: Data in Tables 4A and 4B.




                                                                   54
Figure 8A
Changes in hourly wage rates and changes in employer effects (ψ) for displaced workers
(triangles) and non-displaced job changers (circles): scatterplots with fitted regression lines
                                  .5
   Change in log hourly wage rate
                 0   -.5




                                       -.5                          0                             .5
                                             Change in employer effect for hourly wage rate (ψ)

Notes: The dashed line is a 45° line.AKM_Δw                      DW_Δw
For displaced workers the fitted equation   is:
                                     Fitted values               Fitted values
                d                       d    2
      Δln(wage) = –0.173 + 0.696Δψ   FittedRvalues
                                               = 0.824, RMSE = 0.088, n = 25
                   (0.018) (0.067)
For non-displaced job changers the fitted equation is:
      Δln(wage)n = –0.010 + 0.889Δψn R2 = 0.997, RMSE = 0.015, n = 25
                   (0.003) (0.011)
Source: Authors’ calculations from the data in Tables 4A and 4B.




                                                                 55
Figure 8B
Changes in match effects (μ for hourly wages) and changes in employer effects (ψ) for displaced
workers (triangles) and non-displaced job changers (circles): scatterplots with fitted regression
lines
               .5
   Change in match effect
             0 -.5




                            -.5                           0                            .5
                                  Change in employer effect for hourly wage rate (ψ)

                                          DW_w_Δm                      AKM_w_Δm
Notes:
                                    Fitted is:
For displaced workers the fitted equation  values              Fitted values
         d                     d     2
      Δμ = –0.087 – 0.265Δψ        R = 0.594, RMSE = 0.060, n = 25
            (0.012) (0.047)
For non-displaced job changers the fitted equation is:
      Δμn = 0.034 – 0.070Δψn       R2 = 0.672, RMSE = 0.014, n = 25
           (0.003) (0.010)
Source: Authors’ calculations from the data in Tables 4A and 4B.




                                                      56
Figure 8C
Direct effects of displacement or job transition (d for hourly wages) and changes in employer
effects (ψ) for displaced workers (triangles) and non-displaced job changers (circles): scatterplots
with fitted regression lines
                                                      .5
      Direct effect of displacement or job transition
   -.5                        0




                                                           -.5                           0                            .5
                                                                 Change in employer effect for hourly wage rate (ψ)

                                    DW_w_dir                   AKM_w_dir
Notes:
For displaced workers the fitted equation
                                    Fitted is:
                                           values              Fitted values
         d                     d     2
      Δd = –0.086 – 0.039Δψ        R = 0.054, RMSE = 0.045, n = 25
            (0.009) (0.033)
For non-displaced job changers the fitted equation is:
      Δdn = –0.044 – 0.040Δψn      R2 = 0.477, RMSE = 0.012, n = 25
            (0.002) (0.009)
Source: Authors’ calculations from the data in Tables 4A and 4B.




                                                                                     57
Figure 9
Estimated displacement losses attributable to lost worker-employer match effects (𝜇̂ )


                                                     Log quarterly earnings                                                                Log quarterly work hours
                            .2
                                                                                                                       0
                             0
    log points




                                                                                                         log points
                                                                                                                      -.2
                            -.2

                                                                                                                      -.4
                            -.4

                            -.6                                                                                       -.6

                                  -5   -4     -3     -2     -1       0       1       2       3   4   5                      -5   -4   -3     -2   -1   0   1   2      3   4   5
                                               Year relative to displacement                                                           Year relative to displacement


                                                   Log hourly wage rate
                 .1
    log points




                  0


                 -.1


                 -.2

                       -5         -4   -3     -2       -1        0       1       2       3       4   5
                                            Year relative to displacement


                                                     Match effect (µ) for a given outcome variable                                    log outcome variable



Notes: The figures show estimated displacement losses attributable to lost worker-employer
match effects (𝜇̂ , shown as diamonds), estimated by Woodcock’s (2015) method, compared with
the full losses due to displacement (circles, repeated from Figures 2, 3, and 5). Losses
attributable to foregone match effects are estimates of δk from an equation like equation (3) with
(𝜇̂ ij) as the dependent variable. For example, to obtain the estimates of earnings lost due to lost
match effects, equation (3) was estimated with the Woodcock match effects (𝜇̂ ) for log earnings
as the dependent variable. Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard
errors clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
sections 3.3 and 5.4 of the text for details.




                                                                                                         58
Figure 10
Decomposition of hourly wage rate reductions after displacement

                  0

               -0.02

               -0.04

               -0.06
  log points




               -0.08

                -0.1

               -0.12

               -0.14

               -0.16

               -0.18
                       1   2   3     4   5   6     7    8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                                                       Quarter since displacement

                                   Match effects        Employer effects   Direct effects
Notes: The figure illustrates the decomposition of the log hourly wage rate reductions following
displacement into portions attributable to lost worker-employer match quality [estimated using
Woodcock’s (2015) method], lost employer fixed effects, and the direct displacement effects.
See sections 5.4 and 6 for further discussion.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on data in Figures 5, 6, and 9.




                                                             59
Sources of Displaced Workers’ Long-Term Earnings Losses:
Appendices
Marta Lachowska
Alexandre Mas
Stephen A. Woodbury

May 24, 2019

Appendix A: Alternative Estimates, Additional Analyses, and Other Supporting Material
A.1 Estimated losses of workers with relatively short job tenure
A.2 Unemployment rates in Washington, Connecticut, Pennsylvania, and the United States,
   selected time periods
A.3 Estimated losses of displaced workers including those less strongly attached to the labor
   force
A.4 Estimates using an alternative comparison group
A.5 Estimates from a broadened sample of displaced and non-displaced workers
A.6 Estimates excluding workers displaced from NAICS industries 51–56
A.7 Estimates from a model with worker-specific trends (random trends model)
A.8 Estimates using the specification and sampling choices of Schmieder, von Wachter, and
   Heining (2018)
A.9 Changes in earnings and hours worked associated with inter-quintile employer effects
   transitions
A.10 Alternative estimates of displacement losses due to lost match effects
A.11 Tables supporting Figures 2, 3, 4, and 6 in the main text

Appendix B: Estimation of Employer Fixed Effects for Earnings, Hours, and Wage Rates
B.1 Construction of the analysis sample
B.2 Estimation and variance decompositions
B.3 Event studies of inter-employer mobility
B.4 Estimating the AKM model using random subsamples of employers

References
Appendix A
Alternative Estimates, Additional Analyses, and Other Supporting Material

Appendixes A.1, A.3, A.4, A.5, A.6, and A.7 describe sensitivity tests of the estimates reported

in the main text. Appendix Table A1 gives a tabular summary of these results.

           Appendix A.2 compares the unemployment rates in Washington, Connecticut,

Pennsylvania, and the United States for selected time periods relevant to displaced worker

studies using administrative data.

           Appendix A.8 describes estimates using the specification and sampling choices used by

Schmieder, von Wachter, and Heining (2018).

           Appendix A.9 presents inter-quintile employer fixed effects transitions, changes in

earnings and hours worked, and employer fixed effect changes for earnings and hours worked.

           Appendix A.10 compares alternative estimates of displacement losses due to lost match

effects.

           Appendix A.11 is made up of four tables supporting Figures 2, 3, 5, and 6 in the main

text.




                                                   2
  Appendix Table A1
  Summary of estimated quarterly losses due to displacement

                                            Earnings                       Hours                   Hourly wage rate
                                       Q1         Q17–Q20            Q1        Q17–Q20            Q1        Q17–Q20
1. Displaced workers, UI claimant sample, full losses (sections 4.1 and 4.2)
            levels                  –$6,531         –$2,026          –217         –14.2           –2.40       –2.86
                                   (–48.9%)        (–15.2%)        (–41.8%)     (–2.74%)        (–4.14%)    (–4.93%)
            log points              –0.552          –0.164          –0.423       –0.047          –0.134      –0.115
2. Displaced workers, UI claimant sample, changes due to employer fixed effects (section 5.1)
            log points              –0.033        –0.015        –0.018           0.0046          –0.015       –0.020
3. Displaced workers, UI claimants with shorter job tenure (3–4 years), full losses (Appendix A.1)
            log points              –0.641          –0.153        –0.558            –0.139       –0.063       –0.013
4. Displaced workers, UI claimant sample including less strongly attached, full losses (Appendix A.3)
            log points              –0.531        –0.248          –0.425           –0.116       –0.115        –0.134
5. Displaced workers, UI claimant sample alternative comparison group, full losses (Appendix A.4)
            log points              –0.477         –0.080        –0.376          +0.002       –0.109          –0.081
6. Displaced workers, broadened sample, full losses (Appendix A.5)
            log points             –0.490          –0.232        –0.380          –0.090          –0.145       –0.105
7. Displaced workers, UI claimant sample, excluding NAICS industries 51–56, full losses (Appendix A.6)
            log points              –0.645        –0.166       –0.461         –0.0758        –0.185          –0.0908
8. Displaced workers, UI claimant sample, full losses from random trends model (Appendix A.7)
            log points              –0.542          –0.147        –0.409        –0.0319       –0.135        –0.011
9. Displaced workers, UI claimant sample, full losses (Schmieder, von Wachter, and Heining 2018 setup), (Appendix A.8)
            log points              –0.516         –0.0760        –0.416        –0.0380       –0.103        –0.0380
10. Displaced workers, UI claimant sample, changes due to match effects (section 5.4 and Appendix A.10)
            log points             –0.0624       –0.0848        –0.0379         –0.0188      –0.0236         –0.0654
11. Displaced workers, UI claimant sample, changes due to match effects (unadjusted) (Appendix A.10)
            log points             –0.0765       –0.0962        –0.0330        –0.0157       –0.0431         –0.0804



  Note: Each entry gives the estimated displacement effect on the indicated outcome in either quarter 1 (Q1) or the
  average of quarters 17, 18, 19, and 20 (Q17–Q20) following displacement. For levels, implied percentage changes
  relative to the non-displaced comparison group are shown in parentheses. (For example, the estimated effect of
  displacement on average earnings in quarters 17–20 after displacement is –$2,026, which is 15.2% less than the
  earnings of the non-displaced comparison group.)




                                                            3
Appendix A.1
Estimated losses of workers with relatively short job tenure

An implication of the specific human capital hypothesis is that longer pre-displacement job

tenure will be associated with larger earnings losses (e.g., Topel 1990; Neal 1995; Carrington

and Fallick 2017). Farber (1993) found that, on average, each additional year of pre-

displacement job tenure was associated with an additional one percent drop in post-displacement

earnings. In contrast, in a study using administrative data, von Wachter, Song, and Manchester

(2009) found insubstantial differences between the earnings losses of workers with three years of

tenure and workers with six or more years of tenure.

       This appendix examines and compares the earnings, hours, and wage rate losses of

workers with 6 or more years of pre-displacement job tenure (the main UI claimant sample) to

the losses of workers with only 3–4 years of pre-displacement job tenure. To do this, we first

select displaced workers with 3–4 years of tenure according to the criteria described in section

2.1 (other than the six-year tenure requirement). We then estimate equation (1) using as the

comparison group non-displaced workers with 6 or more years of tenure, so that comparisons

between short- and long-tenure displaced workers are made with respect to the same comparison

group. This is a descriptive exercise, not an attempt to estimate the effect of job tenure on the

outcomes of displaced workers.

       Appendix Figure A1 shows the estimated profiles of earnings, work hours, and wage

rates (in logs), and the estimated time path of the quarterly employment probability—see also

row 3 of Appendix Table A1. The earnings losses and employment probabilities of displaced

workers with 3–4 years of tenure are similar to those with 6 or more years of tenure, consistent

with the findings in von Wachter, Song, and Manchester (2009). However, the patterns of hours

losses and wage rate reductions differ sharply between the two groups. The hours losses of short-



                                                  4
tenure displaced workers are larger than the hours losses of long-tenure displaced workers, but

their wage rates losses are less, and those losses are minimal four years after displacement. This

contrasts with the wage rate losses of long-tenure displaced workers, which plummet at the time

of displacement and never even partially recover.

        A possible interpretation of these estimates is that the reduced work hours of long-tenure

displaced workers represent a labor supply response to their reduced wage rates, whereas the

substantially reduced hours of short-tenure displaced workers, along with wage rates similar to

those faced before displacement, suggests demand constraints faced by these workers. The

implication is that short- and long-tenure displaced workers differ in ways that should not be

attributed to previous job tenure alone.1

        Appendix Figure A2 shows that, as was the case for displaced workers who had six or

more years of job tenure, employer fixed effects account for a negligible portion of the reduced

earnings, work hours, and wage rates of displaced workers with relatively short tenure.




1
  We have also examined losses due to displacement separately for workers younger than age 40 in the quarter of
displacement, and for workers age 40 and older in the quarter of displacement. (To construct the non-displaced
comparison groups, we use age in 2007:IV.) The estimated long-term earnings, hours, and wage-rate losses of the
younger and older workers are quite similar, which is surprising because older workers have on average longer job
tenure. However, the reemployment rates of older workers in the first two years after displacement are lower than
those of younger workers, consistent with Farber’s (2017) findings.


                                                        5
Appendix Figure A1
Estimated displacement effects for workers with relatively short job tenure


                                                     Log quarterly earnings                                                                             Log quarterly work hours
                            .2                                                                                                     .2

                             0                                                                                                      0
    log points




                                                                                                         log points
                            -.2                                                                                                   -.2

                            -.4
                                                                                                                                  -.4
                            -.6
                                                                                                                                  -.6

                                  -5   -4     -3     -2     -1       0       1       2       3   4   5                                  -5   -4    -3     -2   -1   0   1   2      3   4   5
                                               Year relative to displacement                                                                        Year relative to displacement


                                                   Log hourly wage rate                                                                           Quarterly employment probability
                 .2                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                         Fraction employed
                 .1
    log points




                                                                                                                                  -.1
                  0
                                                                                                                                  -.2
                 -.1

                 -.2                                                                                                              -.3

                       -5         -4   -3     -2       -1        0       1       2       3       4   5                                  -5   -4    -3    -2    -1   0   1   2      3   4   5
                                            Year relative to displacement                                                                           Year relative to displacement


                                                                             6+ years of tenure                              3-4 years of tenure



Notes: The figures show estimated displacement effects for workers with 3–4 years of job tenure
at the time of displacement (squares), and 6 or more years of job tenure at the time of
displacement (circles, repeated from Figures 2, 3, 5 in the main text for the first three panels).
The reference time period for workers displaced with 3–4 years of tenure (and their comparison
group) is 3 years before displacement. Each figure shows the profile of displacement effects for
an outcome—quarterly log earnings, log hours, log wage rate (all from the primary employer), or
the probability of employment (positive earnings or hours)—based on estimates of δk in equation
(1). Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by
worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
sections 3.1, 4.1, and 4.2 of the text for details.




                                                                                                     6
Appendix Figure A2
Estimated displacement losses due to foregone employer fixed effects for workers with relatively
short job tenure


                                                        Log quarterly earnings                                                    Log quarterly work hours
                                0                                                                                 0
       log points




                                                                                                    log points
                            -.2
                                                                                                                 -.2
                            -.4
                                                                                                                 -.4
                            -.6

                            -.8                                                                                  -.6

                                    -2        -1         0       1       2        3   4     5                          -2   -1      0      1      2      3       4   5
                                                   Year relative to displacement                                                 Year relative to displacement


                                                       Log hourly wage rate
                    .15
                      .1
       log points




                    .05
                      0
                    -.05
                     -.1

                           -2            -1        0         1       2        3       4     5
                                               Year relative to displacement


                                                                                      ψ (employer fixed effect)
                                                                                      log outcome variable



Notes: The figures show estimated displacement losses attributable to foregone employer fixed
effects (circles) compared with the full losses due to displacement for workers with 3–4 years of
job tenure at the time of displacement (squares, repeated from Appendix Figure A1). Losses
attributable to foregone employer fixed effects are estimates of δk from equation (3). For
example, to obtain the estimates of earnings lost due to foregone employer premiums, equation
(3) was estimated with the AKM employer fixed effect (ψ    ! ) for log earnings as the dependent
variable. Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by
worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records.




                                                                                                7
Appendix A.2
Unemployment rates in Washington, Connecticut, Pennsylvania, and the United States,
selected time periods

This appendix compares the United States national unemployment rate with that in Washington

in 2002–2014 (Appendix Figure A3), Connecticut in 1993–2004 (Appendix Figure A4), and

Pennsylvania in 1974–1986 (Appendix Figure A5)—the states and years studied by Lachowska,

Mas, and Woodbury (2018), Couch and Placzek (2010), and Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan

(1993a, b).

       Appendix Figure A3 shows that the unemployment rate in Washington improved relative

to the US national average in the recovery leading up to the 2008–2010 recession, then fell

somewhat below the national average during the recession itself. However, the Washington

unemployment rate peaked above the national rate and remained above the national rate until

mid 2012. Overall, the Great Recession in Washington appears to have reflected the national

experience with a lag of a few months.

       In contrast, the 2001 recession in Connecticut appears to have followed a different pattern

than the national downturn—see Appendix Figure A4. Connecticut’s unemployment rate was 1–

2 percentage points lower than the national average throughout the recession, then increased

relative to the national average, peaking about 1 percentage point below the national average in

2003. Connecticut, then, started the recession in a substantially better position than the national

labor market, then became more like the national labor market over the next two years.

       Appendix Figure A5 shows that the double-dip recession of the early 1980s was

especially severe in Pennsylvania, even compared with the national experience. Pennsylvania’s

unemployment rate started the 1980 recession nearly one percentage point above the national




                                                 8
average, then increased by nearly an additional point relative to the national average—which

itself increased by four percentage points.

       In summary, of the three recessions studied by us, CP, and JLS, the Washington

experience during the Great Recession appears to have reflected the national experience most

closely, and the Pennsylvania experience during the double-dip recession of the early 1980s was

the most severe both absolutely and relative to the national average.




                                                9
Appendix Figure A3
Civilian monthly unemployment rate, Washington and United States, 2002–2014




Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Data (FRED), based on data from U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                            10
Appendix Figure A4
Civilian monthly unemployment rate, Connecticut and United States, 1993–2004




Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Data (FRED), based on data from U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                            11
Appendix Figure A5
Civilian monthly unemployment rates, Pennsylvania and United States, 1974–1986




Note: The unemployment rate in Pennsylvania is only available from 1976.
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Data (FRED), based on data from U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                            12
Appendix A.3
Estimated losses of displaced workers including those less strongly attached to the labor force

The estimates in Figures 2, 3, and 5 of the main text are based on the UI claimant sample, which

is restricted to displaced workers who were strongly attached to the labor force; that is, were

employed in at least one quarter per calendar year in each year following displacement.

        Relaxing the restriction of strong attachment, so that a displaced worker need not have

positive earnings in at least one quarter per year after being displaced, results in an additional

1,509 displaced workers. These 1,509 displaced workers are assigned zero earnings and hours in

quarters when their earnings and hours are missing and are then added to the UI claimant sample,

yielding a total sample of 4,199. (Necessarily, zero values are dropped from the analysis when

using outcomes in logarithmic form, resulting in an unbalanced panel.) To be clear, these 1,509

displaced workers claimed UI at some time during 2002–2014, so we observe their demographic

characteristics.

        Appendix Table A2 displays the descriptive statistics of both the 2,690 displaced workers

in the UI claimant sample and the 1,509 additional displaced workers who were less strongly

attached to the labor force. On average, the 1,509 less strongly attached displaced workers had

higher pre-displacement earnings and wage rates than the UI claimant sample, and they were

more likely to have a bachelor’s or advanced degree. Of these 1,509 displaced workers, only 26

were never observed with positive earnings after being displaced. Compared with the UI

claimant sample workers, these 26 workers also had higher pre-displacement earnings and wage

rates, and again had higher educational attainment.2



2
  That only 26 displaced workers never had any positive earnings after displacement may be surprising; however,
these workers had at least six years of job tenure before displacement and were no older than 50 at the time of
displacement, so they were strongly attached to the labor force. JLS (1993b, p 16) also find that labor force
withdrawal is rare among long-tenure prime-age workers.


                                                       13
        Appendix Figure A6 plots the estimated time paths of lost log earnings, log hours, and

log wage rates for the augmented sample, consisting of the main UI claimant sample plus the

sample of less attached displaced workers (squares), along with the time paths of earnings, work

hours, and wage rates for the main displaced worker sample (circles, repeated from Figures 2, 3,

and 5 in the main text)—see also row 4 of Appendix Table A1. The comparison group used to

obtain the estimated losses of the augmented sample is the same 13,290 continuously employed

workers who were used to obtain the main estimates.

        Estimates based on the augmented sample differ in two main ways from those based on

the main UI claimant sample. First, five years after displacement, work hours of the augmented

sample were 11.6 log points lower than those of the comparison group, compared with 4.7 log

points lower in the main UI claimant sample (compare rows 1 and 4 of Appendix Table A1).

Earnings losses were also larger by nearly 25 log points in the augmented sample, compared with

16.4 log points lower in the baseline sample.3 Second, relative to the comparison group, the

probability of employment (positive earnings or hours in a quarter) five years after displacement

was 18 percent less for the augmented sample, compared with 3 percent less for the main UI

claimant sample.

        Given the above differences, it is somewhat surprising that the average hourly wage rate

losses are quite similar for the main UI claimant sample and the augmented sample—11.5 log

points for the former, 13.4 log points for the latter.




3
 When Couch and Placzek (2010, p. 579) relax the labor force attachment restriction, they find earnings losses that
are greater by 15–18 percentage points, substantially larger than the 9 log-point increase we estimate.


                                                        14
Appendix Table A2
Sample descriptive statistics for UI claimant sample (2,690 workers), additional displaced workers who did not have
positive earnings once per calendar year after being displaced (1,509 workers), and displaced workers who never
had positive post-displacement earnings (26 workers)
                                                            (1)                 (2)                      (3)
                                                                            Displaced workers
                                                                     Workers not required to
                                                            UI                                   Workers with no
                                                                    have earnings > 0 at least
                                                        claimant                                earnings > 0 post-
                                                                    one quarter per year post-
                                                         sample                                    displacement
                                                                          displacement
 Quarterly average earnings, hours, and wage rates, 2002–2005
 Earnings (2010 dollars)                                 13,349              14,575                   14,861
                                                         (6,466)             (8,063)                  (9,499)
 Paid work hours                                           519                 511                      506
                                                           (82)                (82)                     (66)
 Hourly wage rate (2010 dollars/hour)                     58.00               69.16                    63.52
                                                         (43.12)             (47.21)                  (47.63)
 Worker characteristics, 2007:IV
 Female (proportion)                                      0.286               0.372                    0.269
 Race (proportions)
    White, not Hispanic                                   0.779               0.767                    0.769
    Black, not Hispanic                                   0.030               0.033                    0.038
    Hispanic                                              0.073               0.071                    0.077
    Asian/Pacific Islander                                0.071               0.074                    0.038
    American Indian or Alaskan Native                     0.013               0.016                    0.038
    Missing, unknown, or not available                    0.035               0.040                    0.038
 Schooling (proportions)
    less than high school                                 0.080               0.060                    0.154
    GED                                                   0.031               0.029                    0.000
    high school graduate                                  0.465               0.390                    0.231
    some college                                          0.149               0.154                    0.115
    associate's degree                                    0.124               0.130                    0.154
    bachelor's degree                                     0.125               0.162                    0.269
    master's/PhD                                          0.026               0.047                    0.077
 Age (years)                                              39.45               40.42                    40.58
                                                          (6.46)              (6.36)                   (6.09)
 Employer characteristics in 2007:IV
 Employer size (number of workers)                        2,042               1,974                    1,244
                                                         (2,578)             (2,440)                  (1,800)
 NAICS Industry (proportions)
    11 agriculture, forestry, fishing                     0.016               0.009                    0.000
    21–23 mining, utilities, construction                 0.088               0.068                    0.039
    31–33 manufacturing                                   0.277               0.276                    0.423
    42–49 trade, transportation                           0.160               0.145                    0.192
    51–56 information, finance, prof. services            0.377               0.427                    0.269
    61–62 educational and health care services            0.013               0.013                    0.000
    71–72 arts, recreation, hospitality services          0.055               0.052                    0.077
    81 other services                                     0.007               0.060                    0.000
    92–99 public administration and unclassified          0.007               0.053                    0.000
 Number of employers (pre- and post-displacement)         3,493               1,979                      39
 Number of workers                                        2,690               1,509                      26
Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. The 26 workers who were never observed with positive post-
displacement earnings (column 3) are included with the 1,509 workers in column (2).
Source: Authors’ tabulations of Washington administrative wage and claims records. See section 2.1 for details of
the UI claimant sample construction.



                                                        15
Appendix Figure A6
Estimated displacement effects, including workers less strongly attached to the labor force


                                                     Log quarterly earnings                                                                          Log quarterly work hours
                            .2
                                                                                                                                 0
                             0
    log points




                                                                                                           log points
                                                                                                                               -.2
                            -.2

                                                                                                                               -.4
                            -.4

                            -.6                                                                                                -.6

                                  -5   -4     -3     -2     -1       0       1       2       3   4   5                               -5   -4    -3     -2   -1   0   1   2      3   4   5
                                               Year relative to displacement                                                                     Year relative to displacement


                                                   Log hourly wage rate                                                                        Quarterly employment probability
                 .1                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                           Fraction employed
    log points




                  0                                                                                                            -.1


                                                                                                                               -.2
                 -.1

                                                                                                                               -.3
                 -.2

                       -5         -4   -3     -2       -1        0       1       2       3       4   5                               -5   -4    -3    -2    -1   0   1   2      3   4   5
                                            Year relative to displacement                                                                        Year relative to displacement


                                                                 UI claimant sample                      Including less strongly attached



Notes: The figures show estimated displacement effects for the UI claimant sample (circles,
repeated from Figures 2, 3, and 5 of the main text, N = 2,690) and for the UI claimant sample
augmented by displaced workers not required to be observed with positive earnings or hours
after being displaced (squares, N = 4,199, the sum of the UI claimant sample and the displaced
workers less strongly attached to the labor force). The whiskers denote 95–percent confidence
intervals clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
sections 3.1, 4.1, and 4.2 of the text for details.




                                                                                                           16
Appendix A.4
Estimates using an alternative comparison group

The comparison group used by JLS included only workers continuously employed with their

primary employer throughout the observation period (in our case, 2002–2014). As Krolikowski

(2018) points, this could lead to an overstatement of displaced workers’ losses. Accordingly, we

estimate equation (1) using a comparison group of long-tenure workers (employed by the same

primary employer during 2002–2007) who continued with the same employer (were not

displaced) during 2008–2010, but who may have changed employers or separated from their

primary employer sometime after 2010. We interpret the estimates obtained using this alternative

comparison group as a lower bound of the effects of displacement.

          Appendix Figures A7–A9 show the results of estimating equation (1) for earnings, hours,

and hourly wage rates, using this alternative comparison group—see also row 5 of Appendix

Table A1. The short-term losses are similar to those in Figures 2, 3, and 5: In the quarter after

displacement, earnings dropped by 48 log points (compared with 55 log point using the

continuously employed comparison group), hours dropped by 38 log points (compared with 42

log points using the continuously employed comparison group), and wage rates were lower by 11

log points (compared with about 13 log points using the continuously employed comparison

group).

          Long-term earnings and hours losses estimated using the alternative comparison group

are substantially less than those estimated using the continuously employed comparison group:

After five years, earnings were lower than the alternative comparison group’s by about 8 log

points (compared with 16 log points using the continuously employed comparison group), and

hours recovered completely (compared with a 5 log-point loss). However, the difference between

hourly wage rate losses using the different comparison groups is less striking: they were lower



                                                 17
by 8 log points using the alternatively comparison group (compared with 11.5 log points using

the continuously employed group).

       The three panels of Appendix Figure A10 show the estimated displacement losses due to

                        ! j ) when using the alternative comparison group—see the time paths
employer fixed effects (ψ

marked with circles. (For comparison, the estimated full effects of displacement using the

alternative comparison group are also shown as light squares. These are repeated from Appendix

Figures A7–A9.) As was true in the analysis using the continuously employed comparison group,

lost employer fixed effects account for a minimal portion of the total losses following

displacement.




                                                18
Appendix Figure A7
Earnings losses due to displacement estimated using the alternative comparison group


                                                                             Quarterly earnings (2010$, thousands)
                          2
       2010$, thousands




                          0


                          -2


                          -4


                          -6

                               -5              -4        -3        -2             -1               0          1        2       3       4   5
                                                                                 Year relative to displacement


                                                                                          Log quarterly earnings
                                    .2


                                     0
       log points




                                    -.2


                                    -.4


                                    -.6

                                          -5        -4        -3        -2               -1            0          1        2       3   4   5
                                                                                       Year relative to displacement




Notes: The figures show earnings losses estimated using a comparison group of long-tenure
workers who were not displaced during 2008–2010, but who may have subsequently changed
employers or separated from their primary employer (Krolikowski 2018). The top figure shows
estimated δks—quarterly unconditional earnings lost due to displacement (in constant 2010
$1,000s)—based on equation (1) with unconditional earnings from the primary employer as the
dependent variable. The bottom figure shows estimated δks—log of quarterly earnings lost due to
displacement—based on equation (1) with the log of earnings from the primary employer as the
dependent variable. Whiskers (which are very small) denote 95-percent confidence intervals
based on standard errors clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of
displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
section 2.1 for details of the baseline comparison group, and see Figure 2 in the main text for
estimates using the baseline comparison group.




                                                                                              19
Appendix Figure A8
Work hour losses due to displacement estimated using the alternative comparison group


                                                                                 Quarterly work hours
                            50
    Quarterly work hours




                             0

                            -50

                           -100

                           -150

                           -200

                                  -5         -4        -3        -2         -1            0             1       2       3   4   5
                                                                           Year relative to displacement


                                                                                 Log quarterly work hours
                                  .2


                                   0
    log points




                                  -.2


                                  -.4


                                  -.6

                                        -5        -4        -3        -2         -1           0             1       2   3   4   5
                                                                             Year relative to displacement




Notes: The figures show quarterly work hour losses estimated using a comparison group of long-
tenure workers who were not displaced during 2008–2010, but who may have subsequently
changed employers or separated from their primary employer (Krolikowski 2018). The top figure
shows estimated δks—quarterly unconditional hours lost due to displacement—based on equation
(1) with unconditional hours from the primary employer as the dependent variable. The bottom
figure shows estimated δks—log of quarterly hours lost due to displacement—based on equation
(1) with the log of hours from the primary employer as the dependent variable. Whiskers denote
95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. The vertical lines
denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
section 2.1 for details of the baseline comparison group, and see Figure 3 in the main text for
estimates using the baseline comparison group.




                                                                                         20
Appendix Figure A9
Hourly wage rate losses due to displacement estimated using the alternative comparison group


                                                                                   Hourly wage rate
                          10
       Hourly wage rate




                           5



                           0



                          -5

                               -5             -4        -3        -2         -1              0           1        2       3       4   5
                                                                            Year relative to displacement


                                                                                       Log hourly wage rate

                                    .1

                                .05
       log points




                                    0

                               -.05

                                -.1

                               -.15

                                         -5        -4        -3        -2         -1             0            1       2       3   4   5
                                                                              Year relative to displacement




Notes: The figure shows hourly wage rate losses estimated using a comparison group of long-
tenure workers who were not displaced during 2008–2010, but who may have subsequently
changed employers or separated from their primary employer (Krolikowski 2018). The figure
plots estimated δks—the reduction in the log hourly wage rate due to displacement—based on
equation (1) with the log of the hourly wage rate at the primary employer (constant 2010 dollars
per hour) as the dependent variable. Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on
standard errors clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
section 2.1 for details of the baseline comparison group, and see Figure 5 in the main text for
estimates using the baseline comparison group.




                                                                                        21
Appendix Figure A10
Estimated displacement losses due to lost employer fixed effects based on the alternative
comparison group


                                           Log quarterly earnings                                                      Log quarterly work hours
                      .2                                                                          .2

                       0                                                                           0
       log points




                                                                                     log points
                      -.2                                                                         -.2

                      -.4                                                                         -.4

                      -.6                                                                         -.6

                            -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2    3   4   5                           -5   -4   -3     -2   -1   0   1   2      3   4   5
                                       Year relative to displacement                                               Year relative to displacement


                                           Log hourly wage rate
                      .1
                    .05
       log points




                      0
                    -.05
                     -.1
                    -.15

                            -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1    2     3   4   5
                                       Year relative to displacement


                                                     ψ (employer fixed effect for a given outcome variable)
                                                     log outcome variable



Notes: The figures show estimated displacement losses attributable to foregone employer fixed
effects (circles) compared with the full losses due to displacement (squares, repeated from
Appendix Figures A7, A8, and A9). Losses attributable to foregone employer fixed effects are
estimates of δk from equation (3). For example, to obtain the estimates of earnings lost due to
foregone employer premiums, equation (3) was estimated with the AKM employer fixed effect
 ! ) for log earnings as the dependent variable. Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals
(ψ
based on standard errors clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of
displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
section 2.1 for details of the baseline comparison group, and see Figure 6 in the main text for
estimates using the baseline comparison group.




                                                                                22
Appendix A.5
Estimates from a broadened sample of displaced and non-displaced workers

The estimates in the text are based on a sample of workers who claimed UI at least once during

2002–2014.4 In this appendix, we present an analysis based on a broadened sample not restricted

to UI claimants.

         Appendix Figures A11, A12, and A13 repeat the analysis in the main text using all

workers who satisfy the criteria for inclusion in the analysis sample described in section 2.1,

except we no longer require them to have claimed UI at least once—see also row 6 of Appendix

Table A1. This results in a substantially larger sample (6,170 displaced workers, and 257,651

workers in the comparison group), although it does not materially change the conclusions. The

pre-displacement Ashenfelter dip is more noticeable in the broadened sample, and the initial

drops in earnings, hours, and wage rates are somewhat less than in the original sample

(comparing Appendix Figures A11–A13 with Figures 2, 3, and 5). But long-term losses appear

to be somewhat greater in the broadened sample (23 log points in the broadened sample versus

16 log points in the sample restricted to UI claimants). The larger long-term earnings losses in

the broadened sample occur mainly because wage rates in the broadened sample show little if

any recovery from their drop at the time of displacement.

         As in the main analysis, the employer fixed effects do not appear to account for much of

the losses of this broadened sample.




4
 As described in the text, this restriction is imposed on both the displaced workers and the comparison group for
two reasons. First, we observe the individual characteristics of UI claimants, so we can restrict attention to displaced
workers aged 20–50 at the time of displacement. Second, we can infer that non-displaced workers in the comparison
group who claimed UI experienced at least one temporary layoff (an unemployment spell lasting less than one
quarter and ending in recall to the same employer), creating a comparison group at greater risk of displacement and
more comparable to the displaced treatment group.


                                                          23
Appendix Figure A11
Estimated earnings losses due to displacement, based on the broadened sample of displaced and
non-displaced workers


                                                                             Quarterly earnings (2010$, thousands)
                          2
       2010$, thousands




                          0

                          -2

                          -4

                          -6


                               -5              -4        -3        -2             -1               0          1        2       3       4   5
                                                                                 Year relative to displacement


                                                                                          Log quarterly earnings

                                     0

                                    -.1
       log points




                                    -.2

                                    -.3

                                    -.4

                                    -.5

                                          -5        -4        -3        -2               -1            0          1        2       3   4   5
                                                                                       Year relative to displacement




Notes: The figures show quarterly earnings losses estimated using the broadened sample of
displaced and non-displaced workers—that is, without restricting the sample to workers who
claimed UI at some time during 2002–2014. The top figure shows estimated δks—quarterly
unconditional earnings lost due to displacement (in constant 2010 $1,000s)—based on equation
(1) with unconditional earnings from the primary employer as the dependent variable. The
bottom figure shows estimated δks—log of quarterly earnings lost due to displacement—based
on equation (1) with the log of earnings from the primary employer as the dependent variable.
Whiskers (which are very small) denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors
clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage records.




                                                                                              24
Appendix Figure A12
Estimated work hour losses due to displacement, based on the broadened sample of displaced
and non-displaced workers


                                                                                    Quarterly work hours
                               50
       Quarterly work hours




                                0

                               -50

                              -100

                              -150

                              -200

                                     -5         -4        -3        -2         -1             0            1       2       3   4   5
                                                                              Year relative to displacement


                                                                                    Log quarterly work hours
                                     .2


                                      0
       log points




                                     -.2


                                     -.4


                                     -.6

                                           -5        -4        -3        -2         -1            0            1       2   3   4   5
                                                                                Year relative to displacement




Notes: The figures show quarterly work hour losses estimated using the broadened sample of
displaced and non-displaced workers—that is, without restricting the sample to workers who
claimed UI at some time during 2002–2014. The top figure shows estimated δks—quarterly
unconditional hours lost due to displacement—based on equation (1) with unconditional hours at
the primary employer as the dependent variable. The bottom figure shows estimated δks—log of
quarterly hours lost due to displacement—based on equation (1) with the log of hours at the
primary employer as the dependent variable. Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals
based on standard errors clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of
displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage records.




                                                                                         25
Appendix Figure A13
Estimated hourly wage rate losses due to displacement, based on the broadened sample of
displaced and non-displaced workers


                                                           Hourly wage rate
                          10
       Hourly wage rate




                           5



                           0



                          -5

                                -5   -4   -3   -2    -1            0             1   2   3   4   5
                                                    Year relative to displacement


                                                          Log hourly wage rate
                           .1
       log points




                           0



                          -.1



                          -.2

                                -5   -4   -3   -2    -1            0             1   2   3   4   5
                                                    Year relative to displacement




Notes: The figure shows hourly wage rate losses estimated using the broadened sample of
displaced and non-displaced workers—that is, without restricting the sample to workers who
claimed UI at some time during 2002–2014. The figure plots estimated δks—reductions in the
log hourly wage rate due to displacement—based on equation (1) with the log of the hourly wage
rate at the primary employer (constant 2010 dollars per hour) as the dependent variable.
Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker.
The vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage records.




                                                             26
Appendix Figure A14
Estimated displacement losses due to foregone employer fixed effects, based on the broadened
sample of displaced and non-displaced workers


                                                        Log quarterly earnings                                                                        Log quarterly work hours
                                                                                                                                 .2
                                0
                               -.1                                                                                                0
       log points




                                                                                                                    log points
                               -.2
                                                                                                                                 -.2
                               -.3
                                                                                                                                 -.4
                               -.4
                               -.5                                                                                               -.6

                                     -5   -4     -3     -2     -1       0       1       2       3      4   5                           -5   -4   -3     -2   -1   0   1   2      3   4   5
                                                  Year relative to displacement                                                                   Year relative to displacement


                                                      Log hourly wage rate
                    .1
       log points




                     0


                    -.1


                    -.2

                          -5         -4   -3     -2       -1        0       1       2       3         4    5
                                               Year relative to displacement


                                                                                                    ψ (employer fixed effects)
                                                                                                    log outcome variable


Notes: The figures show estimated displacement losses attributable to foregone employer fixed
effects (circles) compared with the full losses due to displacement (squares, repeated from
Figures A11, A12, and A13) for the broadened sample of displaced and non-displaced workers—
that is, without restricting the sample to workers who claimed UI at some time during 2002–
2014. Losses attributable to foregone employer fixed effects are estimates of δk from equation
(3). For example, to obtain the estimates of earnings lost due to foregone employer premiums,
equation (3) was estimated with the AKM employer fixed effect (ψ    ! ) for log earnings as the
dependent variable. Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors
clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage records.




                                                                                                               27
Appendix A.6
Estimates excluding workers displaced from NAICS industries 51–56

In this appendix, we repeat the main analysis excluding workers displaced from jobs in NAICS

industries 51–56 (information, finance and insurance, real estate, professional, scientific, and

technical services, management of companies; administrative, support, and waste management

and remediation services). We do this for three reasons: first, as seen in Table 1 of the main text,

workers in NAICS industries 51–56 have higher earnings and wage rates than other workers;

second, the comparison sample for workers displaced from NAICS industries 51–56 is relatively

thin, making inferences about the influence of displacement on these workers less convincing

than for others; third, dropping NAICS industries 51–56 brings the industry composition of our

analysis sample closer to the industry composition of the samples examined by JLS and CP.

       Appendix Figure A15 plots the losses of workers displaced from industries other than

NAICS 51–56—see also row 7 of Appendix Table A1. Immediate earnings losses are 65 log

points, and long-term earnings losses (quarters 17–20) are 17 log points. For workers displaced

from industries other than NAICS 51–56, then, both short- and long-term losses appear larger

than for the full UI claimant sample. However, these long-term losses remain somewhat smaller

than those estimated by JLS and CP for Pennsylvania and Connecticut.

       Appendix Figure A15 shows that the long-term lost work hours of workers displaced

from industries other than NAICS 51–56 also exceed those for workers overall. The long-term

hours loss is about 8 log points (compared with 5 log points for the full UI claimant sample). The

long-term wage reduction is about 10 log points (compared with 11 log points for the full UI

claimant sample).




                                                 28
Appendix Figure A15
Estimated displacement effects for workers displaced from industries other than NAICS
industries 51–56


                                                     Log quarterly earnings                                                                    Log quarterly work hours
                             0                                                                                              0

                            -.2
    log points




                                                                                                         log points
                                                                                                                          -.2

                            -.4
                                                                                                                          -.4
                            -.6

                            -.8                                                                                           -.6

                                  -5   -4     -3     -2     -1       0       1       2       3   4   5                          -5   -4   -3     -2   -1   0   1   2      3   4   5
                                               Year relative to displacement                                                               Year relative to displacement


                                                   Log hourly wage rate                                                                   Pr(Earnings > 0 or Hours > 0)
                 .2                                                                                                        0

                 .1                                                                                      Point estimate
                                                                                                                          -.1
    log points




                  0
                                                                                                                          -.2
                 -.1

                                                                                                                          -.3
                 -.2

                       -5         -4   -3     -2       -1        0       1       2       3       4   5                          -5   -4   -3    -2    -1   0   1   2      3   4   5
                                            Year relative to displacement                                                                  Year relative to displacement




Notes: The figures show estimated displacement effects for workers displaced from any industry
except NAICS industries 51–56 (information, finance and insurance, real estate, professional,
scientific, and technical services, management of companies; administrative, support, and waste
management and remediation services). Each figure shows the profile of displacement effects for
an outcome—log quarterly earnings, log quarterly hours, and log wage rate (all from the primary
employer), or the probability of employment (positive earnings or hours)—based on estimates of
δk in equation (1). Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors
clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records.




                                                                                                         29
Appendix A.7
Estimates from a model with worker-specific trends (random trends model)

As a robustness check of the parallel-trends assumption, we estimate a version of the worker

fixed-effects difference-in-differences model with worker-specific trends (a random trend

model):

                                                         k = –20(δk ·Ditk ) + eit ,
       Yit = ci + ωi t + γt+ Zit θ1 + Wit θ2 + Xj(i,t)+ ∑20                                   (A.1)

where t is a quarterly time trend, ωi is a worker-specific quarterly growth rate over the period,

and γt is a vector of calendar quarter indicators. [Other notation is the same as for equation (1) in

the main text.] The worker-specific trends are included for the pre-displacement period, so as to

account for any differential trends between displaced workers and the comparison group before

displacement occurred.

       The results are shown in Appendix Figures A16, A17, and A18—see also row 8 of

Appendix Table A1. The estimated profiles of earnings and hours are similar to those estimated

using equation (1) and shown in Figures 2, 3, and 5. The overall similarity of the estimates

suggests that pre-displacement earnings, work hours, and wage rates of displaced and non-

displaced workers evolve approximately in parallel. This is consistent with interpreting the

estimated δks in equation (1) as displacement effects.




                                                       30
Appendix Figure A16
Estimated earnings losses due to displacement, based on the random-trends model


                                                                Quarterly earnings (2010$, thousands)
                       2
    2010$, thousands




                       0

                       -2

                       -4
                                                                                                                                 Baseline (no worker-specific trends)
                       -6
                                                                                                                                 With worker-specific trends

                            -5              -4        -3         -2           -1        0       1       2        3       4   5
                                                                      Year relative to displacement


                                                                               Log quarterly earnings
                                 .2


                                  0
    log points




                                 -.2


                                 -.4
                                                                                                                                 Baseline (no worker-specific trends)
                                                                                                                                 With worker-specific trends
                                 -.6

                                       -5        -4        -3          -2          -1       0       1       2        3   4   5
                                                                            Year relative to displacement




Notes: The top figure shows estimated δks—quarterly unconditional earnings lost due to
displacement (in constant 2010 $1,000s)—based on the random trend model [equation (A.1)]
with unconditional earnings from the primary employer as the dependent variable. The bottom
figure shows estimated δks—log of quarterly earnings lost due to displacement—based on
equation (A.1) with the log of earnings from the primary employer as the dependent variable.
Whiskers (which are very small) denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors
clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records.




                                                                                                            31
Appendix Figure A17
Estimated work hour losses due to displacement, based on the random-trends model


                                                                           Quarterly work hours
                          100
   Quarterly work hours




                            0


                          -100


                          -200
                                                                                                                            Baseline (no worker-specific trends)
                                                                                                                            With worker-specific trends
                          -300

                                 -5         -4        -3        -2           -1        0       1       2        3   4   5
                                                                     Year relative to displacement


                                                                           Log quarterly work hours
                                  .2


                                  0
   log points




                                 -.2


                                 -.4
                                                                                                                            Baseline (no worker-specific trends)
                                                                                                                            With worker-specific trends
                                 -.6

                                       -5        -4        -3        -2           -1       0       1       2    3   4   5
                                                                          Year relative to displacement




Notes: The top figure shows estimated δks—quarterly unconditional hours lost due to
displacement—based on the random trend model [equation (A.1)] with unconditional hours at
the primary employer as the dependent variable. The bottom figure shows estimated δks—log of
quarterly hours lost due to displacement—based on equation (A.1) with the log of hours at the
primary employer as the dependent variable. Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals
based on standard errors clustered by worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of
displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records.




                                                                                                           32
Appendix Figure A18
Estimated hourly wage rate losses due to displacement, based on the random-trends model


                                                      Hourly wage rate
                       10
    Hourly wage rate




                        5



                        0
                                                                                                      Baseline (no worker-specific trends)
                                                                                                      With worker-specific trends
                       -5

                             -5   -4   -3   -2        -1      0        1         2        3   4   5
                                                 Year relative to displacement


                                                     Log hourly wage rate
                        .1
    log points




                        0



                       -.1
                                                                                                      Baseline (no worker-specific trends)
                                                                                                      With worker-specific trends
                       -.2

                             -5   -4   -3   -2        -1       0       1         2        3   4   5
                                                 Year relative to displacement




Notes: The figure shows estimated δks—the reduction in the log hourly wage rate due to
displacement—based on the random trend model [equation (A.1)] with the log of the hourly
wage rate at the primary employer (constant 2010 dollars per hour) as the dependent variable.
Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker.
The vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records.




                                                                                     33
Appendix A.8
Estimates using the specification and sampling choices of Schmieder, von Wachter, and
Heining (2018)

As noted in the main text (section 5.1), our finding that employer effects play such a limited role

in displaced workers’ losses is surprising in light of contrary findings by Schmieder, von

Wachter, and Heining (2018) for Germany. In this appendix, we examine whether differences

between their and our model specifications and sampling choices (definitions of the displaced

workers and comparison groups) can explain the differences. Specifically, we make the

following changes so as to conform with Schmieder, von Wachter, and Heining (2018):

   •   Include only full-time workers in the pre-displacement period (rather than part-time and

       full-time)

   •   Include only men (rather than women and men)

   •   Include workers aged 24–50 at displacement (rather than aged 20–50)

   •   Exclude workers in public administration and mining

   •   Include in the comparison group workers who separated from their employer (rather than

       require the comparison group to be continuously employed by the same employer)

   •   Use 1-1 closest-neighbor matching without replacement on the following pre-

       displacement characteristics: employer size (in 2007), average wage in t–2 (in 2006) and

       t–1 (in 2007), tenure, age, and education levels) within each one-digit pre-displacement

       industry

   •   Restrict the estimation sample to one control group worker for each displaced worker

   •   Add controls for age and education level to equations (1) and (3)




                                                34
   •      Include in both the displaced worker sample and the comparison group workers with

          three or more years of job tenure (rather than restricting to six or more years of job

          tenure).

          After making these modifications, we obtain the results displayed in Appendix Figure

A19 using the Washington data (see also row 9 of Appendix Table A1). The three panels of

Appendix Figure A19 show that employer fixed effects remain a negligible factor in explaining

the losses of displaced workers. It follows that differences in model specification and sampling

choices do not appear to underlie the different conclusions drawn by Schmieder, von Wachter,

and Heining (2018) and by us. As we note in section 5.1, the disparities are more likely

attributable to institutional differences between Germany and Washington State, possibly the

greater importance of formal occupational training in Germany noted by Acemoglu and Pischke

(1998).




                                                   35
Appendix Figure A19
Estimated displacement losses due to lost employer fixed effects: Model specifications and
sampling choices of Schmieder, von Wachter, and Heining (2018) applied to the Washington
data

                                                     Log quarterly earnings                                                   Log quarterly work hours
                            .2                                                                               .2

                            0                                                                                 0
    log point




                                                                                                 log point
                        -.2                                                                                  -.2

                        -.4                                                                                  -.4

                        -.6                                                                                  -.6

                                 -2        -1         0       1        2       3   4    5                          -2   -1      0      1      2      3       4   5
                                                Year relative to displacement                                                Year relative to displacement


                                                    Log hourly wage rate
                  .1

                .05
    log point




                  0

                -.05

                 -.1

                       -2             -1        0         1        2       3       4    5
                                            Year relative to displacement


                                                                  log outcome variable
                                                                  ψ (employer fixed effects for a given outcome variable)


Notes: The figures show estimated displacement losses attributable to foregone employer fixed
effects (squares) compared with the full losses due to displacement (circles), using Schmieder,
von Wachter, and Heining’s (2018) model specifications and sampling choices. Losses
attributable to foregone employer fixed effects are estimates of δk from equation (3). For
example, to obtain the estimates of earnings lost due to foregone employer premiums, equation
(3) was estimated with the AKM employer fixed effect (ψ   ! ) for log earnings as the dependent
variable. Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by
worker. The vertical lines denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See
sections 3.2 and 5.1 of the text and Appendix A.8 for details.




                                                                                            36
Appendix A.9
Changes in earnings and hours worked associated with inter-quintile employer effects
transitions

Sections 5.2 and 5.4 of the main text presents a discussion of how changes in hourly wage rates,

match effects, and direct effects are related to transitions made by displaced workers and non-

displaced job changers among employers with different employer effects for wage rates (ψ). The

discussion is built around Tables 4A, 4B, and 5, and Figures 7, 8A, 8B, and 8C. We focused on

employer effects for wage rates because wage rates play a central role in explaining displaced

workers’ long-term earnings losses.

       For completeness, this appendix includes tables and figures analogous to those in the

main text, but pertaining to changes in employer effects (and associated outcomes) for earnings

and work hours. Appendix Table A3 and Appendix Figures A20 and A21-1, A21-2, and A21-3

describe the outcomes (earnings, match effects, and direct effects) of displaced workers and non-

displaced job changers as they transition among employers with different fixed effects for

earnings. Appendix Table A4 and Appendix Figures A22 and A23-1, A23-2, and A23-3 do the

same for transitions among employers with different fixed effects for work hours.

       The conclusions to be drawn from the tables and figures in this appendix are similar to

those described in section 5.2 and 5.4:

   •   The distributions of transition probabilities for displaced workers and non-displaced job

       changers differ markedly. The only notable difference from the results discussed in

       section 5.2 is the greater tendency of displaced workers to move to lower fixed effect

       employers for work hours than for either wage rates or earnings (see Appendix Table A4

       (supplement)).




                                                37
•   For both displaced workers and non-displaced job changers, within-quintile transitions

    were more common than moves to higher- or lower-quintile employers. Again, the only

    notable difference pertains to employer effects for work hours, where the modal move for

    displaced workers is from a fifth-quintile to a fourth-quintile employer (see the bottom

    panel of Appendix Figure A22).

•   Changes in employer effects for earnings and work hours do a reasonable job explaining

    the changes in earnings and work hours of non-displaced job changers as they move

    among employers with different fixed effects for earnings and work hours. This again

    suggests that the AKM model gives a reasonable description of the labor market—in this

    case of changes in earnings and work hours that accompany job mobility.

•   In contrast, changes in employer effects for earnings and work hours do a poor job

    explaining the changes in earnings and work hours of displaced workers. If anything,

    these conclusions are stronger for moves to employers with different employer effects for

    earnings and work hours (see Appendix Tables A3 and A4) than was true for wage rates

    (Tables 4 and 5). Appendix Figures A21-1 and A23-1 highlight weak ability of changes

    in employer effects to explain displaced workers’ reduced earnings and work hours.

•   Figure 8A showed that lost wage rate match effects are less important for displaced

    workers who move to employers paying lower premiums than for the majority who move

    laterally or upward (Figure 8B). Appendix Figures A21-2 and A22-2 show the same is

    true for both earnings match effects and work hours match effects, and that the negative

    relationship is strongest for work hours. For non-displaced job changers, the relationship

    between Δµ for earnings and work hours and Δψ is much weaker, as was true for wage




                                            38
    rates: Employer effects play a dominant role in explaining earnings changes and work

    hours changes, and they do in explaining wage changes.

•   As was true for wage rates, the direct effects of displacement (d) on earnings and work

    hours show little systematic variation with moves across employers paying different

    premium levels (Δψ)—see Appendix Figures A21-3 and A22-3. Direct displacement

    losses vary greatly among workers, but not systematically with respect to the type of job

    transition. Non-displaced job changers also face substantial direct earnings penalties

    when they move (Appendix Figure A21-3), but no direct work hours penalty (Appendix

    Figure A23-3). It follows that the earnings penalty derives entirely from the direct wage

    rate penalty illustrated in Figure 8C of the main text.




                                             39
Appendix Table A3
Inter-quintile employer fixed effect transitions, earnings changes, and employer fixed effect
changes of displaced workers and non-displaced job changers, 2008–2010

                                                                                                                             Row sums
 Fixed-effect quintile                                              Fixed-effect quintile of destination employer           and weighted
 of origin employer                                          1             2               3             4           5        averages
             1           % of displaced workers in cell      4.9           1.7             1.3           0.9         0.7          9.6
                          mean Δ earnings                  -21.2         -43.4          -32.6          -19.1        13.2        -24.1
                          mean Δ fixed effect                2.7          28.6           48.8           65.3        84.6         25.6
                         % of AKM sample in cell             8.9           4.7             2.9           2.0         1.0         19.6
                          mean Δ earnings                    1.8          21.9           37.6           50.7        67.5         20.4
                          mean Δ fixed effect                1.5          29.5           51.2           66.0        87.7         26.8
            2            % of displaced workers in cell      1.7           3.6           1.3           0.9           0.1         7.5
                          mean Δ earnings                  -55.0         -36.1         -19.1         -25.4          25.3       -35.2
                          mean Δ fixed effect              -26.9           0.6          17.5          31.8          74.0         2.3
                         % of AKM sample in cell             3.6           8.6           4.0           2.4           1.2        19.7
                          mean Δ earnings                  -19.1          -0.7          10.6          23.1          41.6         3.6
                          mean Δ fixed effect              -27.5          -1.7          16.4          33.1          55.3         4.8
            3            % of displaced workers in cell      1.2           2.2           6.8           3.4           1.2        14.8
                          mean Δ earnings                  -82.8         -46.8         -30.6         -18.5           2.2       -31.8
                          mean Δ fixed effect              -47.8         -15.7          -1.1          12.9          35.6        -0.9
                         % of AKM sample in cell             1.6           3.3           6.5           6.2           2.1        19.7
                          mean Δ earnings                  -35.7         -12.1           0.4           9.7          29.2         1.4
                          mean Δ fixed effect              -48.9         -18.3          -0.9          11.9          36.3         0.3
            4            % of displaced workers in cell      1.7           1.9           5.4           9.1           4.9        23.0
                          mean Δ earnings                  -83.0         -55.6         -37.9         -24.6          -0.8       -29.5
                          mean Δ fixed effect              -64.2         -34.4         -14.8           0.0          25.7        -5.6
                         % of AKM sample in cell             0.8           1.6           4.1          10.3           4.5        21.3
                          mean Δ earnings                  -55.0         -26.7         -10.6          -0.5          15.1        -3.2
                          mean Δ fixed effect              -66.5         -34.5         -14.4           0.1          20.0        -3.7
            5            % of displaced workers in cell      0.6           0.9           3.2           9.6           30.8       45.1
                          mean Δ earnings                 -154.8        -110.6         -49.2         -26.1          -20.8      -27.6
                          mean Δ fixed effect              -76.5         -57.3         -35.2         -14.9           -1.9       -9.2
                         % of AKM sample in cell             0.4           0.7           1.4           3.7           13.6       19.8
                          mean Δ earnings                  -82.6         -47.1         -29.2         -14.8            0.5       -7.7
                          mean Δ fixed effect              -87.4         -56.4         -34.6         -16.3            2.8       -7.3
 Column sums and         % of displaced workers             10.1          10.3          18.0          23.9           37.7      100.0
  weighted averages       mean Δ earnings                  -52.7         -49.7         -35.5         -24.1          -16.7      -28.9
                          mean Δ fixed effect              -24.3          -9.8          -6.3          -0.5            4.7       -2.9
                         % of AKM sample                    15.4          18.8          18.8          24.6           22.4      100.0
                          mean Δ earnings                  -12.2          -0.8           3.6           6.5           11.4        2.8
                          mean Δ fixed effect              -16.5          -1.4           5.2           9.2           16.0        4.0


Note: This transition matrix shows the movement (and associated outcomes) of displaced workers and non-displaced
job changers between employers with different fixed effects for quarterly earnings. Employers are classified into
quintiles by their AKM-estimated fixed effects for earnings. The top three elements of each six-element cell show (i)
the percentage of all displaced workers making the given quintile-to-quintile transition, (ii) the mean log-point
change in earnings of those making that transition, and (iii) the mean change in the associated employer fixed effect
of those making that transition. The bottom three elements of each cell show the same items for non-displaced job
changers. Figures for both displaced workers and non-displaced job changers are based on a comparison of
employment two years before and after the displacement or transition. See section 5.2 of the main text for further
discussion.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the displaced worker sample described in the main text, and on primary job
changes taking place during 2008–2010 in the AKM sample described in Appendix B.




                                                                   40
% of non-displaced job changers                25.7                    42.0                    32.4
 mean Δ wage                                  -17.8                    -1.2                    16.7
 mean Δ fixed effect                          -20.1                    -0.5                    20.5
Note : Figures in the "Below-diagonal sums and averages" column show sums (or weighted averages
Source : Authors' calculations from data in Tables x, x, and x.
Appendix Table A3 (supplement)
 Below-, on-,
Below-,   on-,and
               andabove-diagonal
                   above-diagonalsums   and and
                                     sums   weighted averages
                                                weighted      of inter-quintile
                                                           averages             transitions,transitions of
                                                                      of inter-quintile
 displaced workers
displaced  workersand
                    andnon-displaced
                         non-displacedjob changers, 2008–2010
                                          job changers,  2008–2010, earnings

                                Below-diagonal sums           On-diagonal sums      Above-diagonal sums
                                    and averages                and averages           and averages
% of displaced workers                   28.4                        55.2                    16.4
 mean Δ earnings                        -47.6                       -23.6                   -14.3
 mean Δ fixed effect                    -26.3                        -0.9                    30.6
% of non-displaced job changers          21.2                        47.8                    31.0
 mean Δ earnings                        -21.6                         0.3                    23.2
 mean Δ fixed effect                    -27.8                         0.7                    31.0

 Note : Figures
Note:   Figures ininthe
                     the"Below-diagonal
                         “Below-diagonal  sumssums
                                                and averages"   columncolumn
                                                    and averages”        show sums
                                                                                 show (orsums
                                                                                           weighted averages
                                                                                                (or weighted
 Source  : Authors'  calculations from data in Tables x, x, and  x.
averages of) the cells in the Appendix Table A3 transition matrix representing moves to an
employer with a lower-quintile fixed effect for wage rates. Figures in the “On-diagonal” and
 Below-, on-, and above-diagonal
“Above-diagonal”        columns show sumssums
                                           and weighted   averages
                                                or weighted         of inter-quintile
                                                               averages               transitions,
                                                                           of the cells   in the Appendix Table
 displaced  workers   and non-displaced  job changers, 2008–2010
A3 transition matrix representing moves to a same-quintile employer, or to a higher-quintile
employer.
Source: Authors’ calculations from    Below-diagonal   sums Table
                                           data in Appendix       On-diagonal   sums Above-diagonal sums
                                                                         A3 (main).
                                         and averages            and averages            and averages
% of displaced workers                        43.9                    34.4                    21.7
 mean Δ hours                                -23.3                   -13.0                    -6.5
 mean Δ fixed effect                         -10.6                     0.0                    16.4
% of non-displaced job changers               23.9                    41.4                    34.7
 mean Δ hours                                -14.4                     1.1                    16.8
 mean Δ fixed effect                         -17.0                     0.6                    18.9

Note : Figures in the "Below-diagonal sums and averages" column show sums (or weighted averages
Source : Authors' calculations from data in Tables x, x, and x.




Following are the diagonals with the Woodcock match effects

Below-, on-, and above-diagonal sums and weighted averages of inter-quintile transitions,
displaced workers and non-displaced job changers, 2008–2010

                                Below-diagonal sums           On-diagonal sums      Above-diagonal sums
                                    and averages                and averages           and averages
% of displaced workers                   30.0                        52.2                    17.8
 mean Δ wage                            -29.3                        -7.4                    -2.1
 mean Δ fixed effect                    -18.8                        -0.1                    21.4
 mean Δ match effect                     -5.1                        -3.8                   -15.7
% of non-displaced job changers          25.7                        42.0                    32.4
 mean Δ wage                            -17.8                        -1.2                    16.7
 mean Δ fixed effect                    -20.1                        -0.5                    20.5
 mean Δ match effect                      3.0                        -0.2                    -2.2

Note : Figures in the "Below-diagonal sums and averages"
                                                      41 column show sums (or weighted averages
Source : Authors' calculations from data in Tables x, x, and x.
                        1                               2              3              4            5
                  1    4.9                             1.7            1.3            0.9          0.7             9.6
Origin
                  2    1.7                             3.6            1.3            0.9          0.1             7.5
employer
                  3    1.2                             2.2            6.8            3.4          1.2            14.8
fixed-effect
                  4    1.7                             1.9            5.4            9.1          4.9            23.0
quintile
                  5    0.6                             0.9            3.2            9.6          30.8           45.1
   Appendix Figure A20 10.1                            10.3           18.0           23.9         37.7           100.0
   Inter-quintile employer earnings fixed effect transitions of displaced workers (top) and non-
   displaced job changers    (bottom), 2008–2010, earnings
                   Figure 1: Inter-quintile employer fixed-effect transitions of displaced workers




                         35.0

Table 3              30.0
Inter-quintile transitions of job changers, percentage by transition type
                         25.0
                                               Fixed-effect quintile of destination employer
                         20.0
       Percentage of                1                 2               3              4          5
     displaced workers
                  1      15.0      8.9               4.7             2.9           2.0         1.0       19.6
Fixed-effect
                  2                3.6               8.6             4.0           2.4         1.2       19.7
quintile of              10.0
                                                                                                       5
                  3                1.6               3.3             6.5           6.2         2.1   4   19.7
origin                                                                                                    Quintile of origin
                  4                0.8               1.6             4.1           10.3        4.5 3     21.3
employer                     5.0
                  5                0.4               0.7             1.4            3.7        13.6
                                                                                                2        19.8 employer
                                   15.4              18.8           18.8           24.6      1 22.4      100.0
                             0.0
                                          1            2          3              4        5
                                       Quintile of destination employer
                         Figure 2: Inter-quintile employer fixed-effect transitions of job changers




                      14.0

                      12.0

                      10.0

    Percentage of      8.0
    non-displaced
    job changers       6.0
                                                                                                                 5
                       4.0
                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                     Quintile of origin
                       2.0
                                                                                                   2                    employer
                                                                                              1
                       0.0
                                    1              2          3              4        5
                                              Quintile of destination employer

   Note: The top histogram shows the percentage of displaced workers making each quintile-to-
   quintile transition.
   Source: Data in Appendix Table A3.




                                                                       42
Appendix Figure A21-1
Changes in earnings and changes in employer effects (ψ) for displaced workers (triangles) and
non-displaced job changers (circles): scatterplots with fitted regression lines
             1
             .5
   Change in earnings
      -.5    -10
             -1.5




                        -1    -.5                 0                     .5                 1
                               Change in employer effect for earnings (ψ)

                                    AKM_Δer                     DW_Δer
Note: For displaced workers the fitted  equation is:
      Δearningsd = –0.393 + 0.777Δψ Fitted
                                       d   values
                                                R2 = 0.725, RMSEFitted values
                                                                  = 0.206, n = 25
                    (0.041) (0.010)x45
For non-displaced job changers the fitted linear equation is:
      Δearningsn = –0.011 + 0.804Δψn            R2 = 0.992, RMSE = 0.031, n = 25
                    (0.006) (0.015)
Source: Authors’ calculations based on data in Table A3.




                                               43
Appendix Figure A21-2
Changes in match effects (µ for earnings) and changes in employer effects (ψ) for displaced
workers (triangles) and non-displaced job changers (circles): scatterplots with fitted regression
lines
                 1        .5
   Change in match effect
       -.5       0
                 -1
                 -1.5




                               -1   -.5                 0                     .5              1
                                     Change in employer effect for earnings (ψ)

                                    DW_er_Δm                  AKM_er_Δm
Notes:
                                    Fitted is:
For displaced workers the fitted equation  values             Fitted values
      Δµ = –0.152 – 0.179Δψ
         d                     d     2
                                   R = 0.172, RMSE = 0.170, n = 25
            (0.034) (0.082)
For non-displaced job changers the fitted equation is:
      Δµn = 0.044 – 0.143Δψn       R2 = 0.867, RMSE = 0.024, n = 25
           (0.005) (0.012)
Source: Authors’ calculations.




                                                     44
Appendix Figure A21-3
Direct effects of displacement or job transition (d for earnings) and changes in employer effects
(ψ) for displaced workers (triangles) and non-displaced job changers (circles): scatterplots with
fitted regression lines
                                                     1
     Direct effect of displacemetn or job transition
  -1.5       -1        -.5      0         .5




                                                         -1   -.5                 0                     .5   1
                                                               Change in employer effect for earnings (ψ)

                                   DW_er_dir                  AKM_er_dir
Notes:
                                   Fitted values
For displaced workers the fitted equation is:                 Fitted values
      Δd = –0.241 – 0.044Δψ
         d                     d    2
                                   R = 0.029, RMSE = 0.110, n = 25
            (0.022) (0.053)
For non-displaced job changers the fitted equation is:
      Δdn = –0.055 – 0.053Δψn      R2 = 0.568, RMSE = 0.020, n = 25
            (0.004) (0.010)
Source: Authors’ calculations.




                                                                               45
Appendix Table A4
Inter-quintile employer fixed effect transitions, work hour changes, and employer fixed effect
 Catch-all table-revised
changes
 Inter-quintileof displaced
                employer        workers
                         fixed-effect          and
                                      transitions,   non-displaced
                                                   work                   job changers,
                                                        hour changes (log points), and employer2008–2010
                                                                                                fixed effect changes
of displaced workers and non-displaced job changers, 2008–2010
                                                                                                                                  Row sums
Fixed-effect quintile                                                    Fixed-effect quintile of destination employer           and weighted
of origin employer                                                 1            2               3             4           5        averages
            1           % of displaced workers in cell             4.9          2.5             1.0           1.1         1.2         10.6
                         mean Δ work hours                       -20.0        -12.8          -11.1            5.9         5.2        -12.1
                         mean Δ fixed effect                      -2.5         19.4           32.4           39.3        50.6         16.0
                        % of non-displaced job changers            8.5          4.5             2.5           2.0         1.5         19.1
                         mean Δ wage                               0.4         19.7           32.9           41.1        52.9         17.7
                         mean Δ fixed effect                       0.7         23.7           37.9           45.1        54.5         20.0
            2           % of displaced workers in cell             0.9          3.3           1.8           0.9           1.0          8.0
                         mean Δ work hours                       -23.7        -16.2          -5.2         -23.1          37.1         -8.8
                         mean Δ fixed effect                     -24.9         -0.4           9.6          17.4          27.9          4.7
                        % of non-displaced job changers            3.4          5.7           4.4           3.1           2.3         19.0
                         mean Δ work hours                       -16.7          1.1           8.7          17.6          28.0          5.7
                         mean Δ fixed effect                     -22.2         -0.5          10.2          18.5          28.0          4.8
            3           % of displaced workers in cell             1.6          2.6           7.7           4.3           3.1         19.3
                         mean Δ work hours                       -51.8        -26.7         -15.9          -8.3           3.0        -15.6
                         mean Δ fixed effect                     -37.9        -12.4          -0.4           7.0          13.7         -1.2
                        % of non-displaced job changers            1.5          3.3           9.3           5.2           3.4         22.6
                         mean Δ work hours                       -32.1         -7.9           0.2           5.4          12.0         -0.1
                         mean Δ fixed effect                     -38.2        -11.2           0.3           6.6          13.9         -0.4
            4           % of displaced workers in cell             0.7          1.2           3.1           6.0            4.8        15.8
                         mean Δ work hours                       -71.4        -30.4         -29.2         -11.9          -18.1       -21.4
                         mean Δ fixed effect                     -41.7        -18.1          -6.2           0.9            8.6        -1.6
                        % of non-displaced job changers            1.0          1.9           3.8           6.7            5.8        19.2
                         mean Δ work hours                       -42.3        -15.2          -5.4           0.1            4.0        -3.5
                         mean Δ fixed effect                     -45.6        -19.2          -6.7          -0.1            5.7        -3.9
            5           % of displaced workers in cell             1.4          1.6           4.1          26.8          12.5         46.3
                         mean Δ work hours                       -85.0        -29.7         -27.6         -14.7          -8.2        -16.7
                         mean Δ fixed effect                     -44.1        -23.8         -12.2          -4.8           0.9         -5.7
                        % of non-displaced job changers            0.6          1.1           2.4           4.9          11.1         20.1
                         mean Δ work hours                       -57.7        -26.8         -14.0          -4.9           2.8         -4.5
                         mean Δ fixed effect                     -55.1        -27.8         -14.9          -6.1           1.9         -5.5
Column sums and         % of displaced workers                     9.5         11.2          17.6          39.1          22.6        100.0
 weighted averages       mean Δ work hours                       -39.2        -21.3         -19.6         -13.2          -6.1        -16.1
                         mean Δ fixed effect                     -19.7         -3.9          -1.3          -0.9           8.1         -1.1
                        % of non-displaced job changers           15.0         16.5          22.4          22.0          24.1        100.0
                         mean Δ work hours                       -11.9          0.6           3.0           6.5          10.0          2.8
                         mean Δ fixed effect                     -13.7          0.0           3.6           6.9          10.3          2.8


Note: This transition matrix shows the movement (and associated outcomes) of displaced workers and non-displaced
job changers between employers with different fixed effects for quarterly work hours. Employers are classified into
quintiles by their AKM-estimated fixed effects for work hours. The top three elements of each six-element cell show
(i) the percentage of all displaced workers making the given quintile-to-quintile transition, (ii) the mean log-point
change in work hours of those making that transition, and (iii) the mean change in the associated employer fixed
effect of those making that transition. The bottom three elements of each cell show the same items for non-displaced
job changers. Figures for both displaced workers and non-displaced job changers are based on a comparison of
employment two years before and after the displacement or transition. See section 5.2 of the main text for further
discussion.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the displaced worker sample described in the main text, and on primary job
changes taking place during 2008–2010 in the AKM sample described in Appendix B.




                                                                   46
   mean Δ earnings                           -21.6                    0.3                    23.2
   mean Δ fixed effect                       -27.8                    0.7                    31.0

 Note : Figures in the "Below-diagonal sums and averages" column show sums (or weighted averages
 Source : Authors' calculations from data in Tables x, x, and x.
Appendix Table A4 (supplement)
 Below-, on-,
Below-,  on-, and
              andabove-diagonal
                   above-diagonalsums
                                   sumsandand
                                           weighted averages
                                              weighted       of inter-quintile
                                                         averages              transitions,
                                                                    of inter-quintile   transitions of
 displaced workers
displaced  workersand
                    andnon-displaced
                        non-displacedjobjob
                                         changers, 2008–2010
                                            changers,  2008–2010, work hours

                                 Below-diagonal sums         On-diagonal sums     Above-diagonal sums
                                     and averages              and averages          and averages
 % of displaced workers                   43.9                      34.4                   21.7
  mean Δ hours                           -23.3                     -13.0                   -6.5
  mean Δ fixed effect                    -10.6                       0.0                   16.4
 % of non-displaced job changers          23.9                      41.4                   34.7
  mean Δ hours                           -14.4                       1.1                   16.8
  mean Δ fixed effect                    -17.0                       0.6                   18.9

 Note :Figures
Note:   Figures in
                in the
                    the"Below-diagonal
                         “Below-diagonal sums   andand
                                             sums   averages"   column
                                                         averages”     show sums
                                                                     column show(or weighted
                                                                                 sums        averages
                                                                                       (or weighted
 Source  : Authors'  calculations from data in Tables x, x, and  x.
averages of) the cells in the Appendix Table A4 transition matrix representing moves to an
employer with a lower-quintile fixed effect for wage rates. Figures in the “On-diagonal” and
“Above-diagonal” columns show sums or weighted averages of the cells in the Appendix Table
A4 transition matrix representing moves to a same-quintile employer, or to a higher-quintile
 Following are the diagonals with the Woodcock match effects
employer.
Source: Authors’ calculations from data in Appendix Table A4 (main).
 Below-, on-, and above-diagonal sums and weighted averages of inter-quintile transitions,
 displaced workers and non-displaced job changers, 2008–2010

                                 Below-diagonal sums         On-diagonal sums     Above-diagonal sums
                                     and averages              and averages          and averages
 % of displaced workers                   30.0                      52.2                   17.8
  mean Δ wage                            -29.3                      -7.4                   -2.1
  mean Δ fixed effect                    -18.8                      -0.1                   21.4
  mean Δ match effect                     -5.1                      -3.8                  -15.7
 % of non-displaced job changers          25.7                      42.0                   32.4
  mean Δ wage                            -17.8                      -1.2                   16.7
  mean Δ fixed effect                    -20.1                      -0.5                   20.5
  mean Δ match effect                      3.0                      -0.2                   -2.2

 Note : Figures in the "Below-diagonal sums and averages" column show sums (or weighted averages
 Source : Authors' calculations from data in Tables x, x, and x.




                                                     47
                                 1                2              3            4              5
                   1             4.9              2.5            1.0          1.1            1.2            10.6
Origin
                   2             0.9              3.3            1.8          0.9            1.0             8.0
employer
                   3             1.6              2.6            7.7          4.3            3.1            19.3
fixed-effect
                   4             0.7              1.2            3.1          6.0            4.8            15.8
quintile
                   5             1.4              1.6            4.1         26.8           12.5            46.3
   Appendix Figure A22           9.5             11.2           17.6         39.1           22.6           100.0
   Inter-quintile employer hours fixed effect transitions of displaced workers (top) and non-
   displaced job changers
                   Figure 1:(bottom),   2008–2010,
                             Inter-quintile           work hourstransitions of displaced workers
                                            employer fixed-effect




                         30.0
Table 3               25.0
Inter-quintile transitions of job changers, percentage by transition type
                         20.0
                                       Fixed-effect quintile of destination employer
       Percentage of
    displaced workers 15.0 1                  2               3             4                5
                  1        8.5               4.5             2.5           2.0             1.5     19.1
Fixed-effect
                  2   10.0 3.4               5.7             4.4           3.1             2.3     19.0
                                                                                                   5
quintile of
                  3        1.5               3.3             9.3           5.2             3.4   4 22.6
origin                                                                                                Quintile of origin
                  4    5.0 1.0               1.9             3.8           6.7             5.8 3   19.2
employer                                                                                                 employer
                  5        0.6               1.1             2.4           4.9             11.12   20.1
                                                                                           1
                       0.015.0               16.5           22.4           22.0            24.1    100.0
                                       1         2          3            4        5
                                           Quintile of destination employer
                         Figure 2: Inter-quintile employer fixed-effect transitions of job changers




                   12.0

                   10.0

                       8.0
   Percentage of
   non-displaced       6.0
    job changers
                       4.0                                                                             5
                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                           Quintile of origin
                       2.0                                                                     3
                                                                                           2
                                                                                                              employer
                                                                                       1
                       0.0
                                1            2          3            4        5
                                       Quintile of destination employer

   Note: The top histogram shows the percentage of displaced workers making each quintile-to-
   quintile transition.
   Source: Data in Appendix Table A4.



                                                                48
Appendix Figure A23-1
Changes in work hours and changes in employer effects (ψ) for displaced workers (triangles) and
non-displaced job changers (circles): scatterplots with fitted regression lines
             .5
  Change in work hours
   -.5       -1   0




                         -.5                       0                                  .5
                               Change in employer effect for work hours (ψ)

                                    AKM_Δhr                      DW_Δhr
Note: For displaced workers the fitted equation is:
      Δhoursd = –0.195 + 0.839ΔψdFittedRvalues
                                           2                   Fittednvalues
                                             = 0.698, RMSE = 0.136,   = 25
            (0.027) (0.015)         x45
For non-displaced job changers the fitted linear equation is:
      Δhoursn = –0.002 + 0.932Δψn        R2 = 0.993, RMSE = 0.022, n = 25
                 (0.004) (0.017)
Source: Authors’ calculations from the data in Table A4.




                                                49
Appendix Figure A23-2
Changes in match effects (µ for work hours) and changes in employer effects (ψ) for displaced
workers (triangles) and non-displaced job changers (circles): scatterplots with fitted regression
lines
               .5
   Change in match effect
     -.5       -1   0




                            -.5                       0                                   .5
                                  Change in employer effect for work hours (ψ)

                                    DW_hr_Δm                  AKM_hr_Δm
Notes:
                                    Fitted values
For displaced workers the fitted equation  is:                Fitted values
      Δµd = –0.043 – 0.407Δψd      R2 = 0.695, RMSE = 0.066, n = 25
            (0.013) (0.056)
For non-displaced job changers the fitted equation is:
      Δµn = 0.007 – 0.062Δψn       R2 = 0.442, RMSE = 0.019, n = 25
           (0.004) (0.015)
Source: Authors’ calculations.




                                                   50
Appendix Figure A23-3
Direct effects of displacement or job transition (d for work hours) and changes in employer
effects (ψ) for displaced workers (triangles) and non-displaced job changers (circles): scatterplots
with fitted regression lines
                                                  .5
  Direct effect of displacement or job transition
                -.5           -10




                                                       -.5                       0                          .5
                                                             Change in employer effect for work hours (ψ)

                                                                  DW_hr_dir                    AKM_hr_dir
Notes:
                                   Fitted values
For displaced workers the fitted equation is:                 Fitted values
      Δd = –0.152 + 0.246Δψ
         d                     d    2
                                   R = 0.054, RMSE = 0.120, n = 25
            (0.024) (0.101)
For non-displaced job changers the fitted equation is:
      Δdn = –0.005 – 0.006Δψn      R2 = 0.016, RMSE = 0.012, n = 25
            (0.002) (0.009)
Source: Authors’ calculations.




                                                                              51
Appendix A.10
Alternative estimates of displacement losses due to lost match effects

This appendix shows that, if we do not adjust the Woodcock match effects for job tenure, the

estimated role of match effects in explaining displaced workers’ losses is somewhat larger than if

we do adjust (as in section 3.3). This is consistent with our expectations.

       Section 3.3 outlined Woodcock’s (2015) fixed effects match estimator, and section 5.4

                                                                       &&&&&&ij) used to obtain these
described the resulting estimates. The residualized outcome variables (logY

estimates netted out the effects of job tenure, but because job tenure is endogenous with respect

to worker, employer, and match quality, it seems wise to check whether the estimates are

sensitive to this adjustment. Accordingly, we compute the average of the detrended outcome

          &&&&&&ij) for each unique worker-employer match without netting out the contribution of
variable (logY

job tenure.

       The three panels of Appendix Figure A24 display the estimated displacement losses

attributable to lost worker-employer match effects that adjust for years of job tenure (𝜇̂ , denoted

by diamonds and repeated from Figure 9 in the main text) and match effects that do not adjust for

years of job tenure (denoted by triangles). For comparison, the three panels also display the full

effects of displacement on log earnings, log hours, and log hourly wage rate (denoted by circles

and repeated from the lower panels of Figures 2, 3, and 5 in the main text).

       The estimates that do not adjust for job tenure suggest a somewhat larger role for match

effects than the estimates that include the adjustment—compare rows 10 and 11 of Appendix

Table A1. For example, the long-term wage rate loss due to match effects is about 6.5 log points

after adjusting for job tenure, versus about 8 log points without the adjustment. This is expected

because long-tenure workers have better matches, so not accounting for job tenure tends to

overstate the role of match effects in explaining displaced workers’ losses.


                                                 52
Appendix Figure A24
Estimated displacement losses attributable to lost worker-employer match effects (with and
without controls for years of job tenure)

                                                     Log quarterly earnings                                                                      Log quarterly work hours
                            .2
                                                                                                                             0
                             0
    log points




                                                                                                               log points
                                                                                                                            -.2
                            -.2

                                                                                                                            -.4
                            -.4

                            -.6                                                                                             -.6

                                  -5   -4     -3     -2     -1       0       1       2       3   4     5                          -5   -4   -3     -2   -1   0     1    2   3   4       5
                                               Year relative to displacement                                                                 Year relative to displacement


                                                   Log hourly wage rate
                 .1
    log points




                  0


                 -.1


                 -.2

                       -5         -4   -3     -2       -1        0       1       2       3       4     5
                                            Year relative to displacement


                 Match effect, not controlling for tenure                                            Match effect, controlling for tenure                        log outcome variable



Notes: The figures show estimated displacement losses attributable to lost worker-employer
match effects that adjust for years of job tenure (𝜇̂ , denoted by diamonds and repeated from
Figure 9 in the main text) and match effects that do not adjust for years of job tenure (denoted by
triangles), compared with the full losses due to displacement (light circles). Whiskers denote 95-
percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. The vertical lines
denote the quarter of displacement.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records.




                                                                                                             53
Appendix A.11
Tables supporting Figures 2, 3, 4, and 6 in the main text

Appendix Table A5 displays the estimates underlying Figure 2 in the main text. Column 1

corresponds to the upper panel of Figure 2 (earnings from the primary employer), and column 3

corresponds to the lower panel (log earnings from the primary employer). Columns 2 and 4 show

estimates based on earnings from all employers, which are similar.

       Appendix Table A6 displays the estimates underlying Figure 3 in the main text. Column

1 corresponds to the upper panel of Figure 3 (hours with the primary employer), and column 3

corresponds to the lower panel (log hours with the primary employer). Columns 2 and 4 show

estimates based on hours from all employers, which are again similar to those based only on

earnings from the primary employer.

       Appendix Table A7 displays the estimates underlying Figure 4 in the main text. Column

(1) shows estimated displacement effects on the probability of working a positive number of

hours in a given quarter, based on estimates of equation (1). Columns (2)–(6) show estimated

displacement effects on unconditional hours quantiles, obtained using the re-centered influence

function approach (Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux 2009).

       Appendix Table A8 displays the estimates underlying Figure 6 in the main text. For each

post-displacement quarter, the estimates in the odd-numbered columns give the total log-point

losses of earnings (column 1), hours (column 3), and hourly wages (column 5) attributable to

displacement, and the even-numbered columns give the log-point changes in earnings (column

2), hours (column 4), and hourly wages (column 6) attributable to the effect of displacement on

moving to an employer with a different fixed effect for earnings, hours, or hourly wages.




                                               54
Appendix Table A5
Estimated effects of displacement on unconditional earnings and log earnings (from primary
employer and all employers), UI claimant sample
                                            (1)                  (2)          (3)               (4)
                                     Quarterly earnings (constant 2010
                                              dollars, thousands)              Log quarterly earnings
                                     From primary            From all    From primary          From all
  Quarter relative to displacement   employer only          employers    employer only        employers
      –20                               0.233***             0.236***       0.014***          0.015***
                                         (0.059)              (0.060)        (0.004)            (0.004)
      –19                                  0.065                0.064         -0.001             -0.001
                                         (0.066)              (0.067)        (0.005)            (0.005)
      –18                               0.788***             0.790***       0.054***          0.054***
                                         (0.072)              (0.073)        (0.005)            (0.005)
      –17                               0.248***             0.251***        0.010**           0.011**
                                         (0.078)              (0.078)        (0.005)            (0.005)
      –16                               0.324***             0.324***       0.016***          0.017***
                                         (0.073)              (0.074)        (0.005)            (0.005)
      –15                               0.342***             0.345***       0.015***          0.015***
                                         (0.085)              (0.086)        (0.005)            (0.005)
      –14                               0.697***             0.697***       0.046***          0.046***
                                         (0.079)              (0.080)        (0.005)            (0.005)
      –13                               0.559***             0.558***       0.031***          0.032***
                                         (0.082)              (0.082)        (0.006)            (0.006)
      –12                                -0.144*              -0.142*      -0.020***          -0.019***
                                         (0.081)              (0.082)        (0.006)            (0.006)
      –11                               0.429***             0.432***       0.021***          0.023***
                                         (0.087)              (0.088)        (0.006)            (0.006)
      –10                                  0.038                0.063         -0.006             -0.003
                                         (0.082)              (0.083)        (0.006)            (0.006)
      –9                                0.425***             0.441***       0.021***          0.024***
                                         (0.088)              (0.088)        (0.006)            (0.006)
      –8                               -0.358***            -0.347***      -0.033***          -0.031***
                                         (0.086)              (0.086)        (0.006)            (0.006)
      –7                                 0.224**             0.237***         0.000               0.003
                                         (0.091)              (0.092)        (0.007)            (0.007)
      –6                                  -0.077               -0.061       -0.014**           -0.011*
                                         (0.093)              (0.094)        (0.006)            (0.006)
      –5                                   0.067                0.085         0.002               0.005
                                         (0.094)              (0.094)        (0.006)            (0.006)
      –4                               -0.798***            -0.779***      -0.065***          -0.062***
                                         (0.090)              (0.090)        (0.007)            (0.007)
      –3                               -0.340***            -0.306***      -0.046***          -0.041***
                                         (0.103)              (0.104)        (0.007)            (0.008)
      –2                               -0.547***            -0.515***      -0.063***          -0.058***
                                         (0.105)              (0.105)        (0.008)            (0.008)
      –1                                  -0.095               -0.039      -0.029***          -0.022***
                                         (0.113)              (0.114)        (0.008)            (0.008)
      0                                -2.239***            -1.218***      -0.405***          -0.312***



                                                  55
                                               (0.180)           (0.188)           (0.017)           (0.017)
       1                                     -6.531***         -5.792***         -0.552***          -0.450***
                                               (0.163)           (0.174)           (0.018)           (0.018)
       2                                     -4.834***         -4.617***         -0.442***          -0.410***
                                               (0.160)           (0.163)           (0.017)           (0.017)
       3                                     -3.778***         -3.585***         -0.350***          -0.321***
                                               (0.150)           (0.152)           (0.016)           (0.016)
       4                                     -3.655***         -3.477***         -0.365***          -0.338***
                                               (0.155)           (0.158)           (0.017)           (0.016)
       5                                     -3.263***         -3.091***         -0.298***          -0.272***
                                               (0.146)           (0.147)           (0.015)           (0.015)
       6                                     -2.700***         -2.552***         -0.258***          -0.234***
                                               (0.148)           (0.148)           (0.014)           (0.014)
       7                                     -2.757***         -2.634***         -0.266***          -0.246***
                                               (0.139)           (0.139)           (0.014)           (0.013)
       8                                     -2.817***         -2.687***         -0.256***          -0.236***
                                               (0.136)           (0.137)           (0.013)           (0.012)
       9                                     -2.581***         -2.442***         -0.245***          -0.225***
                                               (0.136)           (0.137)           (0.013)           (0.013)
       10                                    -2.182***         -2.034***         -0.204***          -0.182***
                                               (0.137)           (0.137)           (0.013)           (0.012)
       11                                    -2.522***         -2.096***         -0.235***          -0.189***
                                               (0.131)           (0.132)           (0.013)           (0.012)
       12                                    -2.150***         -2.019***         -0.196***          -0.177***
                                               (0.133)           (0.133)           (0.011)           (0.011)
       13                                    -2.390***         -2.200***         -0.214***          -0.189***
                                               (0.138)           (0.138)           (0.012)           (0.011)
       14                                    -1.753***         -1.586***         -0.155***          -0.136***
                                               (0.137)           (0.139)           (0.012)           (0.012)
       15                                    -2.176***         -2.006***         -0.185***          -0.166***
                                               (0.136)           (0.137)           (0.012)           (0.012)
       16                                    -2.077***         -1.942***         -0.177***          -0.157***
                                               (0.147)           (0.147)           (0.012)           (0.011)
       17                                    -2.209***         -2.034***         -0.187***          -0.163***
                                               (0.141)           (0.142)           (0.012)           (0.012)
       18                                    -1.730***         -1.573***         -0.136***          -0.117***
                                               (0.144)           (0.144)           (0.012)           (0.012)
       19                                    -2.158***         -2.017***         -0.166***          -0.148***
                                               (0.142)           (0.143)           (0.012)           (0.012)
       20                                    -2.008***         -1.878***         -0.168***          -0.149***
                                               (0.143)           (0.143)           (0.012)           (0.012)
  Number of worker-quarter
  observations                                811,141           811,141           808,058            808,058
  Number of workers                           15,980            15,980            15,980             15,980
  R2                                           0.095             0.091              0.086             0.081

Notes: Columns (1) and (3) show the coefficients (and standard errors clustered by worker) underlying Figure 2 in
the main text. These are estimated δks from equation (1) with the log of earnings from the primary employer as the
dependent variable. Each regression controls for a worker-specific fixed effect; a vector of quarterly dummies;
worker’s age and age squared; a vector of gender, race, and education dummies interacted with the worker’s age;


                                                         56
logarithm of pre-displacement employer size and one-digit NAICS code in 2007:IV interacted with a vector of
yearly dummies; a simple average of pre-displacement earnings with the primary employer and an average of pre-
displacement hours with the primary employer, each interacted with a vector of yearly dummies. Earnings are
expressed in 2010-constant dollars.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See sections 3.1, 4.1, and
4.2 of the text for details.
*** p < 0.01; ** p < 0.05; * p < 0.1




                                                       57
Appendix Table A6
Estimated effects of displacement on unconditional hours and log hours (from primary employer
and all employers), UI claimant sample
                                          (1)               (2)            (3)              (4)
                                          Quarterly work hours            Log quarterly work hours
                                     From primary        From all     From primary         From all
  Quarter relative to displacement   employer only      employers     employer only       employers
      –20                                4.195**            4.082**        -0.000             0.000
                                         (1.777)            (1.841)       (0.005)           (0.005)
      –19                              -5.173***          -5.617***        -0.007           -0.009*
                                         (1.774)            (1.848)       (0.005)           (0.005)
      –18                              16.000***          16.123***      0.029***          0.030***
                                         (2.084)            (2.183)       (0.005)           (0.005)
      –17                                -3.952*            -3.737*        -0.003            -0.003
                                         (2.024)            (2.125)       (0.006)           (0.006)
      –16                                4.351**             4.161*        0.009              0.009
                                         (2.126)            (2.220)       (0.006)           (0.006)
      –15                                  0.761              0.609        -0.000            -0.001
                                         (2.070)            (2.155)       (0.006)           (0.006)
      –14                              18.172***          18.474***      0.033***          0.033***
                                         (2.230)            (2.337)       (0.006)           (0.006)
      –13                              18.231***          18.107***      0.029***          0.029***
                                         (2.354)            (2.430)       (0.006)           (0.006)
      –12                                 -0.922             -0.771        -0.010            -0.009
                                         (2.293)            (2.398)       (0.006)           (0.006)
      –11                              23.327***          23.652***      0.037***          0.037***
                                         (2.485)            (2.581)       (0.006)           (0.006)
      –10                                  3.194            5.155**        0.002              0.005
                                         (2.435)            (2.568)       (0.006)           (0.006)
      –9                               24.136***          25.391***      0.038***          0.041***
                                         (2.619)            (2.740)       (0.006)           (0.006)
      –8                               14.205***          14.906***       0.014**           0.015**
                                         (2.725)            (2.837)       (0.006)           (0.006)
      –7                               25.367***          26.187***      0.032***          0.033***
                                         (2.813)            (2.917)       (0.007)           (0.007)
      –6                                6.913***           8.080***        0.006              0.007
                                         (2.573)            (2.693)       (0.006)           (0.006)
      –5                               25.185***          26.821***      0.035***          0.038***
                                         (2.949)            (3.061)       (0.006)           (0.006)
      –4                                  -4.582             -2.223     -0.026***         -0.022***
                                         (2.809)            (2.955)       (0.007)           (0.007)
      –3                               21.578***          24.504***        0.011            0.015*
                                         (3.589)            (3.722)       (0.008)           (0.008)
      –2                              -18.385***         -16.046***     -0.046***         -0.042***
                                         (2.969)            (3.088)       (0.007)           (0.007)
      –1                              -13.501***          -9.418***     -0.033***         -0.028***
                                         (3.124)            (3.302)       (0.008)           (0.008)
      0                              -159.869***        -112.422***     -0.468***         -0.341***
                                         (4.057)            (4.392)       (0.016)           (0.015)


                                                   58
       1                                   -217.212***        -191.846***        -0.423***         -0.336***
                                               (4.749)           (5.206)           (0.016)           (0.016)
       2                                   -138.115***        -130.265***        -0.285***         -0.255***
                                               (4.768)           (4.911)           (0.016)           (0.015)
       3                                   -105.666***         -96.448***        -0.226***         -0.196***
                                               (4.749)           (4.907)           (0.015)           (0.015)
       4                                   -106.383***         -98.573***        -0.241***         -0.218***
                                               (4.460)           (4.635)           (0.014)           (0.014)
       5                                    -68.623***         -59.599***        -0.141***         -0.118***
                                               (4.557)           (4.719)           (0.013)           (0.013)
       6                                    -56.753***         -49.576***        -0.125***         -0.103***
                                               (4.136)           (4.280)           (0.011)           (0.011)
       7                                    -52.836***         -46.115***        -0.135***         -0.116***
                                               (3.911)           (4.040)           (0.012)           (0.012)
       8                                    -47.530***         -40.532***        -0.117***         -0.098***
                                               (3.977)           (4.110)           (0.011)           (0.011)
       9                                    -41.651***         -34.077***        -0.109***         -0.091***
                                               (3.859)           (4.062)           (0.011)           (0.011)
       10                                   -41.909***         -32.788***        -0.106***         -0.080***
                                               (3.773)           (3.917)           (0.011)           (0.011)
       11                                   -44.909***         -21.525***        -0.111***         -0.062***
                                               (3.720)           (3.932)           (0.011)           (0.011)
       12                                   -15.717***           -8.061*         -0.059***         -0.040***
                                               (4.257)           (4.322)           (0.010)           (0.010)
       13                                   -29.960***         -20.093***        -0.080***         -0.056***
                                               (3.849)           (3.980)           (0.010)           (0.010)
       14                                   -12.760***            -4.747         -0.044***         -0.027***
                                               (3.994)           (4.106)           (0.010)           (0.010)
       15                                   -26.738***         -18.313***        -0.065***         -0.044***
                                               (3.722)           (3.856)           (0.010)           (0.009)
       16                                   -17.750***          -9.650**         -0.058***         -0.039***
                                               (3.918)           (4.057)           (0.010)           (0.010)
       17                                   -22.954***         -12.953***        -0.069***         -0.046***
                                               (3.817)           (3.952)           (0.011)           (0.010)
       18                                      -3.708              5.132          -0.024**           -0.007
                                               (3.887)           (4.029)           (0.010)           (0.010)
       19                                   -19.699***         -12.646***        -0.045***         -0.029***
                                               (3.783)           (3.917)           (0.010)           (0.010)
       20                                    -10.467**            -2.555         -0.052***         -0.032***
                                               (4.136)           (4.269)           (0.010)           (0.010)
  Number of worker-quarter
  observations                               811,141            811,141           804,437           804,687
  Number of workers                          15,980             15,980            15,980            15,980
  R2                                          0.109              0.097             0.056             0.051

Notes: Columns (1) and (3) show the coefficients (and standard errors clustered by worker) underlying Figure 3 in
the main text. These are estimated δks from equation (1) with the log of hours from the primary employer as the
dependent variable. Each regression controls for a worker-specific fixed effect; a vector of quarterly dummies;
worker’s age and age squared; a vector of gender, race, and education dummies interacted with the worker’s age;
logarithm of pre-displacement employer size and one-digit NAICS code in 2007:IV interacted with a vector of



                                                         59
yearly dummies; a simple average of pre-displacement earnings with the primary employer and an average of pre-
displacement hours with the primary employer, each interacted with a vector of yearly dummies
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See sections 3.1, 4.1, and
4.2 of the text for details.
*** p < 0.01; ** p < 0.05; * p < 0.1




                                                       60
Appendix Table A7
Estimated displacement effects on the probability of positive work hours and the distribution
of quarterly work hours, UI claimant sample
                           (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)         (5)      (6)
Quarter relative to                                             Hours quantile
displacement          Pr(hours > 0)       10th           25th        50th         75th     90th
     –20                  0.002         -11.19          -1.89        2.84        11.03     20.33
                         (0.001)        (5.07)         (2.59)      (1.00)        (2.17)   (4.45)
     –19                  0.003         13.42           -4.90       -3.36        -15.15   -18.03
                         (0.001)        (5.08)         (2.84)      (1.04)        (2.14)   (3.82)
     –18                  0.004           7.00           7.53        9.22        20.07     32.61
                         (0.002)        (5.45)         (2.64)      (1.08)        (2.35)   (4.76)
     –17                 -0.001           2.46          -1.52        0.19         -4.23   -19.29
                         (0.002)        (5.66)         (2.70)      (1.08)        (2.36)   (4.27)
     –16                 -0.002         -13.79          -5.53        1.79        14.02     27.65
                         (0.002)        (5.90)         (2.89)      (1.10)        (2.36)   (4.94)
     –15                  0.004           0.30           1.68        1.92         1.22     -5.76
                         (0.002)        (5.73)         (2.83)      (1.07)        (2.46)   (4.62)
     –14                  0.002           8.28          14.93        7.94        18.91     45.68
                         (0.002)        (5.60)         (2.75)      (1.14)        (2.58)   (5.43)
     –13                  0.003           4.14           8.81        7.05        23.23     44.79
                         (0.002)        (5.71)         (2.78)      (1.10)        (2.57)   (5.65)
     –12                  0.002          -8.42           3.75       -1.76         -3.36    -2.31
                         (0.002)        (5.86)         (2.82)      (1.18)        (2.60)   (4.97)
     –11                  0.001          -0.60          13.45        9.18        25.75     52.05
                         (0.002)        (5.93)         (2.85)      (1.13)        (2.62)   (5.68)
     –10                 -0.000          -1.11           5.07       -2.71         -0.94     6.89
                         (0.002)        (6.01)         (2.89)      (1.21)        (2.72)   (5.27)
     –9                  -0.001          -5.95          10.90        5.49        22.53     58.90
                         (0.002)        (6.24)         (2.91)      (1.14)        (2.66)   (5.79)
     –8                   0.000         -10.67           1.75       -1.42         7.58     39.97
                         (0.002)        (6.19)         (2.97)      (1.23)        (2.75)   (5.69)
     –7                  -0.001           1.39           8.78        7.15        22.01     47.64
                         (0.002)        (5.99)         (2.98)      (1.21)        (2.68)   (5.62)
     –6                  -0.001           0.13           4.26       -3.13         -1.14    16.19
                         (0.002)        (6.15)         (3.07)      (1.25)        (2.64)   (4.98)
     –5                  -0.001          -6.41           9.36        4.32        16.28     48.50
                         (0.002)        (6.47)         (3.06)      (1.20)        (2.58)   (5.64)
     –4                  -0.003         -23.80         -15.63       -8.62         -8.34    19.31
                         (0.002)        (6.86)         (3.31)      (1.26)        (2.62)   (5.25)
     –3                  -0.005         -27.39          -5.22        1.50        14.99     44.14
                         (0.002)        (6.90)         (3.31)      (1.24)        (2.71)   (5.74)
     –2                  -0.009         -41.06         -17.88      -11.10        -14.81    -4.07
                         (0.003)        (7.69)         (3.56)      (1.32)        (2.58)   (4.60)
     –1                  -0.019         -64.02         -14.56        0.50         6.97     13.97
                         (0.003)        (8.64)         (3.68)      (1.28)        (2.67)   (5.02)
     0                   -0.074        -502.87        -165.38      -31.69        -34.70   -15.77
                         (0.005)       (13.15)         (4.09)      (1.23)        (2.28)   (4.23)
     1                   -0.256        -590.50        -206.74      -38.78        -32.61   -17.61
                         (0.009)       (13.35)         (3.93)      (1.17)        (2.23)   (3.99)
     2                   -0.155        -378.91        -109.00      -22.35        -25.86    -7.22
                         (0.008)       (13.10)         (4.40)      (1.32)        (2.36)   (4.42)
     3                   -0.120        -315.11         -75.52      -10.88        -26.31   -12.69
                         (0.007)       (12.76)         (4.38)      (1.34)        (2.40)   (4.46)
     4                   -0.107        -288.09         -92.98      -22.69        -21.12    -5.14



                                                 61
                            (0.006)           (12.39)        (4.37)       (1.34)        (2.54)        (4.68)
    5                       -0.092            -211.54        -48.89        -3.91         -9.46          8.82
                            (0.006)           (11.78)        (4.33)       (1.38)        (2.56)        (4.82)
    6                       -0.056            -171.48        -48.62        -7.95        -15.97         -0.26
                            (0.005)           (11.28)        (4.27)       (1.37)        (2.60)        (4.81)
    7                       -0.039            -155.65        -43.81       -10.41        -14.29         -2.03
                            (0.005)           (10.96)        (4.15)       (1.37)        (2.66)        (4.92)
    8                       -0.040            -152.18        -37.60        -6.35        -17.09         -2.65
                            (0.005)           (10.77)        (4.09)       (1.38)        (2.64)        (4.96)
    9                       -0.034            -132.64        -48.45        -9.45         -6.19          8.99
                            (0.004)           (10.41)        (4.10)       (1.35)        (2.77)        (5.33)
    10                      -0.032            -128.82        -44.71        -9.84        -11.33         -2.54
                            (0.004)           (10.25)        (4.12)       (1.39)        (2.76)        (5.19)
    11                      -0.030            -148.78        -44.15        -9.25         -9.45          4.83
                            (0.004)           (10.39)        (4.07)       (1.37)        (2.82)        (5.54)
    12                      -0.031            -132.00        -29.39        -2.57         8.63         40.05
                            (0.004)           (10.00)        (3.95)       (1.38)        (2.83)        (5.96)
    13                      -0.027            -126.72        -47.74       -10.05         -5.82        20.95
                            (0.004)           (10.08)        (4.00)       (1.39)        (2.85)        (5.71)
    14                      -0.031            -106.32        -22.19        -1.21         9.26         38.51
                            (0.004)            (9.80)        (3.89)       (1.37)        (2.83)        (5.89)
    15                      -0.026            -112.39        -35.61        -8.61         -2.56        22.23
                            (0.004)            (9.90)        (3.90)       (1.39)        (2.91)        (5.97)
    16                      -0.030            -120.51        -25.37        -1.73         7.82         32.18
                            (0.004)            (9.92)        (3.85)       (1.37)        (2.88)        (5.79)
    17                      -0.028            -107.93        -32.19        -5.83         0.32         29.12
                            (0.004)            (9.86)        (3.97)       (1.39)        (2.91)        (5.97)
    18                      -0.026             -82.55        -21.36        -0.26        13.56         40.63
                            (0.004)            (9.45)        (3.91)       (1.40)        (2.99)        (6.04)
    19                      -0.025             -81.72        -34.15        -8.05         -6.44        17.68
                            (0.004)            (9.75)        (4.10)       (1.45)        (3.03)        (6.03)
    20                      -0.019            -102.63        -27.50        -3.28         0.37         31.91
                            (0.004)           (10.36)        (4.16)       (1.49)        (3.10)        (6.28)
Baseline (pre-disp.)
quantile of displaced
workers                          --               418           480            525          580            649
Notes: Column (1) shows estimated displacement effects on the probability of working a positive number of hours
in a given quarter, based on estimates of equation (1). Columns (2)–(6) show estimated displacement effects on
unconditional hours quantiles, obtained using the re-centered influence function approach (Firpo, Fortin, and
Lemieux 2009). Standard errors clustered by worker are shown in parentheses. The estimates are based on a
sample of 811,141 worker-quarter observations of 15,980 workers.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See section 4.2 of the
text for further discussion.




                                                        62
Appendix Table A8
Estimated displacement effects on log earnings, log hours, log wage rates: full losses and losses
due to employer fixed effects (ψ), UI claimant sample

                              (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)
  Quarter relative              Log earnings                 Log hours           Log hours wage rate
  to displacement          full loss     ψ effect     full loss     ψ effect    full loss    ψ effect
       0                  -0.40***       0.00**      -0.47***       0.00***     0.08***        -0.00
                            (0.02)        (0.00)       (0.02)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       1                  -0.55***      -0.03***     -0.42***      -0.02***    -0.13***     -0.01***
                            (0.02)        (0.01)       (0.02)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       2                  -0.44***      -0.03***     -0.29***      -0.02***    -0.17***     -0.02***
                            (0.02)        (0.00)       (0.02)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       3                  -0.35***      -0.03***     -0.23***      -0.01***    -0.13***     -0.01***
                            (0.02)        (0.00)       (0.02)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       4                  -0.36***      -0.03***     -0.24***      -0.01***    -0.13***     -0.02***
                            (0.02)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       5                  -0.30***      -0.03***     -0.14***      -0.01***    -0.16***     -0.02***
                            (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       6                  -0.26***      -0.02***     -0.12***      -0.01***    -0.13***     -0.02***
                            (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       7                  -0.27***      -0.02***     -0.13***      -0.01***    -0.13***     -0.01***
                            (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       8                  -0.26***      -0.02***     -0.12***       -0.01**    -0.14***     -0.01***
                            (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       9                  -0.25***      -0.02***     -0.11***       -0.01**    -0.13***     -0.01***
                            (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       10                 -0.20***      -0.02***     -0.11***        -0.01*    -0.10***     -0.01***
                            (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       11                 -0.24***      -0.01***     -0.11***         0.00     -0.12***     -0.02***
                            (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       12                 -0.20***       -0.01**     -0.06***       0.01**     -0.14***     -0.02***
                            (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       13                 -0.21***      -0.01***     -0.08***         0.01*    -0.13***     -0.02***
                            (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       14                 -0.15***       -0.01**     -0.04***       0.01**     -0.11***     -0.02***
                            (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       15                 -0.19***        -0.01*     -0.06***       0.01***    -0.11***     -0.02***
                            (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       16                 -0.18***       -0.01**     -0.06***       0.01***    -0.12***     -0.02***
                            (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       17                 -0.19***       -0.01**     -0.07***       0.01**     -0.12***     -0.02***
                            (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       18                 -0.14***      -0.01***      -0.02**         0.00     -0.11***     -0.02***
                            (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       19                 -0.17***      -0.02***     -0.05***         0.00     -0.12***     -0.02***
                            (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
       20                 -0.17***      -0.02***     -0.05***         0.00     -0.11***     -0.02***
                            (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)


                                                    63
  Number of worker-
  quarter observations          808,058       807,423       804,437       807,423        804,429       807,423
  Number of workers             15,980        15,980        15,980        15,980         15,980        15,980
  R2                             0.086         0.027         0.056         0.020          0.080         0.027

Notes: Columns (1), (3), and (5) show the coefficients (and standard errors clustered by worker) underlying in
Figures 2, 3, and 5 in the main text. These are estimated δks from equation (1) with the log of earnings, log of hours,
and log of the wage rate from the primary employer as the dependent variables. Columns (2), (4), and (6) show the
coefficients (and standard errors clustered by worker) underlying Figure 6. These are estimated δks from equation (3)
with employer fixed effects (ψijt) for log of earnings, log of hours, and log of the wage rate from the primary
employer [estimated by equation (2)] as the dependent variables.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Washington administrative wage and claims records. See sections 3, 4, and 5.1
of the text for details.




                                                          64
Appendix B: Estimation of employer fixed effects for earnings, hours, and wage rates

This appendix describes estimation of the AKM employer fixed effects for earnings, hours, and

hourly wages used in the main text. Raw data for the analysis come from quarterly administrative

earnings records of Washington State. The records available to us provide information on the

earnings and work hours of virtually all workers employed in Washington during 2002–2014,5 as

well as information on all UI-covered employers in the state.6 A record appears for each

employer-worker-quarter combination, so a worker has as many earnings records as he or she

has employers in a given quarter. Each record includes a year-quarter indicator; the ID and

NAICS industry code of the reporting employer; and the worker ID, earnings, and work hours of

the worker with that employer in the specified quarter. The availability of both quarterly earnings

and work hours allows us to calculate the hourly wage rate by quarter, and the availability of

quarterly hours for each employer allows us to include both full-time and part-time jobs in the

analysis.




5
  Exemptions from coverage are limited to the self-employed, including outside sales workers paid solely by
commission and independent contractors meeting exemption tests specified in Washington’s UI law (Revised Code
of Washington, Title 50). Nonprofit religious organizations are also exempt.
6
  The employer is the entity from which the state collects UI payroll taxes and to which the state “charges” UI
benefits (for the purpose of experience rating the UI payroll tax). Typically, the employer is the set of establishments
operating in Washington under a single owner, so for a company operating entirely in Washington (with a single or
multiple addresses) the employer is a firm, and for a company with one address in Washington, the employer is also
an establishment.


                                                          65
Appendix B.1 Construction of the analysis sample

We use the raw administrative records to construct a linked employer-employee panel similar to

a procedure developed by Sorkin (2018). First, for each quarter, we identify each worker’s

primary employer, defined as the employer from whom the worker earned the largest share of

his/her earnings in that quarter.7 We then define an employment spell as a series of at least five

consecutive quarters during which a worker has earnings from the same primary employer. For

each of these spells, we drop the first quarter (to avoid making inferences about earnings and

hours based on a partial quarter of employment) and the last two quarters (to avoid making

inferences based on earnings and hours in the quarter before a job loss and the quarter of a job

loss).

         We next annualize the remaining quarterly data within each calendar year, conditional on

the calendar year including at least two consecutive quarters of earnings from the same primary

employer. Earnings are defined as annualized earnings in a given year with the primary

employer, and similarly for hours and wage rates.

         Appendix Figure B1 illustrates the process and gives some examples, described in the

figure notes. Ultimately, the unit of observation is the worker-year, with a focus on the primary

employer in a year.8

         We impose several restrictions on the sample, dropping the following:

         •   workers with more than 9 employers in a year (this affects 1 percent of the sample)




7
  In most cases, a worker has only one employer during the quarter, but multiple employers appear for about 27
percent of the worker-quarter observations.
8
  By removing the first quarter and the last two quarters of any worker-primary-employer spell and by including at
least two consecutive quarters of earnings from the same primary employer in a calendar year, we lose about 27
percent of all worker-primary-employer spells. If we only remove the first quarter and the last two quarters of any
worker-primary-employer spell (without requiring at least two consecutive quarters of earnings from the same
primary employer in a calendar year), we lose about 23 percent of all worker-primary-employer spells.


                                                         66
       •   workers with annual earnings less than $2,850 (in 2005 dollars) and workers with

           calculated hourly wage rates ≤ $2.00/hour (in 2005 dollars) (Sorkin 2018; Card,

           Heining, and Kline 2013)

       •   workers who worked fewer than 400 hours in the year

       •   workers who worked more than 4,800 hours in the year

       •   employers with fewer than 5 employees in the year (Song, Price, Guvenen, Bloom,

           and von Wachter 2015)

       •   all displaced workers and all non-displaced comparison workers (as defined in section

           2.1 of the main text)


The last restriction is imposed because including displaced workers and the non-displaced

comparison group in estimating the AKM model could create a mechanical relationship between

the employer fixed effects and displaced workers’ earnings, hours, and wage rate losses,

potentially overstating the role of employer fixed effects.

       The first column of Appendix Table B1 (“Full annualized panel”) shows summary

statistics for the annualized linked employer-employee panel—that is, after processing the

quarterly records as illustrated in Appendix Figure B1 and imposing the sample restrictions

described above.

       The employer effects are identified only within the “connected set” of employers that are

linked by worker transitions between those employers, so the AKM estimation is necessarily

restricted to the largest connected set of employers. This consists of 64 percent of employers in

the full annualized panel, 79 percent of workers in the panel, and 90 percent of worker-year

observations in the panel.




                                                 67
        The second column of Appendix Table B1 shows descriptive statistics for the largest

connected set. Because identification of employer fixed effects comes from workers moving

between primary employers, it is important to know how much mobility there is in the sample.

The table shows that the largest connected set includes about 3.5 million unique workers, and

about 42 percent of those workers changed primary employer at least once during 2002–2014.

The question is whether the extent of mobility in this sample is adequate for AKM to be an

unbiased estimator of employer fixed effects, or if instead “limited mobility” bias is likely to be a

problem (Andrews et al. 2012).9

        Two factors suggest that limited mobility is unlikely to pose a problem in the Washington

data. First, the average number of movers per employer in sample we use to estimate the AKM

model is about 10. (For employers of the displaced workers, the average number of movers is

211). The analysis in Andrews et al. (2012) suggests that limited mobility bias is unlikely to be a

problem with an average of more than 6 movers per employer.

        Second, the rate of mobility in the Washington data appears quite high compared with the

German data used by Card, Heining, and Kline (CHK) (2013), Fackler, Mueller, and Stegmaier

(2017), and Schmieder, von Wachter, and Heining (2018). We can compute a measure of

mobility in the German data using data reported in CHK, specifically by calculating the ratio of

total moves in their event study analysis to the number of person-year or person observations.

CHK report that there were 3,002,557 moves during the 2002–2009 interval (calculated from

Appendix Table A.3 in CHK). In the same interval, there were 90,615,841 person-year




9
 Limited mobility bias is likely here are a limited number of job changers used to identify the AKM employer
effect. In the AKM model, limited mobility bias appears as a small or negative correlation between worker and
employer effects in variance decompositions, even when the “true” correlation is positive. Finding negative sorting
of workers to employers in terms of wages/earnings is typically considered to be misleading.


                                                        68
observations and 15,834,602 persons (Table 3 in CHK). Dividing the number of moves by

person-years (persons) gives a mobility rate of 0.03 (0.19).

       In the Washington data there are 2,220,454 moves and 22,941,274 person-years and

3,508,811 persons (Appendix Table B1). Dividing the number of moves by person-years

(persons) gives a mobility rate of 0.097 (0.63). Hence, the mobility rates in the Washington

sample we use to estimate the AKM model appear to be relatively high.




                                                69
Appendix B.2 Estimation and variance decompositions

We estimate the AKM model [equation (2) in the main text] using the linked employer-employee

panel for each of the three outcomes: log earnings, log hours worked, and log wage rates.

Appendix Table B2 displays the resulting variance decompositions. The variance of each

outcome is decomposed into five components: one each for worker effects, employer effects,

year effects, the covariance between worker and employer effects (sorting of workers and

employers), and a residual. (To conserve space, we do not show the worker-year or employer-

year covariances. Together, these two covariances explain about one percent of the variation in

each outcome.) The numbers in italics below each variance-covariance term show the share of

the total variance of each outcome attributable to that component.

         Worker fixed effects explain a large share of the variation in all three outcomes: 52

percent of the variation in earnings, 45 percent of the variation in work hours, and 60 percent of

the variation in hourly wage rates. This compares with worker fixed effects explaining 51

percent of the variation in earnings in Sorkin (2018) (see his Table 1, U.S., 2000–2008) and 51–

61 percent of daily earnings in CHK (Table 3, Germany, 1985–2009).

         Employer effects are also important: They explain about 20 percent of the variation in

earnings, 35 percent of the variation in work hours, and 13 percent of the variation in hourly

wage rates. This compares with employer fixed effects explaining about 14 percent of the

variation in earnings in Sorkin (2018) and 18–21 percent in CHK (Table 3, Germany, 1985–

2009).

         The rightmost columns of Appendix Table B2 show adjusted-R2s and RMSEs from a

model in which each outcome variable is regressed on (i) an indicator for each worker-employer

spell and (ii) year effects. CHK (2013, p. 990) suggest that the explanatory power of this model,




                                                 70
compared with the explanatory model of the AKM model, provides a test of the importance of

idiosyncratic worker-employer matches, hence we refer to it as the “CHK match effects model”

(to distinguish it from the match effects model described in Appendix A.10). The adjusted-R2

from the AKM model for earnings is 0.872, whereas the adjusted-R2 from the CHK match effects

model for earnings is about 0.925.10 Although the fit is somewhat better for the CHK match

effects model, the roughly 5 percentage-point difference between the R2s of the AKM and CHK

match-effects models suggests that the AKM model specification of earnings as the sum of

worker and employer fixed effects is not greatly off the mark.




10
 These estimates are similar to those in Sorkin (2018), who obtains an adjusted-R2 of 0.86 for the AKM model of
earnings, and an adjusted-R2 of 0.92 for the CHK match effects model of earnings.


                                                       71
Appendix B.3 Event studies of inter-employer mobility

OLS estimation of the AKM model will be biased for the employer effects (ψ) if worker mobility

among employers is endogenous, or correlated with time-varying components of the residual in

equation (2). This problem would arise, for example, if workers moved to take advantage good

specific employer-employee matches, or if workers developed specific human capital within a

job over time.11 To examine the importance of endogenous mobility, CHK developed an event

study analysis of the movement of earnings when workers move among employers. If the AKM

model is a correct description of earnings determination, then workers who move from low-ψ to

high-ψ employers should on average see their pay rise, and conversely. Further, workers who

move from low-ψ to high-ψ employers should receive (on average) pay increases equal and

opposite those of workers who move from high-ψ to low-ψ employers. In contrast, the presence

of specific employer-employee match effects would lead to average pay increases for workers

moving in any direction, as they take advantage of opportunities for favorable specific matches.

        Following CHK, we conduct event study analyses of how earnings, work hours, and

wage rates change when workers move between employers of different types in the Washington

linked employer-employee panel. For example, we can follow a group of workers who start with

an employer whose fixed effect (ψ) is in the fourth quartile, and who then move to other

employers. Some of these “destination” employers will have a high ψ, others will have a low ψ,

and observing how workers’ earnings, hours, and wage rates change with these moves provides

information about employers’ influence on earnings, hours, and wage rates.




11
   Card, Heining, and Kline (2013) and Card, Cardoso, Heining, and Kline (2018) provide clear discussions of the
assumptions needed for unbiased estimation of employer fixed effects in the AKM model, with several examples of
situations that do and do not violate those assumptions.


                                                       72
       The procedure for constructing these event studies is as follows. For each outcome

(earnings, hours, or wage rates) we classify employers into quartiles by their AKM-estimated

employer effect (ψ). Next, for a given year t, we select workers in each ψ quartile who have been

with the employer at least two years, change employers (i.e., are observed with a different

primary employer in year t+1), and remain with the subsequent employer for at least two years.

Finally, we calculate the average outcome before and after the move for each possible type of

interquartile move (1→1, 1→2, ..., 4→3, and 4→4).

       Appendix Figure B2 shows the results for eight of interquartile transitions (4→4, 4→3,

4→3, 4→1 1→4, 1→3, 1→2, and 1→1) for log earnings. Appendix Figures B3 and B4 show

same transitions for log work hours and log wage rates. Appendix Table B3 displays the data

underlying these figures.

       We note two main points about Appendix Figure B2. First, workers who move from

lower-ψ to higher-ψ employers tend to improve their earnings, and conversely. For example,

workers who start with a low-ψ (quartile 1) employer and move to a high-ψ (quartile 4) employer

experience a 70 log point increase in their earnings. (This 1→4 change falls to 60 log points

when adjusted by the 1→1 within-quartile change, which is 10 log points—see the “Adjusted

change from year –2 to year 1” column in Appendix Table B3.) Conversely, workers who start

with a high-ψ (quartile 4) employer and move to a low-ψ (quartile 1) employer experience a 54

log point decrease in their earnings (63 log points if adjusted by the 4→4 within-quartile change,

which is 9 log points). Consistent with the AKM model, the pay of workers who move from low-

ψ to high-ψ employers increases on average, and conversely. Appendix Figures B3 and B4 show

similar patterns.




                                                73
       Second, the approximate symmetry of gains and losses suggests that idiosyncratic match

effects are not of great importance (CHK, p. 990). If employer-employee match effects were

important, we would observe average pay increases for workers moving in any direction, but this

is not the case. The symmetry of earnings changes for workers moving from low-ψ to high-ψ

employers and those moving from high-ψ to low-ψ employers is consistent with the specification

of the AKM model, with its additive worker and employer effects. For the Washington labor

market overall, the AKM model appears to be a reasonable fit.




                                              74
Appendix B.4 Estimating the AKM model using random subsamples of employers

Because the available data come from a single state, any worker who moves out of Washington

and takes a job in another state cannot be observed. To examine the extent to which this attrition

affects the estimated AKM employer fixed effects, we have re-estimated the AKM model after

dropping random subsamples of 30 percent and 50 percent of employers from the AKM sample

described in Appendix B.1. The idea is to approximate a situation where Washington workers

move to out-of-state employers who cannot be observed in the Washington data.

       The resulting employer fixed effects, presented in Appendix Figures B5 and B6, correlate

very strongly with those obtained in the original full AKM sample analysis, suggesting that

interstate migration does not bias the AKM results to a large extent.




                                                75
Appendix Table B1
Summary statistics for the overall sample and the largest connected set (AKM dataset)

                                                   Full annualized panel         Largest connected set
  Number of worker/year observations                         25,578,007                    22,941,274
  Number of unique workers                                    4,450,785                     3,508,811
  Number of unique employers                                    341,553                       218,593
  Number of unique movers                                     1,546,094                     1,463,030
  Number of mover/year observations                           2,394,145                     2,220,454
  Log earnings (mean)                                            10.321                        10.432
  Log hours (mean)                                                 7.338                        7.453
  Log hourly wage rate (mean)                                      3.063                        3.052

Source: Authors' tabulations of Washington administrative wage records, 2002–2014. See Appendix section B.1.




                                                      76
Appendix Table B2
Variance decompositions of log earnings, log hours, and log hourly wage rates, Washington, 2002–2014
(variance shares accounted for by each component in italics)
                    Variance of outcome and decomposition into components                AKM model fit        CHK match effects model fit
                                                Year
                Total     Worker Employer       FEs                                      Adj.
Outcome        variance FEs (α)      FEs (ψ)     (θ)    2cov(α,ψ)    Residual             R2     RMSE            Adj. R2         RMSE
Log
earnings         0.596      0.309      0.123      0.004       0.101        0.064         0.872    0.253           0.925          0.211
                            0.519      0.207      0.006       0.169        0.107
Log
hours            0.129      0.058      0.045      0.000      –0.013        0.039         0.638    0.197           0.754          0.178
                            0.449      0.352      0.001      –0.104        0.303
Log
hourly
wage
rate             0.411      0.247      0.053      0.022       0.065        0.040         0.885    0.199           0.932          0.167
                            0.601      0.128      0.054       0.159        0.096


Source: Authors' tabulations of Washington administrative wage records, 2002–2014.
Notes: The decompositions include covariances between worker and employer fixed effects and year fixed effects. Because these
covariances explain only about 1 percent of the variation, they are omitted from the table. The CHK match effects model is estimated by
regressing each outcome variable on worker-employer indicators and year indicators. See Appendix section B.2.




                                                                      77
Appendix Table B3
Mean outcomes, classified by quartile of employer fixed effect

Panel A: Mean log earnings of movers, classified by quartile of employer earnings fixed effect at
origin (year = –1) and destination (year = 0) employer
                                                                                   Adjusted change
  Origin/destination                                             Change from       from year –2 to    Number of
       quartile        Year –2   Year –1   Year 0    Year 1    year –2 to year 1       year 1a       observations
        1 to 1          9.79      9.79      9.88      9.89           0.10               0.00           247,950
        1 to 2          9.83      9.83     10.12      10.14          0.31               0.21           120,636
        1 to 3          9.80      9.81     10.27      10.30          0.50               0.40           74,936
        1 to 4          9.88      9.89     10.54      10.58          0.70               0.60           38,488
        2 to 1         10.16     10.13     10.03      10.03         –0.12              –0.18           80,566
        2 to 2         10.29     10.28     10.35      10.35          0.06               0.00           173,078
        2 to 3         10.36     10.35     10.54      10.55          0.19               0.13           116,916
        2 to 4         10.39     10.39     10.75      10.78          0.38               0.33           57,176
        3 to 1         10.36     10.32     10.02      10.02         –0.34              –0.40           29,168
        3 to 2         10.52     10.50     10.46      10.46         –0.07              –0.12           84,368
        3 to 3         10.65     10.64     10.70      10.71          0.06               0.00           234,702
        3 to 4         10.73     10.73     10.92      10.94          0.21               0.15           122,092
        4 to 1         10.72     10.70     10.18      10.18         –0.54              –0.63           13,102
        4 to 2         10.77     10.74     10.51      10.51         –0.25              –0.34           27,982
        4 to 3         10.87     10.86     10.81      10.81         –0.06              –0.15           84,974
        4 to 4         11.15     11.15     11.21      11.24          0.09               0.00           313,108
                                                                                                      1,819,242


Panel B: Mean log hours of movers, classified by quartile of employer hours fixed effect at
origin (year = –1) and destination (year = 0) employer
                                                                                   Adjusted change
  Origin/destination                                             Change from       from year –2 to    Number of
       quartile        Year –2   Year –1   Year 0    Year 1    year –2 to year 1       year 1a       observations
        1 to 1          7.24      7.22      7.27      7.26           0.02               0.00           221,266
        1 to 2          7.27      7.24      7.49      7.47           0.20               0.18           124,596
        1 to 3          7.22      7.18      7.56      7.55           0.33               0.32           69,170
        1 to 4          7.21      7.17      7.65      7.64           0.43               0.42           55,296
        2 to 1          7.45      7.41      7.29      7.28          –0.18              –0.17           78,030
        2 to 2          7.51      7.48      7.52      7.50          –0.01               0.00           169,094
        2 to 3          7.50      7.47      7.58      7.57           0.07               0.08           142,100
        2 to 4          7.49      7.46      7.66      7.65           0.16               0.16           83,628
        3 to 1          7.54      7.50      7.25      7.23          –0.31              –0.31           32,736
        3 to 2          7.57      7.54      7.51      7.49          –0.09              –0.08           90,480
        3 to 3          7.58      7.55      7.58      7.57          –0.01               0.00           189,088
        3 to 4          7.59      7.57      7.66      7.65           0.05               0.06           144,280
        4 to 1          7.65      7.61      7.21      7.20          –0.45              –0.44           21,302
        4 to 2          7.66      7.63      7.50      7.48          –0.18              –0.17           47,296
        4 to 3          7.65      7.63      7.60      7.58          -0.07              –0.07           115,634
        4 to 4          7.67      7.66      7.68      7.67           0.00               0.00           235,246
                                                                                                      1,819,242


Note: a. The adjusted change is the change from year –2 to year 1, minus the within-quartile change from year –2 to
year 1.




                                                        78
Panel C: Mean log hourly wage rate of movers, classified by quartile of AKM employer wage
effects at origin (year = –1) and destination (year = 0) employer
                                                                                   Adjusted change
  Origin/destination                                             Change from       from year –2 to    Number of
       quartile        Year –2   Year –1   Year 0    Year 1    year –2 to year 1       year 1a       observations
        1 to 1          2.46      2.49      2.53      2.57            0.12               0.00          225,660
        1 to 2          2.54      2.59      2.75      2.80            0.26               0.15          121,060
        1 to 3          2.57      2.64      2.90      2.96            0.39               0.27          82,656
        1 to 4          2.65      2.71      3.17      3.23            0.59               0.47          45,184
        2 to 1          2.72      2.76      2.69      2.73            0.01              –0.12          97,952
        2 to 2          2.86      2.90      2.95      2.99            0.13               0.00          164,396
        2 to 3          2.91      2.96      3.09      3.14            0.23               0.10          127,162
        2 to 4          2.93      2.98      3.27      3.33            0.40               0.27          61,112
        3 to 1          2.91      2.94      2.75      2.79           –0.13              –0.27          44,052
        3 to 2          3.03      3.07      3.04      3.07            0.04              –0.10          100,114
        3 to 3          3.12      3.17      3.22      3.27            0.14               0.00          195,376
        3 to 4          3.22      3.27      3.45      3.50            0.29               0.14          121,480
        4 to 1          3.17      3.21      2.78      2.82           –0.35              –0.51          17,238
        4 to 2          3.29      3.33      3.12      3.16           –0.14              –0.30          40,524
        4 to 3          3.37      3.41      3.33      3.37            0.00              –0.16          95,154
        4 to 4          3.59      3.64      3.68      3.75            0.16               0.00          280,122
                                                                                                      1,819,242


Note: a. The adjusted change is the change from year –2 to year 1, minus the within-quartile change from year –2 to
year 1.




                                                        79
Appendix
 Figure 1
          Figure B1
Construction
 Constructionof
              of the
                  the analysis sample for the AKM dataset
                      analysis sample


                    2005                       2006                     2007                      2008
      Er1 Er1 Er1 Er1 Er1 Er1 Er2 Er2 Er2 Er2 Er2 Er2 Er3 Er3 Er3 Er3 Er3 Er3
       ×     R      R     R      ×      ×     ×     R     R        S"   ×     ×     ×     R      R     R      ×     ×

             Employment spell 1                    Employment spell 2                     Employment spell 3


Notes:
  Notes:The
          Thefigure      shows three
                figure shows      threehypothetical
                                         hypotheticalemployment
                                                           employment      spells
                                                                        spells withwith  three
                                                                                     three       different
                                                                                            different       employers
                                                                                                       employers
  (Er1, Er2,
(Er1,  Er2,   and   Er3), each of which has the minimum five quarters required to be included in thein the
                    Er3),   each   of  which    has  the  minimum     five  quarters  required    to  be  included
  analysissample.
analysis   sample. The  The first
                             firstquarter
                                   quarterand andlast
                                                   lasttwo
                                                         twoquarters of of
                                                               quarters  each  employment
                                                                            each   employment  spellspell
                                                                                                      (denoted    by ×)by ×)
                                                                                                           (denoted
  aredropped
are   droppedfrom fromthethe analysis,
                              analysis, and
                                          and outcomes
                                                outcomesfrom fromthe
                                                                   theremaining
                                                                        remaining  quarters
                                                                                     quartersareare
                                                                                                  then
                                                                                                     thenannualized
                                                                                                            annualized for for
  each  calendar     year,  conditional    on  the  calendar   year including   at least two   consecutive
each calendar year, conditional on the calendar year including at least two consecutive quarters              quarters   of
  earnings   from   the  same   primary     employer.    For example,   outcomes    for
of earnings from the same primary employer. For example, outcomes for 2005 (Employment  2005    (Employment      spell 1)
  and 2008 (Employment spell 3) are obtained by averaging the outcomes for the first, second, and
spell  1) and 2008 (Employment spell 3) are obtained by averaging the outcomes for the first,
  third quarters of 2005 (or 2008) and multiplying by four. (The quarters used in the calculations are
second,
  denotedandby third    quarters of
                 R.) Outcomes       for2005
                                        2007(or     2008)
                                                (part       and multiplying
                                                      of Employment      spell 2)by four.
                                                                                  are      (The quarters
                                                                                      excluded               used in
                                                                                                   because 2007         the
                                                                                                                     does
calculations
  not include aretwodenoted      by R.)
                       consecutive          Outcomes
                                       quarters   that canforbe2006
                                                                used(Employment        spell criteria
                                                                      under the selection     2) are obtained      by
                                                                                                       (that is, after
  excludingthe
averaging      theoutcomes
                    first quarter
                                forandthelast twoand
                                           third    quarters
                                                        fourthofquarters
                                                                 each employment
                                                                          of 2006 and  spell). As a result,
                                                                                          multiplying      bythe  data
                                                                                                              four.
  from 2007:Q1
Outcomes             (denoted
              for 2007     (partbyof S)  are not used.
                                      Employment        spell 2) are excluded because 2007 does not include
two consecutive quarters that can be used under the selection criteria (that is, after excluding the
first quarter and last two quarters of each employment spell). As a result, the data from 2007:I
(denoted by S) are not used.




                                                              80
Appendix Figure B2
Mean log earnings of movers, classified by quartile of AKM employer earnings effects (ψ) at
origin (year = –1) and destination (year = 0) employer


                                                                                        4 to 4
                                 11.4
                                                                                        4 to 3
                                 11.2
   Mean log earnings of movers




                                                                                        4 to 2
                                  11
                                                                                        4 to 1
                                 10.8
                                                                                        1 to 4
                                 10.6
                                                                                        1 to 3
                                 10.4
                                                                                        1 to 2
                                 10.2                                                   1 to 1
                                  10
                                  9.8
                                  9.6
                                        -2     -1                   0      1
                                             Years since new job started




                                                          81
Appendix Figure B3
Mean log hours of movers, classified by quartile of AKM employer hours effects (ψ) at origin
(year = –1) and destination (year = 0) employer


                              7.8                                                       4 to 4
                                                                                        4 to 3
                              7.7
                                                                                        4 to 2
   Mean log hours of movers




                              7.6                                                       4 to 1
                                                                                        1 to 4
                              7.5
                                                                                        1 to 3
                              7.4                                                       1 to 2
                                                                                        1 to 1
                              7.3

                              7.2

                              7.1
                                    -2     -1                   0      1
                                         Years since new job started




                                                       82
Appendix Figure B4
Mean log hourly wage rates of movers, classified by quartile of AKM employer wage rate effects
(ψ) at origin (year = –1) and destination (year = 0) employer


                             3.8                                                       4 to 4
                             3.6                                                       4 to 3
                                                                                       4 to 2
   Mean log wage of movers




                             3.4
                                                                                       4 to 1
                             3.2                                                       1 to 4

                              3                                                        1 to 3
                                                                                       1 to 2
                             2.8
                                                                                       1 to 1
                             2.6

                             2.4

                             2.2
                                   -2     -1                   0      1
                                        Years since new job started




                                                      83
Appendix Figure B5
Correlation of estimated employer fixed effects for the full AKM sample and a random 70
percent sample of employers
       ψ log earnings (70% of full sample)




                                                                                                               ψ log hours (70% of full sample)
                                              6                                                                                                    4

                                             5.5                                                                                                  3.8

                                              5                                                                                                   3.6


                                             4.5                                                                                                  3.4


                                              4                                                                                                   3.2

                                                   4           4.5              5         5.5         6                                                  3.2         3.4         3.6         3.8   4
                                                               ψ log earnings (full sample)                                                                           ψ log hours (full sample)
                                                   Correlation = 0.9815                                                                                 Correlation = 0.9697
       ψ log wage (70% of full sample)




                                              2

                                             1.8

                                             1.6

                                             1.4

                                             1.2

                                              1

                                                       1       1.2        1.4       1.6         1.8   2
                                                                 ψ log wage (full sample)
                                                   Correlation = 0.9733




                                                                                                          84
Appendix Figure B6
Correlation of estimated employer fixed effects for the full AKM sample and a random 50
percent sample of employers
       ψ log earnings (50% of full sample)




                                                                                                                ψ log hours (50% of full sample)
                                              6                                                                                                     4


                                                                                                                                                   3.8
                                             5.5

                                                                                                                                                   3.6
                                              5
                                                                                                                                                   3.4

                                             4.5
                                                                                                                                                   3.2

                                                         4.5              5                5.5         6                                                  3.2         3.4         3.6          3.8   4
                                                                ψ log earnings (full sample)                                                                           ψ log hours (full sample)
                                                   Correlation = 0.9625                                                                                  Correlation = 0.9381
       ψ log wage (50% of full sample)




                                              2

                                             1.8

                                             1.6

                                             1.4

                                             1.2

                                              1

                                                     1         1.2            1.4    1.6         1.8   2
                                                                     ψ log wage (full sample)
                                                   Correlation = 0.9459




                                                                                                           85
References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, 1998. “Why Do Firms Train? Theory and
Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(1): 79–119.

Andrews, Martyn, Leonard Gill, Thorsten Schank, and Richard Upward. 2012. “High Wage
Workers Match with High Wage Firms: Clear Evidence of the Effects of Limited Mobility Bias.”
Economics Letters 117(3): 824–827.

Card, David, Joerg Heining, and Patrick M. Kline. 2013. “Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise
of West German Wage Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3): 967–1015.

Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Joerg Heining, and Patrick M. Kline. 2018. “Firms and Labor
Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory.” Journal of Labor Economics 36(S1): S13–
S70.

Carrington, William, J., and Bruce C. Fallick. 2017. “Why Do Earnings Fall with Job
Displacement?” Industrial Relations 56(4): 688–722.

Couch, Kenneth A., and Dana W. Placzek (CP). 2010. “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers
Revisited.” American Economic Review 100(1): 572–589.

Fackler, Daniel, Steffen Mueller, and Jens Stegmaier. 2017. “Wage Losses after Job
Displacement: Productivity Depreciations or Lost Firm Rents?” Manuscript.

Farber, Henry S. 1993. “The Incidence and Costs of Job Loss, 1982–91.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity: Microeconomics (1993): 73–132.

Farber, Henry S. 2017. “Employment, Hours, and Earnings Consequences of Job Loss: U.S.
Evidence from the Displaced Workers Survey.” Journal of Labor Economics 35(S1): S235–
S272.

Firpo, Sergio, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 2009. “Unconditional Quantile
Regressions.” Econometrica 77(3): 953–973.

Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan (JLS). 1993a. “Earnings Losses
of Displaced Workers.” American Economic Review 83(4): 685–709.

Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan (JLS). 1993b. The Costs of
Worker Dislocation Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Krolikowski, Pawel. 2018. “Choosing a Control Group for Displaced Workers.” Industrial Labor
and Relations Review 71(5): 1232–1254.

Lachowska, Marta, Alexandre Mas, and Stephen A. Woodbury. 2018. “Sources of Displaced
Workers’ Long-Term Earnings Losses” NBER Working Paper No. 24217.


                                              86
Neal, Derek. 1995. “Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers.”
Journal of Labor Economics 13(4): 653–677.

Schmieder, Johannes F., Till von Wachter, and Joerg Heining. 2018. “The Cost of Job
Displacement over the Business Cycle and Its Sources: Evidence from Germany.” Paper
presented at NBER Labor Studies Program Meeting, February 2018.

Sorkin, Isaac. 2018. “Ranking Firms Using Revealed Preference.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 133(3): 1331–1393.

Topel, Robert. 1990. “Specific Capital and Unemployment: Measuring the Costs and
Consequences of Job Loss.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 33: 181–
214.

Woodcock, Simon D. 2015. “Match Effects.” Research in Economics 69:100–121.

Von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. 2009. “Long-Term Earnings Losses due to
Mass-Layoffs During the 1982 Recession: An Analysis Using Longitudinal Administrative Data
from 1974 to 2004.” Manuscript.




                                             87
