                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          PRICES OR QUANTITIES DOMINATE BANKING AND BORROWING

                                     Martin L. Weitzman

                                     Working Paper 24218
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24218


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2018




For helpful constructive comments, but without implicating them in errors, omissions, or
interpretations, I am indebted to: Reyer Gerlagh, Kenneth Gillingham, Ben Groom, Garth Heutel,
Ryan Kellogg, Frank Krysiak, Derek Lemoine, Jing Li, Jussi Lintunen, Ian MacKenzie, Gilbert
Metcalf, Guy Meunier, Ian Parry, Cedric Philibert, Simon Quemin, Philippe Quirion, Mar
Reguant, Till Requate, Richard Revesz, Andrew Schein, Richard Schmalansee, Joseph Shapiro,
Jean Tirole, and Yi-Ming Wei. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Martin L. Weitzman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Prices or Quantities Dominate Banking and Borrowing
Martin L. Weitzman
NBER Working Paper No. 24218
January 2018
JEL No. Q50,Q51,Q52,Q54,Q58

                                          ABSTRACT

The possibility of intertemporal banking and borrowing of tradeable permits is often viewed as
tilting the various policy debates about optimal pollution control instruments toward favoring
such time-flexible quantities. The present paper shows that this view is misleading, at least for
the simplest dynamic extension of the original `prices vs. quantities' information structure. The
model of this paper allows the firms to know and act upon the realization of uncertain future costs
two full periods ahead of the regulators. For any given circumstance, the paper shows that either
a fixed price or a fixed quantity is superior in expected welfare to time-flexible banking and
borrowing. Furthermore, the standard original formula for the comparative advantage of prices
over quantities contains sufficient information to completely characterize the regulatory role of
intertemporal banking and borrowing. The logic and implications of these results are analyzed
and discussed.


Martin L. Weitzman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 313
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mweitzman@harvard.edu
1       Introduction
Choosing the best instrument for controlling pollution has been a long-standing central issue
in environmental economics. This paper is primarily concerned with the theory of environ-
mental policy in terms of the basic theoretical foundations of the instrument choice issue
among the three alternatives of: …xed prices, …xed quantities, and time-‡exible quantities
from intertemporal banking and borrowing.1
    Pollution is a negative externality. Pigou (1920) introduced and subsequently popu-
larized the central concept of placing a price-charge on pollution (since called a ‘Pigouvian
tax’) as an e¢ cient way to correct a pollution externality. This Pigouvian-tax approach
dominated economic thinking about the pollution externality problem for about the next
half-century.
    Dales (1968) introduced the idea of creating property rights in the form of tradeable pol-
lution permits (aka ‘allowances’) as an e¢ cient alternative to a Pigouvian tax. Montgomery
(1972) proved rigorously the formal equivalence between a price on pollution emissions and
a dual quantity representing the total allotment of tradeable permits. Henceforth, it be-
came widely accepted that there is a fundamental isomorphism between a Pigouvian tax
on pollution and the total quantity of allotted caps in a cap-and-trade system that ends up
with all permits trading at the same competitive-equilibrium market price as the Pigouvian
tax. For every given Pigouvian tax, there is a total quantity of tradeable permits allotted
whose competitive-equilibrium market price equals the Pigouvian tax. And for every given
total quantity of tradeable permits allotted, there is a competitive-equilibrium market price
that would yield the same result if it were imposed as a Pigouvian tax. Thus far all of the
analysis took place in a deterministic context where everything was known with certainty.
    Weitzman (1974) showed that with uncertainty in cost and bene…t functions there is
no longer an isomorphism between price and quantity instruments. The key distinction
under uncertainty is that setting a …xed price stabilizes marginal cost while leaving the total
quantity variable, whereas setting a …xed total quantity of tradeable permits stabilizes total
quantity while leaving price (or marginal cost) variable. The question then becomes: which
instrument is better under which circumstances?
    The Weitzman (1974) paper ‘Prices vs. Quantities’derived a relatively simple formula for
the ‘comparative advantage of prices over quantities’, denoted in the paper as . The sign
    1
    I sprinkle some comments on ‘practicality’ throughout the paper, but the main focus is on the pure
economics of instrument choice. Thus, the broader dimensions of real-world political, ideological, legal,
social, historical, administrative, motivational, informational, timing, lobbying, monitoring, enforcing, or
other non-purely-economic issues are beyond the scope of this paper. For a balanced overall discussion of
both theoretical and practical issues involved in choosing between carbon taxes and cap-and-trade, see the
review article of Goulder and Schein (2013) and the many further references that they cite.


                                                     2
of depends on the relative slopes of the marginal abatement-cost curve and the marginal
abatement-bene…t curve. The sign of is positive (prices are favored over quantities) when
the marginal bene…t curve is ‡atter than the marginal cost curve. Conversely, the sign of
is negative (quantities are preferred over prices) when the marginal bene…t curve is steeper
than the marginal cost curve.2
    There subsequently developed a sizable literature on the optimal choice of price vs. quan-
tity policy instruments under uncertainty.3 Adar and Gri¢ n (1976), Fishelson (1976), and
Roberts and Spence (1976) analyzed seemingly alternative (but ultimately similar) forms of
uncertainty. Weitzman (1978), Yohe (1978), Kaplow and Shavell (2002), and Kelly (2005)
extended the basic model to cover various aspects of nonlinear marginal bene…ts and non-
linear marginal costs. Yohe (1978) and Stavins (1995) analyzed a situation where uncertain
marginal costs are correlated with uncertain marginal bene…ts. Chao and Wilson (1993),
and Zhao (2003) incorporated investment behavior into the basic framework of instrument
choice under uncertainty. In these extensions, the results seemed by and large to preserve
the earlier insight that, other things being equal, ‡atter marginal bene…ts or steeper mar-
ginal costs tend to favor prices while steeper marginal bene…ts or ‡atter marginal costs tend
to favor quantities.4
    Extensions to cover stock externalities in a dynamic multi-period context were made by
Hoel and Karp (2002), Pizer (2002), Newell and Pizer (2003), and Fell, MacKenzie and Pizer
(2012), among others. These dynamic stock externality extensions appeared to keep much of
the ‘‡avor’of the original story, which was phrased in terms of emission ‡ows throughout
a regulatory period (after which comes a new regulatory period with new decision-relevant
parameters). In particular, for the case of climate change from accumulated stocks of
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2 ), this stock-based literature concludes that, throughout
the relevant regulatory period, Pigouvian taxes are strongly favored over cap-and-trade.
This is because the ‡ow of CO2 emissions throughout a realistic regulatory period is but a
tiny fraction of the total stock of atmospheric CO2 (which actually does the damage), and
therefore the corresponding marginal ‡ow bene…ts of CO2 abatement within, say, a …ve or
ten year regulatory period, are very ‡at, implying that prices have a strong comparative
   2
     This same ‘prices vs. quantities’ condition for the sign of       will later be shown to be a su¢ cient
statistic for completely characterizing the welfare-maximizing regulatory role of intertemporal banking and
borrowing.
   3
     This literature is too large to cover here all published papers concerning various aspects of ‘prices vs.
quantities’. Instead, I have included here only a subset that I subjectively judged to be most relevant to
this paper.
   4
     But note that combinations of instruments, such as a …xed price with a ‡oor and ceiling on quantities,
must supersede in expected welfare both a pure price and a pure quantity because both of these pure
instruments are special cases of such combinations of instruments. This insight traces back to Roberts and
Spence (1976).


                                                      3
advantage over quantities.
    The role of intertemporal banking and borrowing of emissions permits in a dynamic
multi-period context was analyzed, or at least touched upon, in a methodologically het-
erogeneous series of papers5 including Rubin (1995), Yates and Cronshaw (2001), Williams
(2002), Newell, Pizer and Zhang (2005), Feng and Zhao (2006), Murray, Newell, and Pizer
(2009), Fell, MacKenzie, and Pizer (2012), and Pizer and Prest (2016). Conclusions of
this heterogeneous collection of banking-and-borrowing papers are mixed, but several are
favorable to intertemporal banking and borrowing of permits (or allowances).
    The papers cited above do not fully and completely confront the main themes of this
paper.6 The two-period model of this paper features symmetric linear marginal-cost and
marginal-bene…t functions in each period, along with an entirely general joint probability
speci…cation of the two marginal-cost-shifting random variables of each period. This paper
shows exactly how the quantitative formulas for comparative advantage (between each di¤er-
ent pairwise combination of the three regulatory instruments being analyzed) depend upon
the slopes of the marginal bene…t and marginal cost functions, and also upon the probabil-
ity distribution of two-period uncertainty, as well as other parameters of the model. Such
quantitative formulas could be used to examine, for example, the magnitude of the pairwise
welfare implications of the wrong policy, a task that is left for future research. Instead,
the analysis of this paper is focused primarily on providing a complete qualitative welfare
ordering among the three instruments of …xed prices, …xed quantities, and intertemporal
banking and borrowing –which welfare ordering depends only on the relative slopes of the
marginal bene…t and marginal cost functions and is independent of other parameters of the
model or the joint probability distribution of two-period uncertainty.
    For any given set of circumstances, the model of this paper shows that either a …xed price
or a …xed quantity is superior in expected welfare to time-‡exible banking and borrowing.
(For example, in instances where banking and borrowing dominates …xed quantities in ex-
pected welfare, then …xed prices dominate both.) Furthermore, the paper shows that the
standard original formula for the comparative advantage of prices over quantities contains
su¢ cient information to completely characterize the welfare-maximizing regulatory role of
intertemporal banking and borrowing relative to …xed prices or …xed quantities. The logic
and implications of these seemingly counterintuitive results are analyzed and discussed.
   5
      The literature concerning intertemporal banking and borrowing is too large to cover here all papers
related to this subject. Instead, I have included here only a subset that I subjectively judged to be most
relevant to this paper.
    6
      There is a partial overlap in the methodology and conclusions of some of the above-cited papers with
this paper. Williams (2002), in particular, overlaps with this paper in several of his conclusions, although
his methodology is very di¤erent by depending upon an insightful analogy between spatial and temporal
formulations.


                                                     4
2       The Model
The emphasis in the model of this paper is on clarity of exposition and the appealing sim-
plicity of clean crisp analytical results. Hopefully the model preserves enough of ‘reality’to
give some useful insights, if only at a fairly high level of abstraction.
    For the sake of preserving a uni…ed familiar notation, we follow the standard convention
that goods are good. This means that rather than dealing with polluted air, we deal instead
with its negative – clean air. And instead of dealing with pollution emissions, we deal
instead with its negative –emissions reduction (or abatement). This standard convention
implies, under the usual assumptions, that the marginal bene…t curve is familiarly downward
sloping and the marginal cost curve is familiarly upward sloping.
    We analyze a regulatory cycle of …xed length, at the very beginning of which the regulator
chooses instrument values that the …rm will respond to during the regulatory cycle. ‘The
regulator’is shorthand for some government regulatory agency that sets policy instruments
to maximize overall social welfare.7 ‘The …rm’refers to an aggregate of all emitting …rms
in the economy, all of which are united, within the same period, by facing an identical
price on emissions (whether as the outcome of a Pigouvian tax, or as the outcome of the
competitive market equilibrium of a cap-and-trade system, or as the shadow-price outcome
of intertemporal banking and borrowing). Whatever the origin, charging a single uniform
price causes the marginal costs of all …rms to be equal. But this is exactly the condition for
horizontal summation (of quantities across one parametric price) of all of the di¤erent …rms’
marginal cost (or supply) curves into one overall aggregate marginal cost (or supply) curve.
This aspect justi…es the rigorous aggregation of all …rms into one big economy-wide as-if
…rm with an aggregate cost curve as just described (and where the various cost uncertainties
of the various …rms are aggregated into the single cost uncertainty of the single as-if …rm).
Henceforth, for notational and analytical convenience, this as-if aggregate …rm will simply be
referred to as the …rm, with the understanding that its marginal cost function has a rigorous
aggregation-theoretic underpinning in a situation where all …rms face the same uniform price
on pollution.
    This paper analyzes and compares the expected welfare of three di¤erent regulatory in-
struments: prices, quantities, and time-‡exible quantities. In the nomenclature of this paper,
a ‘price’instrument is synonymous with a …xed ‘Pigouvian tax’, a ‘quantity’instrument is
synonymous with …xed one-period ‘total allocated tradeable permits’, and a ‘time-‡exible
quantity’instrument is synonymous with ‘intertemporal banking and borrowing’. In each
    7
   Only the e¢ ciency side is covered here. The distribution side is outside the scope of this paper and
depends, among other things, on how revenues are collected and spent.



                                                   5
case the regulator acts like a Stackelberg leader, setting policy instruments for the regula-
tory cycle given the …rm’s response as a function of the particular value of the regulatory
instrument that has been chosen and the realization of uncertainty.
    At the end of one regulatory cycle, a new regulatory cycle begins with new cost and
bene…t functions along with newly-updated speci…cations of uncertainty, and the process
proceeds anew – thus allowing us, at least in principle, to analyze regulatory cycles in
isolation.8 Here we introduce a critical change in the more standard one-period structure
of uncertainty, information, and decision-making in a regulatory cycle.
    Any analysis of intertemporal banking and borrowing requires at least two periods, which
motivates the approach taken here. The regulatory cycle is divided into two periods of equal
duration. Period one is henceforth denoted period1, while period two is henceforth denoted
period2. Costs are uncertain in both periods. The regulator sets policy instruments at the
beginning of the regulatory cycle just before period1 when it knows only the distribution
of the cost-shifting random variables in period1 and period2, and must then live with the
consequences of the realizations of uncertainty throughout the entire two-period regulatory
cycle.9 By contrast, the time-‡exible …rm here enjoys a situation of knowing already at the
very start of period1 the realizations of the cost-shifting random variables in both period1
and period2 –and can intertemporally bank or borrow accordingly beginning in period1.10
    What follows in this section is the speci…cation of the overarching two-period model
framework that will subsequently be applied to the analysis of all three regulatory instru-
ments of …xed prices, …xed quantities, and, most critically, time-‡exible quantities.
    Turning …rst to period1, let q1 be any value of the quantity (here period1 pollution
abatement). Consider a quadratic speci…cation of period1 costs of the form

                                                                         c
                         C1 (q1 ;   1)   = f1 ( 1 ) + ( +   1 )(q1   q) + (q1     q)2 ;                     (1)
                                                                         2
   8
      I can only hope in this paper that, as is often the case in economic theory, an analytically-tractable ‡ow
model, standing in for a more complicated stock-‡ow situation, is capable of o¤ering some useful insights. I
have in mind here a regulatory cycle of maybe …ve to ten years or so, which is short enough to justify the model
speci…cation here, yet is long enough to allow banking and borrowing. The model of this paper abstracts
away from highly durable capital investments, as well as long-term innovation and stock externalities. These
could in principle be covered by a fully-dynamic multi-period stock-‡ow model, but the lack of analytical
solutions for such a complicated formulation is a big drawback and I opt here for a surrogate ‡ow model.
    9
      Thus, importantly throughout the formulation here, the regulator knows the structure of this model
of uncertainty, if not the realization of the uncertainty.        It is undoubtedly more accurate to say that
the regulator knows how the …rm would react to various realizations of uncertainty than to say that the
regulator can write down the structure of the uncertain cost functions, even though, at least in principle,
the two concepts are logically equivalent.
   10
      An alternative interpretation of the banking-and-borrowing setup here is that both the regulator and the
…rm learn the realization of two-period cost uncertainty at the same time, but there is a regulatory lag for
the regulator, whereas, hypothetically, perfect futures markets with perfect information in principle would
allow the …rm to realize any price consequences immediately.


                                                       6
where the known coe¢ cients and c are positive, while the known value of q will be explained
later, and 1 is a random shift-variable normalized so that E[ 1 ] = 0.11        The stochastic
function f1 ( 1 ) represents a pure vertical displacement of the period1 total-cost curve. The
period1 marginal cost corresponding to (1) is the linear form

                                   M C1 (q1 ;   1)   =   +    1   + c (q1     q);                      (2)

which means that the random variable 1 with E[ 1 ] = 0 represents a pure neutral shift of
the period1 marginal cost function.
   Turning next to the period2 cost function, for analytical convenience we assume the
same structure as period1 except that the period2 random variable 2 replaces the period1
random variable 1 . Thus, for quantity q2 (here period2 pollution abatement) the quadratic
speci…cation of period2 costs is of the form

                                                                           c
                       C2 (q2 ;   2)   = f2 ( 2 ) + ( +      2 )(q2    q) + (q2       q)2 ;            (3)
                                                                           2

where the known coe¢ cients and c are positive, while the known value of q will be explained
later, and 2 is a random shift-variable normalized so that E[ 2 ] = 0. The stochastic function
f2 ( 2 ) represents a pure vertical displacement of the period2 total-cost curve. The period2
marginal cost corresponding to (3) is the linear form

                                   M C2 (q2 ;   2)   =   +    2   + c (q2     q);                      (4)

which means that the random variable 2 with E[ 2 ] = 0 represents a pure neutral shift of
the period2 marginal cost function.
     We specify here a fully general relationship between the random variables 1 and 2 . The
joint probability distribution of ( 1 ; 2 ) is completely unrestricted (except for the normaliza-
tion E[ 1 ] = E[ 2 ] = 0).12 Some special cases of this generality include: all uncertainty
concentrated in period2 ( 1        0), all uncertainty concentrated in period1 ( 2        0), and
( 2 ; 1 ) following an AR(1) stochastic process.
     For any value of the quantity q1 , the quadratic speci…cation of bene…ts in period1 is taken
to be of the deterministic form:

                                                                      b
                                  B1 (q1 ) = g1 + (q1         q)        (q1   q)2 ;                    (5)
                                                                      2
  11
    For any random variable z, the notation E[z] represents the expected value of z.
  12
    Note that while the unconditional expectation of 2 (namely E[ 2 ]) is normalized to be zero, the expec-
tation of 2 conditional on 1 (namely E[ 2 j 1 ]) is not restricted to be zero.



                                                         7
where all coe¢ cients are known (with and b positive, while q will be explained later). For
any value of q1 , the deterministic period1 marginal bene…t corresponding to (5) is of the
linear form
                                  M B1 (q1 ) =  b (q1 q):                               (6)

   Analogously, for any value of the quantity q2 , the quadratic speci…cation of bene…ts in
period2 is taken to be of the deterministic form:

                                                             b
                              B2 (q2 ) = g2 + (q2      q)      (q2     q)2 ;                        (7)
                                                             2

where all coe¢ cients are known (with and b positive, while q will be explained later). For
any value of q2 , the deterministic period2 marginal bene…t corresponding to (7) is of the
linear form
                                  M B2 (q2 ) =  b (q2 q):                               (8)

    We could readily consider an extension of the bene…t functions to include uncertainty,
where the random variable 1 with E[ 1 ] = 0 represents a pure neutral shift of the period1
marginal bene…t function, while the random variable 2 with E[ 2 ] = 0 represents a pure
neutral shift of the period2 marginal bene…t function. Since the unknown factors connecting
q1 with C1 and q2 with C2 are likely to be quite di¤erent from those linking q1 to B1
and q2 to B2 , it seems plausible to assume as a base case that the random variables 1
and 2 are independently distributed from the random variables 1 and 2 .13 So long
as 1 and 2 are independent of 1 and 2 , careful, if tedious, calculations show that the
in‡uence of 1 and 2 has zero e¤ect on all of the comparative-advantage formulas to be
derived throughout this paper.       This zero in‡uence of 1 and 2 on all relevant formulas
occurs here because uncertainty in 1 and 2 that is independent of 1 and 2 a¤ects all
regulatory instruments equally adversely, which is a well-known e¤ect throughout the ‘prices
vs. quantities’literature. Thus, with independent uncertainty between marginal bene…t and
marginal cost functions, there is no loss of generality (in making pairwise welfare comparisons
between binary instrument choices) by considering bene…ts here to be deterministic.
    The value q is intended to represent both the period1 quantity where period1 marginal
bene…t equals period1 expected marginal cost, or

                                     M B1 (q) = E[M C1 (q;     1 )];                                (9)
  13
    The condition E[ ] = 0 seems like an especially relevant abstraction for the case of climate change.
The situation where and have non-zero correlation in the standard one-period model is considered in the
footnote on page 485 of Weitzman (1974) and explicated in more detail in Yohe (1978) and Stavins (1995).




                                                   8
and also, simultaneously, the period2 quantity where period2 marginal bene…t equals period2
expected marginal cost, or
                                  M B2 (q) = E[M C2 (q; 2 )]:                           (10)

    With the normalization of q implied by (9) and (10), and making use of formulas (6),
(2), (8), and (4) (along with E[ 1 ] = E[ 2 ] = 0), then (9) and (10) both imply

                                                    = :                                               (11)

Henceforth we substitute for in all formulas of this paper.
    The above description of q allows an important elucidation of cost and bene…t functions
in both period1 and period2. The value q is a natural focal point or point of departure
where marginal bene…ts equal expected marginal costs in both periods. The cost functions
C1 (q1 ; 1 ) of (1) and C2 (q2 ; 2 ) of (3) then represent rigorously a quadratic approximation of
costs in a relevant neighborhood of q. Analogously, the bene…t functions B1 (q1 ) of (5) and
B2 (q2 ) of (7) then represent rigorously a quadratic approximation of bene…ts in a relevant
neighborhood of q.
    This concludes our description of the basic model.14 Now we are ready to apply this
framework to evaluate and compare the expected welfare of the three di¤erent regulatory
control instruments analyzed in this paper.


3      Expected Welfare of Time-Flexible Quantities
We begin this section with a reminder that, for a two-period version of a …xed-price or …xed-
quantity instrument, the …rm is not required to foresee the resolution of period2 uncertain
costs at any time before period2 because it makes no di¤erence for the analysis whether
the …rm foresees or not. Period2 adjustments by the …rm to a …xed price or to a …xed
quantity, which are imposed by the regulator at the beginning of the regulatory cycle just
before period1, need occur only during period2 (after the …rm learns the realization of the
random variable 2 ), not earlier. By way of sharp contrast, to make the strongest case for
banking and borrowing the model is seemingly most favorable when the …rm foresees the
resolution of period2 uncertain costs (as well as the resolution of period1 uncertain costs)
  14
     It goes without saying that we are imposing a tremendous amount of structure on the basic model
(including linear-quadratic costs and bene…ts, a two-period analysis, independence of regulatory cycles,
additively-separable costs and bene…ts each having essentially the same structure in both periods, additive
marginal-cost shocks, statistical independence of costs and bene…ts, a highly simpli…ed information and
decision structure, a purely static ‡ow analysis, and so forth and so on). Absent such kind of structure it
is di¢ cult to address simply and analytically the basic issues of this paper.



                                                    9
instantaneously at the very beginning of period1.
    By time-‡exible quantities, we mean here the ability of the …rm to intertemporally bank
and borrow freely between the two periods within the regulatory cycle on the basis of perfect-
foresight knowledge of costs in both periods. After the end of one regulatory cycle, there
begins a new regulatory cycle with new regulations based on new coe¢ cients of cost and
bene…t functions along with new joint probability distributions, and the process proceeds
anew.15 The regulator sets its control instruments just before the beginning of the regulatory
cycle, which here means just before the start of period1. At that initial instant, the regulator
comprehends 1 and 2 just as probability distributions that will make their realizations
known only during period1 (for 1 ) and period2 (for 2 ), well after regulatory policy has
already been set. The time-‡exible …rm, by distinction, here is allowed to have perfect
foresight throughout by knowing already at the very beginning of period1 the realizations of
the random variables 1 in period1 and 2 in period2. By striking contrast with this model
of banking and borrowing, both a …xed-price instrument and a …xed-quantity instrument are
far less informationally demanding of the …rm by not requiring perfect-foresight knowledge
of the period2 resolution of uncertainty 2 at any earlier time before period2 arrives.
    In this model of time-‡exible quantities the …rm can freely bank or borrow intertemporally
between period1 and period2 as it sees …t on the basis of its super-prescient knowledge of
 1 and 2 . This strong informational asymmetry would appear to stack the odds in favor

of the expected welfare of intertemporal banking and borrowing. Time-‡exible quantities
are made to appear more attractive than they actually are in practice because, in reality,
…rms have at best imperfect foresight and, while they are able to bank permits in many
regulatory situations, they only rarely can borrow. The arti…cially-enhanced attractiveness
of perfect-foresight intertemporal banking and borrowing in this model multiplies the force of
the two basic counterintuitive results from this paper that (for any given circumstance) either
…xed prices or …xed quantities are superior in expected welfare to intertemporal banking and
borrowing, and that the standard original formula for the comparative advantage of prices
over quantities contains su¢ cient information to completely characterize the appropriate
regulatory role of time-‡exible quantities.
  15
     Unfettered banking and borrowing is allowed here within a regulatory cycle but not across regulatory
cycles, because in a new regulatory cycle there are new regulations based on new information. Pizer and
Prest (2016) analyze a model with policy updating based on banking and borrowing across regulatory cycles,
in which the regulator and the …rm are both e¤ectively locked together within a mutual rational-expectations-
type equilibrium where each is acting contingent upon a self-ful…lling expectation of how the other is acting.
This forceful assumption of a joint rational-expectations equilibrium represents a signi…cantly higher order
of abstraction about ‘rational’human behavior than the model here, and leads to quite di¤erent and, typical
of rational expectations, very strong policy implications. By contrast, in this paper the regulator is merely
assumed to be a Stackelberg leader within the regulatory cycle.



                                                     10
     At the very instant before the regulatory cycle, when the regulator comprehends 1 and 2
just as probability distributions that will make their realizations known only during period1
(for 1 ) and period2 (for 2 ), let the regulator here set a total quantity of permits Q covering
both periods. With unlimited banking and borrowing by the super-prescient …rm, the form
in which Q is assigned is inessential. For example, the regulator might specify an assigned
number of permits q10 for period1 and an assigned number of permits q20 for period2. With
the ability to bank or borrow unlimited amounts under perfect foresight, the …rm cares only
about the two-period total quantity of permits Q = q10 + q20 . Henceforth we deal only with
Q.
     Given Q and the …rm’s perfect-foresight super-prescient knowledge of the realizations of
the random variables 1 and 2 already at the very beginning of period1, the …rm (postulated
as having the unlimited ability to bank or borrow) faces the problem of optimally determining
qb1 (Q; 1 ; 2 ) in period1 and qb2 (Q; 1 ; 2 ) = Q qb1 (Q; 1 ; 2 ) in period2. The …rm therefore
seeks to minimize the total costs of both periods, conditional on knowing the realizations of
  1 and 2 , which means that it minimizes over q   b1 the expression16

                                         C1 (b
                                             q1 ;   1)   + C2 ((Q          qb1 );   2 ):                           (12)

     Let the solution of the …rm minimizing over qb1 the total-cost expression (12) be denoted
qb1 (Q; 1 ; 2 ). Then qb1 (Q; 1 ; 2 ) must satisfy the …rst order condition17

                       M C1 (b
                             q1 (Q;      1 ; 2 ); 1 )    = M C2 ((Q            qb1 (Q;      1 ; 2 )); 2 ):         (13)

       Substituting qb1 (Q;   1; 2)   into the M C1 formula (2) yields

                       M C1 (b
                             q1 (Q;      1 ; 2 ); 1 )    =   +    1   + c (b
                                                                           q1 (Q;           1; 2)      q):         (14)

       Substituting qb2 (Q;   1; 2)   =Q       qb1 (Q;    1; 2)   into the M C2 formula (4) yields

                 M C2 ((Q      qb1 (Q;   1 ; 2 )); 2 )   =    +       2   + c (Q           qb1 (Q;   1; 2)   q):   (15)

   Next plug (14) into the left hand side of equation (13) and plug (15) into the right
hand side of (13). Then, after carefully cancelling, consolidating, and rearranging terms, the
  16
     For simplicity, we assume throughout that there is no discounting by the …rm within the two-period
regulatory cycle. Thus, the intertemporal trading ratio = 0 in the notation of Feng and Zhao (2006).
More generally, if the intertemporal trading ratio equals the regulator’s discount factor, then all of the
results of the paper go through.
  17
     As if there is a single shadow price for tradeable permits covering emissions from both periods.



                                                             11
substituted version of (13) reduces to

                                                              Q         2         1
                                       qb1 (Q;    1; 2)   =     +                     ;                                    (16)
                                                              2             2c

which implies
                                              Q     2    1
                                       qb2 (Q;    1; 2)   =:                          (17)
                                              2       2c
   Thus far the regulator imposes a value of Q at the instant just before period1 (when it
knows 1 and 2 only as probability distributions) and the super-prescient …rm reacts with
(16) and (17). Next, the welfare-maximizing regulator seeks to maximize over Q the welfare
expression18

      q1 (Q;
E[B1 (b         1 ; 2 ))]   E[C1 (b
                                  q1 (Q;   1 ; 2 ); 1 )]+E     [B2 (b
                                                                    q2 (Q;            1 ; 2 ))]   E [C2 (b
                                                                                                         q2 (Q;   1 ; 2 ); 2 )] :

                                                                                  (18)
   Let the value of Q that maximizes (18) be denoted Q . Then Q must satisfy the …rst-
order condition

                                                                                                     @b
                                                                                                      q1
                   (E[M B1 (b
                            q1 (Q ;     1 ; 2 ))]    E[M C1 (b
                                                             q1 (Q ;              1 ; 2 ); 1 )])
                                                                                                     @Q

                                                                                                    @b
                                                                                                     q2
               +(E [M B2 (b
                          q2 (Q ;     1 ; 2 ))]     E [M C2 (b
                                                             q2 (Q ;             1 ; 2 ); 2 )])            = 0:            (19)
                                                                                                    @Q
       Note from (16) and (17) that

                                             @b
                                              q1  @b
                                                   q                1
                                                 = 2            =           ;                                              (20)
                                             @Q   @Q                2

and therefore the two terms in (20) cancel out of equation (19).
    Next, use the results (16) and (17). Plug (16) into formulas (6) and (2), and plug (17)
into formulas (8) and (4) (paying attention to condition (11) when applicable); thereafter
plug the resulting four pre-expectation terms into equation (19). Take expected values,
remembering that E[ 1 ] = E[ 2 ] = 0. Rearrange terms to derive the basic consequence that

                                                    Q = 2q:                                                                (21)
  18
    For simplicity, we assume throughout this paper that there is no discounting by the regulator within the
two-period regulatory cycle. Thus, the discount rate r = 0 in the notation of Feng and Zhao (2006). More
generally, if the intertemporal trading ratio equals the regulator’s discount factor, then all of the results of
the paper go through.




                                                          12
       With (21) holding, (16) becomes

                                                                         2        1
                                         qb1 (Q ;   1; 2)   =q+                       ;                               (22)
                                                                             2c

while (17) becomes19
                                                                         2        1
                                         qb2 (Q ;   1; 2)  :=q                         (23)
                                                       2c
   Let the expected welfare of optimized time-‡exible quantities with banking and borrowing
here be denoted EW (bq ). Making use of formulas (22) and (23), we then have

                            2        1                  2        1                                2        1           2     1
EW (b
    q ) = E B1 q +                          C1 q +                   ;   1     + B2 q                          C2 q              ;   2   :
                                2c                          2c                                 2c     2c
                                                                                            (24)
    Substitute carefully the four basic pre-expectation terms of the right-hand side of (24)
into the corresponding equations (5) for B1 (q + 22c 1 ), (1) for C1 ((q + 22c 1 ); 1 ), (7) for
B2 q      2
           2c
              1
                , and (3) for C2 ((q   2
                                        2c
                                           1
                                             ); 2 ) (paying attention to (11) when applicable).
Take the expected values of the resulting substituted-for version of (24). Then use E[ 1 ] =
E[ 2 ] = 0 to consolidate and eliminate terms. After much careful algebra, cancellation, and
rearrangement, we obtain …nally the basic result
                                                                       2
                                                     E[(     2       1) ]
                                EW (b
                                    q) = k +                                          (c    b);                       (25)
                                                             4c2

where the constant k is de…ned by the equation

                                     k = g1 + g2      E[f1 ( 1 )]            E[f2 ( 2 )]:                             (26)


4        Expected Welfare of a Fixed Quantity
In this section, assume that the regulator imposes the same …xed quantity q on output (here
emissions abatement) in both period1 and period2.20 We now seek to know the regulator’s
expected welfare in this two-period …xed-quantity setting, which will be indispensable later
for addressing, understanding, and comparing the three basic regulatory instruments being
analyzed in this paper.
  19
      If a reader wishes to take (22) and (23) on faith, it can be excused. However, I heartily believe that
at least skimming the intermediate arguments leading up to (22) and (23) is vital for understanding what
underlying logic these two expressions rest upon.
   20
      It makes no di¤erence if the regulator is allowed to set di¤erent quantities in the two di¤erent periods,
since in an optimal quantity solution here they will both end up being the same anyway.



                                                            13
       The regulator seeks to maximize over q the welfare expression

                            B1 (q)    E[C1 (q;    1 )]   + B2 (q)      E [C2 (q;   2 )] ;                 (27)

implying that the solution q must satisfy the …rst-order condition

                  M B1 (q )     E[M C1 (q ;    1 )]   + M B2 (q )        E [M C2 (q ;       2 )]   = 0:   (28)

   For q = q , plug (6), (2), (8), and (4) into the left hand side of equation (28), being
aware of (11). Take expected values where indicated, and make use of the condition E[ 1 ] =
E[ 2 ] = 0 to infer (after eliminating and consolidating terms) that equation (28) then implies

                                                      q = q:                                              (29)

    Let EW (q) stand for expected welfare in the optimally-…xed-quantity setup of this section
where the basic equation (29) holds. Then EW (q) equals bene…ts minus expected costs in
period1 plus bene…ts minus expected costs in period2. More formally, substituting (29)
into (27) for q = q and taking expectations where indicated, we then have

                      EW (q) = B1 (q)       E[C1 (q;       1 )]   + B2 (q)   E [C2 (q;      2 )] :        (30)

   Substitute the four basic terms of the right-hand side of (30) into the corresponding
equations (5) for B1 (q), (1) for C1 (q; 1 ), (7) for B2 (q), and (3) for C2 (q; 2 ) (paying attention
to (11)). Take expected values where indicated. Use E[ 1 ] = E[ 2 ] = 0.                     We then
immediately obtain the basic result

                                                 EW (q) = k;                                              (31)

where the constant k is given by equation (26).


5        Expected Welfare of a Fixed Price
Assume that the regulator imposes the same …xed price on output (here emissions abatement)
in period1 and period2.21 We now seek to know the regulator’s expected welfare in this two-
period …xed-price setting, which will be indispensable later for addressing, understanding,
and comparing the three basic regulatory instruments being analyzed in this paper.
  21
    It makes no di¤erence if the regulator is allowed to set di¤erent prices in the two di¤erent periods, since
in an optimal price solution here they will both end up being the same anyway.


                                                         14
   If the regulator imposes the price p in period1, the …rm’s quantity response is then to
react with quantity qe1 (p; 1 ) satisfying M C1 (e
                                                 q1 (p; 1 ); 1 ) = p. Substituting qe1 (p; 1 ) into (2)
and inverting to solve for qe1 (p; 1 ) yields the period1 quantity-reaction or supply function

                                                                             p            1
                                                qe1 (p;     1)   =q+                          :                                       (32)
                                                                                 c

    Likewise if the regulator imposes the price p in period2, the …rm’s quantity response is
then to react with quantity qe2 (p; 2 ) satisfying M C2 (e
                                                         q2 (p; 2 ); 2 ) = p. Substituting qe2 (p; 2 )
into (4) and inverting to solve for qe2 (p; 2 ) yields the period2 quantity-reaction or supply
function
                                                     p         2
                                   qe2 (p; 2 ) = q +             :                               (33)
                                                         c
    The regulator seeks to maximize over p the welfare expression

       E[B1 (e
             q1 (p;    1 ))]     E[C1 (e
                                       q1 (p;        1 ); 1 )]       + E[B2 (e
                                                                             q2 (p;      2 ))]        E [C2 (e
                                                                                                             q2 (p;   2 ); 2 )] ;     (34)

implying that the solution p must satisfy the …rst-order condition22

E[M B1 (e
        q1 (p ;       1 ))]    E[M C1 (e
                                       q1 (p ;         1 ); 1 )]+E[M B2 (e
                                                                         q2 (p             ;
                                                                                         = 0:     2 ))]   E [M C2 (e
                                                                                                                   q2 (p ;    2 ); 2 )]

                                                                                        (35)
    Plug (32) into (6) and (2). Plug (33) into (8) and (4). Then substitute the results into
equation (35), being aware of (11). Take expected values of the resulting substituted-for
terms in the left-hand side of (35). Make use of the conditions E[ 1 ] = E[ 2 ] = 0 to infer
(after eliminating and consolidating terms) that equation (35) then implies

                                                                     p = ;                                                            (36)

in which case (32) and (33) reduce to

                                                                                     1
                                                        qe1 (p ;      1)   =q                                                         (37)
                                                                                  c

and
                                                                                     2
                                                     :  qe2 (p ;      2)   =q         (38)
                                                   c
   Let EW (p) stand for expected welfare in the optimally-…xed-price setup of this section
where the basic equations (37) and (38) both hold. Then EW (p) equals expected bene…ts
  22                                    @ qe1       @ qe2        1
    Note from (32) and (33) that        @p      =   @p      =    c    , so that these two terms have already been cancelled out
of equation (35).



                                                                        15
minus expected costs in period1 plus expected bene…ts minus expected costs in period2.
More formally, making use of (37) and (38), we have here:

                             1                      1                       2                    2
EW (p) = E B1 q                     E C1 q              ;   1   +E B2 q           E C2 q             ;    2       :
                             c                      c                       c                    c
                                                                                             (39)
    Substitute the four basic pre-expectation terms of the right-hand side of (39) into the
corresponding equations (5) for B1 (q c1 ), (1) for C1 ((q c1 ); 1 ), (7) for B2 (q c2 ), and (3)
for C2 ((q c2 ); 2 ) (paying attention to (11) whenever applicable). Take expected values in
the substituted-for version of (39). Then use E[ 1 ] = E[ 2 ] = 0 to consolidate and eliminate
terms. After much careful algebra, cancellation, and rearrangement, we obtain …nally the
basic result
                                         E[( 1 )2 ] + E[( 2 )2 ]
                        EW (p) = k +                             (c b);                      (40)
                                                   2c2
where the constant k is given by equation (26).


6        Comparative Advantage of Fixed Prices over Fixed
         Quantities
In all of the comparative advantage calculations to be undertaken throughout the rest of this
paper, we will employ the following useful notation. Let x be a real number. The sign of
x will be denoted sign[x].23 If x and y are two real numbers with the same sign, we will
write sign[x] = sign[y].
    Within the two-period framework of this paper, denote the comparative advantage of
…xed prices over …xed quantities as qp . In symbols,24

                                          p
                                          q   = EW (p)          EW (q):                                  (41)

   Substituting from formulas (40) and (31) into equation (41), we then have the basic result
that
                           p     E[( 1 )2 ] + E[( 2 )2 ]
                           q =                           (c b) :                         (42)
                                           2c2
       Since the term E[( 1 )2 ] + E[( 2 )2 ] of (42) is strictly positive, we are entitled here to write

                                                p
                                       sign     q   = sign [(c      b)] :                                (43)
  23
     The sign operator sign[x] takes on one of three values: x > 0 , sign[x] = +; x < 0 , sign[x] =           ;
x = 0 , sign[x] = 0.
  24
     Note that yx =     x
                        y , which will be used throughout the rest of this paper.



                                                        16
    From (43), the analysis of the two-period comparative advantage of prices over quantities,
here qp , essentially duplicates the traditional standard analysis of the one-period compara-
tive advantage of prices over quantities . The sign of pq is positive (prices are favored over
quantities) when the marginal bene…t curve is ‡atter than the marginal cost curve (b < c).
Conversely, the sign of pq is negative (quantities are preferred over prices) when the marginal
bene…t curve is steeper than the marginal cost curve (b > c).


7    Comparative Advantage of Fixed Quantities over Time-
     Flexible Quantities
Within the two-period framework of this paper, denote the comparative advantage of …xed
quantities over time-‡exible banked-and-borrowed quantities as qqb. In symbols,

                                         q
                                         qb   = EW (q)            EW (b
                                                                      q ):                    (44)

   Substituting from formulas (31) and (25) into equation (44), we then have the basic result
that                                              2
                             q       E[( 2      1) ]
                             qb =                       (c b);                           (45)
                                          4c2
which, multiplying by 1, can be trivially rearranged into an equivalent form more useful
for the purposes of this paper:
                                                                2
                                q             E[(      2      1) ]
                                qb   =                                  (b      c):           (46)
                                                       4c2

                               2
   Since the term E[(   2    1) ]    of expression (46) is strictly positive (unless   2   1 ),   we
can write                                     h     i
                                                  q
                                     sign         qb       = sign [(b   c)] :                 (47)

    Condition (47) signi…es that the …xed-quantity q regulatory system is preferred to the
time-‡exible banking-and-borrowing qb regulatory system when the slope of the marginal
bene…t curve is steeper than the slope of the marginal cost curve (b > c). Conversely, the
time-‡exible banking-and-borrowing qb regulatory system is preferred to the …xed-quantity q
regulatory system when the slope of the marginal bene…t curve is ‡atter than the slope of
the marginal cost curve (b < c).
    A prime question, which is begging to be answered, is why the …xed-quantity q regulatory
system is ever preferred to the time-‡exible banking-and-borrowing qb regulatory system. Af-
ter all, with the same total output across both periods (= 2q), the time-‡exible qb system

                                                            17
is ex-post intertemporally cost-e¢ cient (M C1qb = M C2qb), whereas the …xed-quantity q sys-
tem is ex-post intertemporally cost-ine¢ cient (M C1q 6= M C2q ).25 This cost-e¢ ciency aspect
is, perhaps naturally, what most economists have instinctively focused upon in intuitively
preferring time-‡exible qb to …xed-quantity q. Why, then, is the sign of qqb not unambigu-
ously negative, thereby indicating the regulator’s dominant preference for the time-‡exible
banking-and-borrowing qb system over the …xed-quantity q system?26
     The answer is that in the choice of control instruments for this model we must pay atten-
tion to the bene…t side (as well as the cost side). Marginal costs in the time-‡exible qb system
are intertemporally equal, but marginal bene…ts are intertemporally unequal. Conversely,
marginal bene…ts in the …xed-quantity q system are intertemporally equal, but marginal
costs are intertemporally unequal.
      While the time-‡exible qb system is intertemporally cost-e¢ cient, it increases the variabil-
ity of qb1 in equation (22) and qb2 in equation (23) relative to the …xed quantity assignments
of q 1 = q 2 = q. The risk-aversion to quantity variability here is captured by the b coe¢ cient
in the quadratic total-bene…t formulas (5) and (7) when q1 = qb1 is given by (22) and q2 = qb2
is given by (23). The more that b increases in formula (46) (or (45)), the more are the ex-
pected drawbacks of quantity variability diminishing the expected bene…ts minus expected
costs (summed over the two periods) of variable time-‡exible cost-e¢ cient quantities relative
to stable cost-ine¢ cient …xed quantities. In other words, all else being equal, the relative
advantage of stable (but intertemporally cost-ine¢ cient) …xed quantities over variable (but
intertemporally cost-e¢ cient) time-‡exible quantities increases in the risk-aversion coe¢ cient
b, and translates into a positive comparative advantage when b > c.
     The logic of (47) is somewhat analogous to the logic of the corresponding comparative
advantage formula from a ‘prices vs. quantities’ perspective. Time-‡exible banked-and-
borrowed quantities have a …gurative ‘price like’aspect in the sense that there is one shadow
price across both periods due to intertemporal arbitrage by the …rms, so that quantities
adjust between periods to e¢ ciently make all marginal costs equal to the single shadow price.
In this paper, let the comparative advantage of time-‡exible quantities
                                                                     h i over …xed quantities
be denoted qqb. Then qqb =          q
                                    qb, implying from (47) that sign
                                                                         qb
                                                                         q = sign [(c    b)]. The
corresponding formula here for the comparative advantage of …xed prices over …xed quantities
   p                                           p
   q from (42) implies by (43) that sign       q = sign [(c  b)] : In this admittedly incomplete
  25
    More precisely, M C1q 6= M C2q except on a set of measure zero.
  26
    Note that if B(q1 ; q2 ) = B1;2 (q1 + q2 ) (instead of the paper’s assumed form B(q1 ; q2 ) = B1 (q1 ) + B2 (q2 )),
then qqb < 0 for any values of b or c (b 6= c), thereby seemingly justifying the economist’s …rst instinct.
But the case B(q1 ; q2 ) = B1;2 (q1 + q2 ) is presumably trying to capture stock e¤ects, in which situation
the corresponding one-period marginal ‡ow-bene…t curve is relatively ‡at and a price instrument dominates
both …xed and time-‡exible quantity instruments anyway. This issue is discussed further in footnote 29.



                                                          18
story, the sign of qqb is the same as the sign of pq because the underlying considerations
are roughly analogous – namely adjusting variable quantities between each period to have
the same marginal cost, as if equal to a single price (thereby guaranteeing intertemporal
cost e¢ ciency), versus the stability of …xed quantities in each period. We elaborate on this
theme later in the paper.


8     Comparative Advantage of Fixed Prices over Time-
      Flexible Quantities
Within the two-period framework of this paper, denote the comparative advantage of …xed
prices over time-‡exible banked-and-borrowed quantities as pqb. In symbols,

                                                    p
                                                    qb   = EW (p)               EW (b
                                                                                    q ):                                            (48)

   Substituting from formulas (40) and (25) into equation (48), we then have, after rewriting,
the result
                  p     1
                  qb =     2E[( 1 )2 ] + 2E[( 2 )2 ] E[( 2   1)
                                                                2
                                                                     (c b):               (49)
                       4c2
   Collecting and consolidating terms within the curly brackets of (49) yields

 2E[( 1 )2 ] + 2E[( 2 )2 ]       E[(   2
                                                   2
                                                 1) ]    = E[( 1 )2 ] + E[( 2 )2 ] + 2E[            1 2]   = E[(   2   +      2
                                                                                                                           1 ) ];   (50)

thereby allowing (49) to be expressed in the form of a basic result that

                                                                           2
                                           p             E[(      2+     1) ]
                                           qb   =                                   (c       b) :                                   (51)
                                                                  4c2

                                         2
   Since the term E[(        2   +     1) ]     in expression (51) is strictly positive (unless                        2        1 ),   we
can write                                                h     i
                                                             p
                                                sign         qb       = sign [(c     b)] :                                          (52)

    From (52), …xed prices are preferred to time-‡exible quantities with intertemporal bank-
ing and borrowing when the slope of the marginal bene…t curve is ‡atter than the slope of
the marginal cost curve (b < c). Conversely, time-‡exible quantities with intertemporal
banking and borrowing are preferred to …xed prices when the slope of the marginal bene…t
curve is steeper than the slope of the marginal cost curve (b > c).
    The logic of (52) is somewhat analogous to the logic of the corresponding compara-
tive advantage formula from a ‘prices vs. quantities’ perspective. Time-‡exible banked-


                                                                       19
and-borrowed quantities here have a …gurative ‘quantity like’ aspect reminiscent of …xed
quantities in the sense that total output across both periods is …xed at the same total
quantity of 2q (whereas total output in a …xed-price system is variable). The formula
here for the comparative advantage of …xed prices over …xed quantities pq from (42) im-
plies by (43) that sign pq = sign[(c b)], to be compared with the comparative advan-
tage of …xed prices over time-‡exible quantities pqb from (51), which implies by (52) that
     h i
sign pqb = sign[(c b)]. In this admittedly incomplete story, the sign of pqb (from (52))
here is the same as the sign of pq (from (43)) because the underlying considerations are
roughly analogous –namely variable total quantities (being adjusted within each period to
make each period’s marginal cost equal to the single …xed price of ) versus, by comparison,
the relative stability of having total quantities across both periods …xed at 2q. We elaborate
on this theme in the next section.


9       Prices or Quantities Dominate Banking and Borrow-
        ing
The most striking result of this paper is that, for any given values of the model’s primi-
tive parameters (b; c; ; q; k) and for any joint probability distribution of ( 1 ; 2 ), there is a
complete welfare ordering such that either

                               b < c =) EW (p) > EW (b
                                                     q ) > EW (q);                                      (53)

or 27
                               b > c =) EW (q) > EW (b
                                                     q ) > EW (p):                                      (54)

    The proof of conditions (53) and (54) simply relies on systematically examining the signs
of the relevant comparative advantage formulas pqb and qqb for b < c in (53), along with qqb
and qpb for b > c in (54). When b < c, then sign[ pqb] > 0 from (52), and also when b < c,
then sign[ qqb] = sign[ qqb] > 0 from (47) –this explains condition (53). When b > c, then
                                                                        h i
       q
sign[ qb] > 0 from (47), and also when b > c, then sign[ p ] = sign pqb > 0 from (52) –
                                                            qb

this explains condition (54).
    Conditions (53) and (54) immediately imply that either a …xed price or a …xed quantity
is superior in expected welfare to intertemporal banking and borrowing. Such an outcome
appears all the more surprising because the two-period model of this paper has seemingly
  27
    I ignore here and throughout the razor’s edge case where b = c, in which zero-measure situation all three
instruments have the same expected welfare: EW (p) = EW (b   q ) = EW (q).



                                                     20
biased the odds in favor of intertemporal banking and borrowing by allowing the …rm to
know, and immediately act upon, the perfect-foresight realizations of both of the uncertain
future costs a full two periods ahead of the regulator (and also, although less importantly,
by allowing unlimited borrowing).28 By stark contrast, it is important to appreciate fully
that both in the …xed-price regime and, more trivially, in the …xed-quantity regime, the …rm
is not required (or even permitted) to foresee period2 costs at any time before period2.
    Such a prominently counterintuitive result as the dominance of prices or quantities over
banking and borrowing is a mathematical surprise of the model, so that it cannot be too
obvious why it is occurring. A heuristic story might be attempted along the rough lines that
a time-‡exible quantity acts like a sort of a metaphorical intermediate hybrid between a …xed
price and a …xed quantity. Intertemporal banking and borrowing is somewhat related to a
price instrument here insofar as time-‡exible quantities adjust across the two periods as if by
reacting to a single shadow price, thereby inducing intertemporal cost e¢ ciency via setting
marginal costs in both periods equal to the shadow price (much as a …xed price of induces
intertemporal cost e¢ ciency). Simultaneously, intertemporal banking and borrowing is also
somewhat related to a quantity instrument here insofar as total output across both periods
is …xed (at 2q). The mutual exclusivity of conditions (53) and (54), with EW (b         q ) in the
middle of both inequalities, also hints at an intermediate-hybrid interpretation of banking
and borrowing as a kind of a metaphorical cross between (…xed) prices and (…xed) quantities.
    If b < c, the ‘prices vs. quantities’ tradition suggests …guratively that the regulator
should want to move away from a quantity instrument in favor of moving toward a price
instrument. But then, in this heuristic story, rather than settling for the mongrel half-price
hybrid banking-and-borrowing instrument, which has the other half tainted by its similarity
to a here-inferior quantity-hybrid half, the regulator would prefer to go all the way to a
purebred price instrument. When b < c, the part of the banking-and-borrowing instrument
that is attractive to the regulator is the price component, while the quantity component is
unattractive. Here the full-price is preferred to the half-price-half-quantity is preferred to
the full-quantity. Hence the ordering (53).
    Conversely, if b > c, the ‘prices vs. quantities’ tradition suggests …guratively that the
regulator should want to move away from a price instrument in favor of moving toward a
quantity instrument. But then, in this heuristic story, rather than settling for the mongrel
half-quantity hybrid banking-and-borrowing instrument, which has the other half tainted by
its similarity to a here-inferior price-hybrid half, the regulator would prefer to go all the way
  28
    In reality, as has been pointed out, …rms have at best imperfect foresight about the resolution of future
cost uncertainty and, while they are able to bank permits in many regulatory situations, they only rarely
can borrow.



                                                     21
to a purebred quantity instrument. When b > c, the part of the banking-and-borrowing
instrument that is attractive to the regulator is the quantity component, while the price
component is unattractive. Here the full-quantity is preferred to the half-quantity-half-
price is preferred to the full-price. Hence the ordering (54).
    For both cases of b < c or b > c, instead of a mongrel hybrid policy instrument mixing
attractive with unattractive components, the regulator prefers a purebred policy instrument
that is fully attractive through and through. This heuristic story is not rock-solid, but
perhaps it is the best tale that can be told in these circumstances to try to intuit what is,
after all, a genuine mathematical surprise.
    Note from conditions (53) and (54) that if the …rst-best instrument of either a price or a
quantity is ruled out, then banking and borrowing might have a genuine, if limited, role to
play as a second-best option. For example in the case of CO2 , since the marginal bene…t
curve within a regulatory period is very ‡at, so that b 0 << c, the theory strongly advises
a …xed price as the optimal regulatory instrument; however, if policy makers override the
adviser and insist on a cap-and-trade system, then condition (53) informs us that banking
and borrowing is then some-ways superior to …xed quantities and should therefore he allowed.
Another possible example is when the coe¢ cients b or c are themselves genuinely unknown,
so that it is unclear whether b < c or b > c, in which case the intermediate banking-
and-borrowing instrument might represent a compromise strategy that avoids worst-case
outcomes.29


10         Prices vs. Quantities, Again
From the literature on ‘prices vs. quantities’, the sign of the traditional formula for the com-
parative advantage of prices over quantities in a one-period setting is given by the condition

                                           sign[ ] = sign [(c          b)] :                                    (55)

                                                                   p
       Comparing (43) with (55) indicates that sign                q   = sign[ ], thus allowing the familiar
  29
     If B(q1 ; q2 ) = B1;2 (q1 + q2 ) (instead of the paper’s assumed form B(q1 ; q2 ) = B1 (q1 ) + B2 (q2 )), then
intertemporal banking and borrowing necessarily dominates …xed quantities for any values of b or c (with
b 6= c). For the corresponding linear-quadratic setup of this paper applied to the speci…cation B(q1 ; q2 ) =
B1;2 (q1 + q2 ), we have b < c ) EW (p) > EW (b       q ) > EW (q), and b > c ) EW (b    q ) > EW (q) > EW (p).
However, the speci…cation B1;2 (q1 +q2 ) is presumably attempting to capture cumulative stock e¤ects, in which
case (at least for CO2 in climate change) b 0 within a regulatory cycle of …ve to ten years or so. But then
we are e¤ectively in preference-ordering situation (53) anyway, and the insight that EW (b      q ) > EW (q) for the
speci…cation B1;2 (q1 +q2 ) is not challenging the ordering prescribed by (53). If B(q1 ; q2 ) = B1;2 (q1 +q2 ) is not
representing cumulative stock e¤ects, then the additively-separable speci…cation B(q1 ; q2 ) = B1 (q1 ) + B2 (q2 )
of this paper seems appropriate, or at least seems defensible.


                                                         22
one-period formula (55) for the sign of to e¤ectively ‘stand in’for the two-period formula
(43) for the sign of pq .
    If b < c then, from (53), a (…xed) price instrument is welfare-superior to both a (…xed)
quantity instrument and a time-‡exible quantity instrument. If b > c then, from (54),
a (…xed) quantity instrument is welfare-superior to both a (…xed) price instrument and a
time-‡exible quantity instrument.
    What the above observations mean for policy is that, in principle, the regulator here
need not ever consult the sign formula (52) for pqb or the sign formula (47) for qqb: A useful
conceptual-informational
          h i              hshortcut
                                i     is available because sign[ ] is a su¢ cient statistic for
              p               q
both sign qb and sign qb . To determine whether p dominates qb in the two-period sign
formula (52) for pqb, it su¢ ces to check whether p dominates q in the traditional one-period
formula (55) for the sign of . To determine whether q dominates qb in the two-period sign
formula (47) for qqb, it su¢ ces to check whether q dominates p in the traditional one-period
sign formula (55) for . In other words,
                                                      h    i
                                                          p
                              sign[ ] > 0 () sign         qb   > 0;                       (56)

while
                                                      h    i
                                                          q
                              sign[ ] < 0 () sign         qb   > 0:                       (57)

    Thus, the standard original formula for the comparative advantage of prices over quanti-
ties contains enough information to completely characterize the appropriate regulatory role
of time-‡exible quantities. In this sense (…xed) prices vs. time-‡exible quantities or (…xed)
quantities vs. time-‡exible quantities present no new issues relative to the standard insights
o¤ered by the original formula for –at least within the con…nes of the model of this paper.
Nothing is otherwise gained by, or added to, the economic analysis by conceptualizing the
regulatory role of intertemporal banking and borrowing as somehow fundamentally di¤erent
from the usual analysis in terms of ‘prices vs. quantities’. Therefore, far from undoing the
standard ‘prices vs. quantities’message about the formula for the comparative advantage
of prices over quantities, the introduction of intertemporal banking and borrowing seems to
reinforce the robust scope of the original basic message.


11      Concluding Remarks
There is no question that the model of this paper is highly stylized with a great many
restrictive assumptions (including linear-quadratic costs and bene…ts, a two-period analy-

                                              23
sis, independence of regulatory cycles, additively-separable costs and bene…ts each having
essentially the same structure in both periods, additive marginal-cost shocks, statistical in-
dependence of costs and bene…ts, a highly simpli…ed information and decision structure, a
purely static ‡ow analysis, and so forth and so on). The problem confronting a modeler here
is that the issues addressed in the model of this paper tend to become analytically intractable
without making strong structural assumptions. The model of this paper might be appended
and extended, but largely at the detriment of adding complexity. As a consequence of the
model’s sparsely-crisp simplicity, the results of this paper are applicable for providing insight
and rough guidance only at a high level of abstraction. At the very least, I would hope
that the ideas expressed in this paper might be found to be thought-provoking about an
important set of issues.
    The most striking insight of the paper is the result that, for any given parameter values,
either a …xed price or a …xed quantity is superior in expected welfare to intertemporal banking
and borrowing. Of course, this strong result can be criticized as stemming from unrealistic
assumptions. However, we must also keep in mind that the dominance of prices or quantities
emerges in spite of the model here seemingly being biased in favor of arti…cially boosting
the welfare status of intertemporal banking and borrowing by allowing the …rm to know,
and immediately act upon, the perfect-foresight realizations of both of the uncertain future
costs at the very beginning of the regulatory cycle.30 This unrealistic assumption about the
exaggerated power of time-‡exible quantities (over …xed prices or …xed quantities, which do
not rely on perfect foresight) would have to be weighed against other unrealistic assumptions
in evaluating the overall real-world relevance of the idea that prices or quantities dominate
banking and borrowing.
    Furthermore, the paper shows that the addition of intertemporal banking and borrowing
does not alter the fundamental insights gained from the traditional framework for analyzing
‘prices vs. quantities’. The customary formula for the comparative advantage of prices over
quantities is su¢ ciently robust for the regulators to make correct economic decisions even
when intertemporal banking and borrowing is included. I believe this insight too is useful,
and parts of it might even survive under more realistic assumptions.


References
 [1] Adar, Zvi, and James M. Gri¢ n (1976). “Uncertainty and the Choice of Pollution
     Control Instruments.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 3: 178-
     188.
 30
      And also, but less importantly, by allowing unlimited borrowing.


                                                    24
 [2] Chao, Hung-Po, and Robert Wilson (1993). “Option Value of Emission Allowances.”
     Journal of Regulatory Economics, 5: 233-249.

 [3] Dales, John H. (1968). Pollution, Property, and Prices: An Essay on Policy-making
     and Economics. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

 [4] Fell, Harrison, Ian A. MacKenzie, and William A. Pizer (2012). “Prices versus Quantities
     versus Bankable Quantities.” Resource and Energy Economics, 34(4): 607-623.

 [5] Feng, Hongli, and Jinhua Zhao (2006). “Alternative intertemporal trading regimes with
     stochastic abatement costs.” Resource and Energy Economics, 28(1): 24-40.

 [6] Fishelson, Gideon (1976). “Emission Control Policies under Uncertainty.”        Journal
     of Environmental Economics and Management, 3: 189–197.

 [7] Goulder, Lawrence H., and Andrew R. Schein (2013). “Carbon Taxes vs. Cap and
     Trade: A Critical Review.” Climate Change Economics, 4(3): 1-28.

 [8] Hoel, Michael, and Larry Karp (2002). “Taxes versus Quotas for a Stock Pollutant.”
     Resource and Energy Economics, 24(4): 367-384.

 [9] Kaplow, Louis, and Steven Shavell (2002). “On the superiority of corrective taxes to
     quantity regulation.” American Law and Economics Review, 4(1): 1-17.

[10] Kelly, David L. (2005). “Price and quantity regulation in general equilibrium.” Journal
     of Economic Theory, 125: 36-60.

[11] Montgomery, W. David (1972). “Markets in Licenses and E¢ cient Pollution Control
     Programs.” Journal of Economic Theory, 5(3): 395-418.

[12] Murray, Brian C., Richard G. Newell, and William A. Pizer (2009). “Balancing cost and
     emission certainty: An allowance reserve for cap-and-trade.” Review of Environmental
     Economics and Policy, 3: 84-103.

[13] Newell, Richard, and William Pizer (2003). “Regulating stock externalities under un-
     certainty.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 45: 416-432.

[14] Newell, Richard, William Pizer, and Jiangfeng Zhang (2005). “Managing permit mar-
     kets to stabilize prices.” Environment and Resource Economics, 31: 133-157.

[15] Pigou, Arthur C. (1920). The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan.



                                             25
[16] Pizer, William A. (2002). “Combining price and quantity controls to mitigate global
     climate change.” Journal of Public Economics, 85: 409-434.

[17] Pizer, William A. and Brian Prest (2016). “Prices versus Quantities with Policy Updat-
     ing.”NBER Working Paper No. 22379.

[18] Roberts, Mark J., and A Michael Spence (1976). “E- uent charges and licenses under
     uncertainty.” Journal of Public Economics, 5: 193-208.

[19] Rubin, Jonathan D. (1995). “A Model of Intertemporal Emission Trading, Banking,
     and Borrowing.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 31: 269-286.

[20] Weitzman, Martin L. (1974). “Prices vs. Quantities.” Review of Economic Studies,
     41(4): 477-491.

[21] Weitzman, Martin L. (1978). “Optimal rewards for economic regulation.” American
     Economic Review, 68: 683-691.

[22] Williams, Roberton C. III (2002). “Prices vs. Quantities vs. Tradeable Permits.” NBER
     Working Paper No. 9283.

[23] Yates, Andrew J., and Mark B. Cronshaw (2001). “Pollution permit markets with
     intertemporal trading and asymmetric information.” Journal of Environmental Eco-
     nomics and Management, 42: 104-118.

[24] Yohe, Gary W. (1978). “Towards a general comparison of price controls and quantity
     controls under uncertainty.” Review of Economic Studies, 45: 229-238.

[25] Zhao, Jinhua (2003). “Irreversible abatement investment under cost uncertainties: trad-
     able emission permits and emissions charges.” Journal of Public Economics, 87: 2765-
     2789.




                                            26
