                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          SHADOW FUNDING COSTS:
              MEASURING THE COST OF BALANCE SHEET CONSTRAINTS

                                      Matthias Fleckenstein
                                      Francis A. Longstaff

                                       Working Paper 24224
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24224


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2018




We are grateful for the comments and suggestions of Andrea Eisfeldt, Tyler Muir, Laura Field,
Xiaoxia Lou, Michael Pagano, Fei Xi, Haoxiang Zhu, and seminar participants at the University
of Delaware and the 2017 Villanova University, Drexel University, Temple University, Lehigh
University, and University of Delaware joint conference. All errors are our responsibility. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24224.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Shadow Funding Costs: Measuring the Cost of Balance Sheet Constraints
Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff
NBER Working Paper No. 24224
January 2018
JEL No. G12,G13,G21,G23,G28

                                          ABSTRACT

Recent theory suggests that balance sheet frictions and constraints faced by financial
intermediaries can have major asset pricing implications. We propose a new measure of the
impact of these constraints on intermediary funding costs that is based on the implied cost of
renting intermediary balance sheet space. On average, balance sheet constraints add 81 basis
points to intermediary funding costs, but the impact often exceeds 200 basis points during a crisis.
We find that these balance sheet costs have real effects on intermediary investment decisions and
asset holdings. Increases in balance sheet costs are associated with short-term increases in the use
of derivatives, but longer-term declines in risk-taking by financial institutions. Balance sheet
costs introduce a wedge between on- and off-balance-sheet investments which may help resolve a
number of asset pricing puzzles.


Matthias Fleckenstein
University of Delaware
Lerner College of Business and Economics
310 Purnell Hall
Newark, DE 19716
mflecken@udel.edu

Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
    Balance sheet space is treated like expensive real estate, available only
    to positions that can afford to pay rental fees that are now much larger.1

                                                        — Darrell Duffie


    Bankers are blaming tensions in the repo world on the increasing cost
    of renting out their balance sheets.2

                                                        — Izabella Kaminska



                            1. INTRODUCTION


One of the fundamental principles of current asset pricing theory is that frictions
and constraints that impact financial intermediaries may play a central role in
determining security values. In particular, this literature demonstrates that bal-
ance sheet constraints faced by intermediaries—such as funding illiquidity or
regulatory capital and leverage restrictions—may impact the stochastic discount
factor used in the market. Key examples include Brunnermeier and Pedersen
(2009) who examine the relation between funding availability and asset prices,
Duffie (2010) who studies the effects of slow-moving capital on prices in finan-
cial markets, and He and Krishnamurthy (2013) who model how equity capital
constraints faced by intermediaries may affect risk premia in financial markets.
     An important implication of this literature is that asset pricing effects are
directly related to how binding balance sheet constraints are on financial interme-
diaries. To date, however, it has been difficult to quantify the effects of balance
sheet constraints on intermediaries. In particular, relatively little is known about
how these constraints affect the cost of funding or the cost of capital of inter-
mediaries over time. Clearly, having a measure of the impact of balance sheet
constraints on intermediary funding costs would not only allow us to evaluate
how binding these constraints are, but could also provide valuable perspective
1
 Darrell Duffie, Why are Big Banks Offering Less Liquidity to Bond Markets?,
Forbes, March 11, 2016.
2
 Izabella Kaminska, Exorbitant Privilege and the Cost of Renting America’s
Balance Sheet, Alphaville, Financial Times, March 23, 2016.


                                         1
on their effects on asset pricing, market liquidity and stability, and risk sharing
in the financial sector.
      This paper uses a simple new approach to measure the effects of balance
sheet constraints on these funding costs. This approach consists of comparing
the direct financing cost of owning a security (on balance sheet) to the implied fi-
nancing cost of taking a position (off balance sheet) in the same security through
the derivatives market. Intuitively, by taking a synthetic position in the security
via derivatives, an investor essentially “rents” balance sheet space from the finan-
cial intermediary providing the derivative. In equilibrium, the rental costs for the
security should equal the sum of both the direct financing costs and the indirect
balance sheet costs an intermediary bears by owning the underlying security as
the hedge for the derivative contract. Thus, the impact of balance sheet con-
straints on intermediary funding costs—commonly known as balance sheet costs
or shadow funding costs—can be measured directly as the difference between the
implied financing rate in the derivatives market and the direct financing rate in
the cash market.

     We implement our approach by comparing the implied repo rates incorpo-
rated into Treasury note futures directly to the actual repo rates for Treasury
notes paid by financial intermediaries. Both the Treasury note cash and futures
markets are among the most liquid and actively-traded fixed income markets.
An important advantage of focusing on these markets is that we can measure
balance sheet costs over an extensive sample period ranging from 1991 to 2016.
     A number of important results emerge from our analysis. First, we find
that balance sheet costs are positive and significant throughout much of the
sample period. On average, balance sheet constraints add 81 basis points to
an intermediary’s cost of funding. The funding cost impact, however, was as
high as 200 basis points in the aftermath of the Asian debt crisis of 1997 and
the financial crisis of 2008. To put these costs into perspective, we note that
the direct cost of funding earning assets (defined as the total interest expense
paid on deposits and other borrowed money as a percentage of average earning
assets) as reported by the FDIC averaged about 256 basis points during the
sample period. Thus, these indirect costs increased the average funding costs
of financial intermediaries by nearly one third. Furthermore, these costs are
multiples of typical FDIC deposit insurance assessment rates or the guaranty
fees for agency mortgage-backed securities.3 Clearly, balance sheet costs of this

3
 For current FDIC deposit insurance assessment rates, see https://www.fdic.gov/
deposit/insurance/assessments/proposed.html. As examples of historical agency
mortgage-backed security guaranty fees, see https://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs/Re
ports/ReportDocuments/GFee Report FINAL.pdf.


                                         2
magnitude could have first-order effects on asset pricing as well as significant real
effects on the financial sector and the macroeconomy.
     Second, we demonstrate that our measure of balance sheet costs is directly
related to constraints faced by financial intermediaries. In particular, we find
that these balance sheet costs are increasing in the amount of equity capital that
financial institutions are required to hold. Furthermore, we find that balance
sheet costs are positively related to measures of the cost of equity capital and
the cost of unsecured debt for these financial institutions. We also find a seasonal
pattern in which balance sheet costs decline at year end. This result is consistent
with recent evidence that intermediaries may strategically manage their balance
sheets in a way that temporarily reduces their apparent leverage at year end.

     Third, we find that changes in balance sheet costs have significant real ef-
fects on financial intermediaries. In particular, we find that an increase in balance
sheet costs is associated with significant declines in broker-dealer leverage, hold-
ings of Treasury securities, and asset growth rates. These results provide direct
support for Duffie (2016) and others who argue that constraints (such as the
Basel III supplementary leverage ratio (SLR)) could reduce market liquidity as
financial intermediaries reduce their security inventories in response to the higher
capital costs.

     Fourth, we also find that balance sheet costs have important effects on the
use of derivatives by financial institutions. Specifically, we find that an increase
in balance sheet costs results in a short-term increase in the use of derivatives
such as interest rate swaps and futures. In the longer term, however, we find
that an increase in balance sheet costs leads to a decline in interest rate swap
notional and Treasury note futures open interest. These results are consistent
with a scenario in which investors initially migrate from the cash market to
the derivatives market when balance sheet costs increase, but then reduce their
overall risk positions over time in response to higher capital costs.

     Finally, we explore whether the balance sheet costs inferred from the Trea-
sury cash and futures markets relate to the funding spreads between cash-deriv-
atives pairs in other markets. In particular, we examine whether our balance
sheet cost measure is related to interest rate swap spreads. Swap spreads repre-
sent the difference between the yield on a synthetic bond (receiving fixed on a
swap) and the yield on a Treasury bond with the same maturity. We find that an
increase in our measure of balance sheet costs is followed by significant increases
in longer-horizon swap spreads. This result is important since it suggests that the
funding costs associated with balance sheet constraints have the potential to rec-
oncile a number of well-known asset pricing anomalies involving cash-derivative
pairs, such as CDS contracts and corporate bonds (Duffie (2010)), deviations
from covered interest rate parity (Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen (2008),

                                         3
Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2017)), and inflation swaps and Treasury Inflation
Protected Securities or TIPS (Fleckenstein, Longstaff, and Lustig (2014)).
     There is an extensive literature on how the various types of balance sheet
constraints faced by financial intermediaries may affect asset prices. A number of
recent papers have focused on the implications of collateral constraints, funding
liquidity, margin requirements, leverage constraints, regulatory capital require-
ments, and other types of balance sheet frictions and restrictions for financial
markets. Important examples include Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Chowdhry and
Nanda (1998), Basak and Croitoru (2000), Allen and Gale (2000), Xiong (2001),
Kyle and Xiong (2001), Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Krishnamurthy (2003, 2010),
Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), Adrien and
Shin (2010), Holod and Kitsul (2010), Gârleanu and Pedersen (2011), Daniels-
son, Shin, and Zigrand (2011), He and Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013), Adrien and
Boyarchenko (2012), Basak and Pavlova (2013), Adrien, Etula, and Muir (2014),
Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), Kondor and Vayanos (2015), He, Kelly, and
Manela (2016), and Klinger and Sundaresan (2016).

     There is also a rapidly growing literature on the potential impact on asset
prices and market liquidity of recent legal and regulatory measures including
the Dodd Frank Act, the Volcker Rule, and the Supplementary Leverage and the
Liquidity Coverage Ratios of Basel III. Examples include Adrien, Fleming, Gold-
berg, Lewis, Natalucci, and Wu (2013), Kiema and Jokivuolle (2014), Adrien,
Fleming, Stackman, and Vogt (2015), Duffie (2016), Allahrakha, Cetina, Mun-
yan (2016), Bao, O’Hara, and Zhou (2016), Baranova, Liu, and Noss (2016),
and Adrian, Fleming, Shachar, and Vogt (2016). This issue has also been ex-
tensively discussed among industry participants and policy makers are actively
considering the impact of these regulatory measures on market liquidity. Recent
examples include the International Capital Market Association (2015) and Chen,
Korapaty, and Swaminathan (2016).

     This paper contributes to this literature in several ways. First, we provide
strong evidence that the relative pricing of Treasury securities in the cash and
futures markets is directly related to the balance sheet constraints faced by finan-
cial intermediaries. Second, we show that increases in balance sheet costs have
real effects on the leverage, holdings of Treasury securities, and asset growth
rates of financial intermediaries, as well as on the use of derivatives by mar-
ket participants. Third, our measure of the impact of balance sheet constraints
provides a metric for monetary policy authorities and others for evaluating the
effects of capital regulation on financial markets. Fourth, our results provide a
framework for resolving a number of puzzling asset pricing anomalies involving
financial derivatives and cash market instruments. Finally, our results provide
direct empirical support for the rapidly growing literature on intermediary asset


                                         4
pricing.
     The results in this paper also provide new perspective on an important
parallel literature that studies the financing rates incorporated into derivatives
prices. Key examples include Brenner and Galai (1986), Ronn and Ronn (1989),
Longstaff (1995), Krishnamurthy (2002), and Song and Zhu (2016). Other work
on implied financing rates in derivatives prices includes Manaster and Rendleman
(1982), Naranjo (2009), Omprakash (2014), Gunther, Anderson, and Goldberg
(2016), and Golez, Jackwerth, and Slavutskaya (2017).


              2. IDENTIFYING BALANCE SHEET COSTS


To illustrate the intuition behind our approach, imagine that an investor wishes
to take a position in a financial asset. The investor typically has two ways of
entering into this position. The standard approach is for the investor to take
ownership of the asset by purchasing it outright. An important consequence of
direct ownership of the asset is that it becomes part of the investor’s balance
sheet. This has major implications for many types of financial institutions, how-
ever, because on-balance-sheet assets introduce additional capital constraints.
This is because on-balance-sheet assets often require financial institutions to set
aside additional capital for these assets due to regulatory capital requirements.
      Alternatively, the investor can take a position in the asset synthetically
via the derivatives market using futures, total return swaps, or other types of
contracts. A key feature of this approach is that it allows the investor to benefit
from price changes in the underlying asset without having to take ownership
or pay the full value of the asset up front. Thus, derivative contracts not only
allow investors to take synthetic positions, they also provide synthetic leverage
for those positions.4 Moreover, only the mark-to-market value of the derivative
is placed on the balance sheet—the full value of the asset remains off balance
sheet, which means in most cases that the financial institution must put aside
less incremental regulatory capital when taking a derivative position than is the
case for a cash position in the asset.5 For many investors, this means that taking
4
    For example, see Tuckman (2013).
5
 Under U.S. GAAP (FAS 133), swaps, futures, forwards, and option contracts are
derivatives whose notional values are carried off balance sheet and only fair values
recorded on the balance sheet. See FAS 133: Statement of Financial Accounting
Standards 133,“Accounting for Derivative Financial Instruments and Hedging
Activities,” at: http://www.fasb.org/jsp /FASB/Document C/DocumentPage?
cid=1218220124631&acceptedDisclaimer=true.


                                         5
a synthetic position in the derivative market is far less capital intensive than an
outright ownership position in the security.
      Intuitively, by taking a synthetic position, an investor essentially “rents” the
security from a financial intermediary instead of owning it outright. This trans-
action, however, typically requires that some financial intermediary purchase
the underlying asset to maintain a hedged position. In this sense, the investor
rents not only the security, but also space on the financial intermediary’s balance
sheet. In equilibrium, the cost of renting the security should equal the cost of
owning the security.6 To make things concrete, consider the case of a financial
intermediary taking a position in a Treasury bond. For this investor, the cost of
ownership can be broken down into two components. The first is the direct cost
of financing the position in the repo market. The second consists of the indirect
costs imposed on the intermediary because of frictions and constraints such as
margins, haircuts, regulatory capital and leverage requirements, funding illiquid-
ity, and compliance costs. For clarity, we refer to these frictions and constraints
generically as balance sheet constraints. Similarly, we refer to the indirect costs
that balance sheet constraints impose on financial intermediaries as balance sheet
costs (the equivalent term shadow funding costs is also used in practice). Thus,
the total cost of ownership is the sum of the repo rate and the balance sheet
costs. By contrast, the funding cost of taking a synthetic position in a Treasury
bond is simply the implicit financing rate embedded in the derivative contract.
In the case of Treasury futures contracts, this implicit financing rate is known as
the implied repo rate.
     Thus, comparing the rental cost of securities with the direct financing costs
of ownership allows us to identify the balance sheet costs faced by financial
intermediaries. In this paper, we estimate these balance sheet costs as the differ-
ence between the implied repo rates incorporated into Treasury note futures and
the corresponding term repo rates for the underlying Treasury notes. Clearly,
however, this approach to identifying the balance sheet costs of financial inter-
mediaries could be extended to other markets.




6
 It is important to observe, however, that financial constraints may also play
an important role in the rent vs. ownership decision. For example, Eisfeldt
and Rampini (2009) show that when recovery rates differ between buying and
renting, firms with higher default risk may prefer to rent. This issue is relevant
since derivatives may receive priority in bankruptcy. See also Sharpe and Nguyen
(1995).


                                          6
                 3. BALANCE SHEET CONSTRAINTS


As described above, we use the term balance sheet constraints in a broad sense
to denote the many frictions and constraints that may impact an intermediary’s
cost of direct ownership of financial assets. In this section, we highlight several
of the major categories of frictions and constraints that play a central role in
the current regulatory and market environment. It is important to recognize,
however, that these are only a few examples of the many types of constraints faced
by intermediaries and do not represent a comprehensive list. Table 1 provides a
timeline of some of the major market events and changes in financial regulation
during the study period.
3.1 Capital Requirements

Capital requirements for financial institutions have increased significantly in re-
cent years as a result of stricter regulation following the 2008 financial crisis.
Both Basel III and the Dodd-Frank Act raised existing bank capital adequacy
standards and introduced new requirements. For example, Basel III mandates
a five percent equity-to-asset ratio for the largest U.S. banks (regardless of the
risk of the assets, see Duffie (2017)), and also specifies stress tests and risk man-
agement practices (the appendix provides a detailed discussion of the Basel III
framework). The Supplementary Leverage Ratio (SLR), introduced in June 2012
and finalized in July 2013, has been at the center of ongoing controversy. The
SLR requires that large U.S. banks have a minimum of $3 in Tier 1 capital for
each $100 of total non-risk-weighted exposures. Repo transactions have a risk
weight of one in the total exposure measure, regardless of whether assets are given
lower risk weights in calculating risk-based capital ratios.7 Duffie (2016) argues
that the SLR requirement may have serious adverse effects on liquidity in fixed
income markets. The appendix provides an example illustrating how a direct
position in a Treasury security may materially worsen a financial institution’s
SLR compared to a synthetic position in a Treasury security via futures.

     U.S. regulators tightened leverage requirements further in July 2013 by in-
troducing the Enhanced Supplementary Leverage Ratio (eSLR). The eSLR in-
creased the capital buffer above the three percent SLR to a minimum of five
percent of Tier 1 capital divided by total exposures for a covered bank holding
7
 Total exposure is typically higher than total on-balance-sheet assets. For exam-
ple, Allahrakha, Glasserman, and Young (2015) report that total exposures are
44 percent greater than total assets for the largest top-tier U.S. banks, and 27
percent greater for all large U.S. banks. In addition, banks are no longer allowed
to net repo activity with non-dealer clients because short-term wholesale funding
transactions must be reported on a gross basis.


                                         7
company and, in addition, any insured depository institution that is a subsidiary
must maintain a minimum of six percent to pay out unrestricted bonuses and
dividends. The eSLR applies only to U.S. bank holding companies with assets
of at least $700 billion or with assets in custody of at least $10 trillion on a con-
solidated basis with all their insured banking subsidiaries. As of 2016, eight U.S.
bank holding companies fit this description and the Basel committee classifies
these as global systemically important banks (G-SIBs).8

     The Dodd-Frank Act introduced the framework for systemically important
financial institutions (SIFIs) in 2010. Financial institutions designed as globally
systematically important bank holding companies must hold additional capital
ranging from 1.00 to 5.50 percent or more of a firm’s total risk-weighted assets.
The Volcker Rule prohibits banks from engaging in proprietary trading with their
own accounts and limits their ownership of (and relationship with) hedge funds
and private equity funds.
      Banks are subject to the Basel Capital rules as well as to regulations passed
after the financial crisis such as the Dodd-Frank Act. Bank holding companies
(BHCs) are subject to capital and leverage ratio requirements similar to those of
banks. Bank holding companies are not subject to statutory prompt corrective
action, but are subject to supervisory action and potential penalties by the Fed-
eral Reserve if they fail to meet capital requirements. Prior to 2004, broker-dealer
capital requirements were primarily dictated by Security and Exchange Commis-
sion (SEC) rules. Since the introduction of the 2004 SEC Net Capital Rule and
the SEC’s Consolidated Supervised Entities (CSE) Program, broker-dealers have
essentially been subject to the Basel capital rules. Moreover, after the financial
crisis many large broker-dealers have converted to bank holding companies and,
thus, are subject to bank regulations.

3.2 Liquidity Requirements
The Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III also impose balance sheet constraints through
their liquidity requirements. For example, the Dodd-Frank Act narrowed the
definitions of acceptable collateral and raised risk-weighted asset requirements.
Two liquidity requirements that directly impact a financial institution’s capital
structure are the total loss absorption capital measure (TLAC) and the liquidity
coverage ratio (LCR). The TLAC requires large banks to issue ordinary shares,
subordinated debt, and other loss-absorbing securities equivalent to the mini-
mum of 16 to 20 percent of their risk-weighted assets, and at least two times
the Basel III leverage requirement of 3 percent. The LCR requires banks with
over $50 billion in assets to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) to
8
 See http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/2016-list-of-globalsystemically-im
portant-banks-G-SIBs.pdf.


                                         8
meet projected net short-term cash obligations over a 30-day stress period. In
particular, this requirement implies that for assets to qualify as high-quality liq-
uid, the assets cannot be financed by repo and must be available to the bank’s
treasury function to liquidate.9 Moreover, when a bank holding company funds a
security position via repo, only outflows associated with the secured funding are
used in determining the LCR and, thus, the costs of using repo transactions to
finance asset positions increase. Allahrakha, Cetina and Munyan (2016), using
data on tri-party repos, document that following the 2012 introduction of the
supplementary leverage ratio, broker-dealers affiliated with bank holding com-
panies decreased their repo borrowing but increased their use of repo backed by
more price-volatile collateral. Furthermore, they argue that the announcement
of the SLR rule has disincentivized those dealers from borrowing in the triparty
repo market. The appendix also provides an example illustrating how a direct
position in a Treasury security may materially worsen a financial institution’s
LCR compared to a synthetic position in a Treasury security via futures.
     In addition to the LCR, the Basel Committee introduced the Net Stable
Funding Ratio (NSFR) in January 2014 to promote funding stability by reduc-
ing overreliance on short-term wholesale funding and to mitigate funding risk
across on- and off-balance-sheet items. Specifically, the NSFR requires banks
to maintain stable funding for both on- and off-balance-sheet activities over a
one-year stress period. The NSFR may significantly affect how banks obtain
and provide short-term funding, in particular in the repo markets. That is be-
cause securities financing transactions are defined as loans, and secured lending
to non-banks is treated in the same way as unsecured lending in terms of capital
requirements.

3.3 Funding Frictions

Another potential source of balance sheet costs is the impact of funding frictions
on financial institutions. For example, Johannes and Sundaresan (2007) describe
how the frictions associated with marking-to-market and the costly collateral-
ization of trading positions impact financial intermediaries in the interest rate
swap market. Andersen, Duffie, and Song (2016) present a framework in which
the cost to a dealer’s shareholders of financing the cash required to collateralize
trading positions creates a type of debt overhang problem that impacts dealer
bid-ask spreads.

     Market practitioners account for the cost of funding frictions through a va-
riety of balance sheet valuation adjustments known generically as XVA adjust-
ments. For example, market practitioners have introduced measures such as the
9
 See Section 22, p. 61530 of the U.S. final rule implementing the LCR, available
at www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2014-10-10/pdf/2014-22520.pdf.


                                         9
credit valuation adjustment (CVA) and the debt valuation adjustment (DVA) to
account for credit risk, the margin valuation adjustment (MVA) to account for
the funding cost associated with initial margin, the capital valuation adjustment
(KVA) to account for the impact of regulatory capital, and the tax valuation
adjustment (TVA) to account for the effect of taxation on profits and losses.
Although controversial, some practitioners also use a funding value adjustment
(FVA) to account for the cost of financing the cash required to enter and maintain
asset positions.10 Andersen, Duffie, and Song (2016) report that the cumulative
total FVA of major dealers in the markets was on the order of $10 billion in 2014.

3.4 Spillover Effects on other Financial Institutions
While many of the examples of balance sheet constraints discussed above relate
directly to banks, bank holding companies, and broker-dealers, it is also impor-
tant to recognize that these constraints have ripple effects that impact other
types of financial institutions. Thus, the impact of balance sheet constraints is
not limited to just those large financial institutions explicitly addressed in recent
regulatory and legislative actions.

     As one example, a 2015 survey by Ernst and Young finds that recent regu-
lation has had costly spillover effects on the hedge fund industry:11

     Hedge fund managers are experiencing the ripple effects of new regu-
     lations on banks and prime brokers, with hedge funds facing increased
     trading fees and broader changes to business relationships. . . . Regu-
     lations such as Basel III and Dodd-Frank have caused banks and their
     prime brokerage businesses to focus more closely on liquidity, balance
     sheet capacity and funding, resulting in changing economics for fund
     managers who finance trades through prime brokers. Twenty-nine per-
     cent of respondents said their prime brokers increased fees in the past
     year, and and additional 22% expect an increase in fees within the next
     year. . . . Many primary brokers are becoming reluctant to hold cash
     for hedge funds because of how such balances are classified toward banks’
     capital reserves under new regulations. . . . Hedge fund managers are
     beginning to explore non-traditional financing sources outside of prime
     brokers. Thirteen percent of respondents are seeking or plan to seek fi-
     nancing from non-traditional sources in the next two years, from sources
10
  For example, see Hull and White (2012, 2014a, 2014b), Albanese and Andersen
(2014), and Andersen, Duffie, and Song (2016).
11
  See http://www.ey.com/gl/en/newsroom/news-releases/news-ey-hedge-funds-
confront-impact-of-financial-market-regulations-and-challenges-of-evolving-
prime-broker-relationships.


                                         10
     including institutional investors and sovereign wealth funds, custodians,
     or other hedge funds.

As another example, a recent article from the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries
argues that new regulations have the potential to impose indirect costs on pension
funds:12

     As a result, pension funds could be forced into using central clearing
     which, Mercer said, requires a number of operational changes. Schemes
     are yet to make due to the expectation they will be exempt from it for
     three years. Ben Gunnee, European director of Mercers Sentinel group,
     said: ‘Those schemes that try to undertake hedging strategies using in-
     terest rate swaps outside central clearing may find the cost prohibitively
     expensive under the new regulations. The additional capital charges
     levied on counterparties will ultimately result in trading costs increasing
     for pension funds wishing to hedge liabilities through swaps.’



     4. TREASURY NOTES AND TREASURY NOTE FUTURES


In this study, we focus on the direct funding costs and balance sheet costs asso-
ciated with Treasury securities. A key advantage of this approach is that there
are liquid futures markets for taking synthetic positions in Treasury notes and
bonds as well as an active repo market for financing Treasuries. Thus, we can
directly observe the direct funding costs for Treasuries in the repo market and
solve for the implied funding rate from futures prices.

     We focus on five-year Treasury notes and Treasury note futures in the anal-
ysis since they were among the most actively-traded Treasury securities and
futures contracts during the sample period. For example, Brandt, Kavajecz, and
Underwood (2007) and Mizrach and Neely (2006) find that price discovery in
the Treasury futures market is most efficient for the five-year Treasury note fu-
tures contract. Furthermore, the design of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange’s
(CME) five-year Treasury note futures contract has the important advantage of
minimizing the value of the timing and cheapest-to-deliver options implicit in
Treasury futures contracts. For example, only a very narrow range of maturities
is deliverable into the contract, making the possibility of a switch in the cheapest-
to-deliver note far less likely than is the case for other Treasury futures contracts.
In this section, we summarize the key frictions and constraints faced by an in-
12
  See http://www.theactuary.com/news/2012/06/basel-iii-could-increase-cost-
of-trades-by-pension-schemes/.


                                         11
termediary in taking a direct position in Treasury notes, and contrast these with
those associated with a synthetic position via the Treasury note futures market.
4.1 Treasury Notes

Financial intermediaries face increased balance sheet constraints when they take
a direct ownership position in Treasury securities via the repo market. This
is because repo transactions are on-balance-sheet secured loans for accounting
and regulatory purposes and thus require incremental regulatory capital.13 The
appendix provides a detailed discussion of the repo market.

     Treasury notes are recorded on balance sheet when acquired.14 Under current
Basel III and Dodd-Frank provisions, all positions in Treasury securities are
subject to capital requirements because they are included in the calculation of a
bank’s total exposure measure. Specifically, the U.S. SLR requires institutions to
hold capital against three percent of total balance sheet exposures, regardless of
their risk weighting. The Federal Reserve also imposes an additional two-percent
buffer in the form of the eSLR for the largest U.S. banks.

    The transaction costs associated with trading Treasury notes are relatively
small. Fleming (2003) estimates that the bid-ask spread for five-year Treasury
notes is on the order of 0.39 32nds, or 1.22 cents per $100 notional amount.
Similar results are reported in Brandt and Kavajecz (2004) and Engle, Fleming,
Ghysels, and Nguyen (2012).

     The Federal Reserve Board reports that the median tri-party repo haircut for
Treasury securities from 2010 to 2016 is two percent.15 Finally, repo transactions
are also subject to delivery squeezes when repo volume is large relative to supply,
which can result in repo fails. In May 2009, the Treasury Market Practices
Group introduced a dynamic fails charge for Treasury securities.16 Specifically,

13
  Specifically, Statement of Financing Accounting Standards (SFAS) 125 “Ac-
counting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and Extinguishment of
Liabilities” requires that repo transactions be classified as secured loans, and not
as financing transactions.
14
  The specific accounting treatment depends on whether the securities are catego-
rized as trading securities, available-for-sale securities, or held-to-maturity securi-
ties. See SFAS 115 at http://www.fasb.org/jsp/FASB/Pronouncement C/Summ
aryPage&cid=900000010225.
15
  For example, see https://www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/data-visual
ization/tri-party-repo/index.html#interactive/haircut.
16
  See Treasury Market Practices Group, “Treasury Market Practices Group En-
dorses Several Measures to Address Widespread Settlement Fails,” November 12,

                                          12
the principal recommendation suggested that “market participants agree that the
invoice price . . . on any cash or financing transaction that fails to settle on the
originally scheduled date be reduced at a fails [charge] rate equal to the greater
of a) three percent per annum minus the fed funds target rate . . . and b) zero.”

4.2 Treasury Note Futures
A financial institution that takes a synthetic Treasury position via the futures
market faces far lower balance sheet costs than is the case for cash positions.
In particular, under U.S. GAAP (FASB 133), Treasury futures are derivative
instruments whose notional values are carried off balance sheet, and only their
fair values are recorded on balance sheet. Because the initial value of a futures
contract is zero, however, the mark-to-market value of daily resettled futures
contracts is likely to remain orders of magnitude smaller than the market values of
the underlying Treasury securities. The appendix provides a detailed discussion
of Treasury note futures contracts.
     Prior to Basel III, off-balance-sheet interest rate derivatives such as Treasury
futures with maturities less than one year had no capital requirements. Under
Basel III, there is only a two-percent risk weight for Treasury futures contracts.
Furthermore, since Treasury futures are off-balance-sheet instruments, the two-
percent risk weight is multiplied by a credit conversion factor of the derivatives
position to arrive at the actual capital charge. This implies that the regulatory
capital requirement is not based on the notional position as would be the case for
a repo transaction. Thus, the capital requirements for Treasury futures positions
are substantially lower than those for cash positions.

     An important feature of Treasury note futures is that they are virtually free
of counterparty credit risk. This is because Treasury note futures contracts are
centrally cleared by the CME Clearing Corporation which acts as the counter-
party to every trade. By serving as the counterparty to every transaction, the
CME becomes the buyer to every seller and the seller to every buyer, essentially
eliminating any counterparty credit risk in Treasury notes futures positions.

     The transaction costs of trading Treasury note futures contracts are similar
to those of the underlying Treasury notes. For example, Holder and Sinha (2009)
estimate that the bid-ask spread for Treasury note futures is on the order of 1.7
cents per $100 notional position. This is consistent with the estimates in Fleming
and Sarkar (1999) and Fett and Hayes (2017).
    Treasury note futures contracts are also subject to margining provisions.
Participants in the Treasury note futures market post initial margin when a

2008, available at http://www.newyorkfed.org/tmpg/PR081112.pdf.


                                         13
transaction is executed and must post additional margin when the balance in
the margin account falls below the maintenance margin. The required initial
and maintenance margins are adjusted periodically by the CME. During the
sample period, the initial margin requirement ranged from 0.54 percent to 1.59
percent of the total notional size of the contract, and averaged 1.03 percent.
Thus, the margin requirements for Treasury note futures appear to be generally
lower than those in the tri-party Treasury repo market.

     In summary, the transaction costs and margin requirements for Treasury
notes and Treasury note futures are roughly similar in magnitude. Thus, their
net effect on estimates of balance sheet costs is likely to be close to a wash.
By contrast, there are major differences in the capital constraints and require-
ments imposed on Treasury note cash and futures positions. These considera-
tions strongly support the notion that balance sheet costs are measurable by the
difference between the implied repo rate and the actual repo rate.


                                5. THE DATA


In this section, we briefly describe the data sets and variables used in the study.
Table A1 of the appendix provides detailed information about the data and the
data sources.
     We collect data for five-year Treasury note futures prices, trading volume,
open interest, and margins from the Bloomberg system. Overall, we have data
for the 103 futures contracts with quarterly expirations in the June 1991 to
December 2016 sample period. For each futures contract, we also identify the set
of deliverable Treasury notes and collect information about their coupon rates,
maturity dates, conversion factors, and prices from the Bloomberg system. Table
2 presents summary statistics for the Treasury note futures contracts. To value
the cheapest-to-deliver option, we also collect data on interest rate swap rates
as well as cap, floor, and swaption volatilities from quote sheets from the broker
Tradition Inc. for the first few years of the sample period, and then from the
Bloomberg system for the remainder of the sample period.

     We obtain data for general collateral Treasury repo rates for overnight, 1-
week, 2-week, 3-week, 1-month, 2-month, 3-month, 4-month, 5-month, and 6-
month horizons from the Bloomberg system. The repo rates are interpolated
to match exactly the maturity implied by the date on which delivery into the
corresponding futures contract occurs. Not all term repo rates are available
continuously throughout the sample period, in which case we use the closest
available tenor as the repo rate.


                                        14
     Finally, we collect data on a set of financial market variables including prices,
spreads, and outstanding notional amounts from a number of sources. Further-
more, we also collect balance sheet and capital ratio information for U.S. financial
institutions.


              6. MEASURING BALANCE SHEET COSTS


The balance sheet costs are estimated using a simple two-step procedure. In
the first step, we estimate the funding rate implicit in the five-year Treasury
note futures contract—designated as the implied repo rate. In the second step,
we subtract the actual repo rate for financing five-year Treasury notes from the
implied repo rate. The appendix provides the full details on this methodology.
    To illustrate how the implied repo rate is computed, consider the simple case
where the currently cheapest-to-deliver note eligible for delivery into the futures
contract does not pay any coupons between now and the expiration date of the
contract.17 In this situation, the implied repo rate IR is given by

                                       F −P   360
                                IR =        ×     ,                               (1)
                                         P     N

where F is the futures price for the cheapest-to-deliver note and P denotes the
current market price of that note. The futures price F is obtained by making
a small adjustment to the market futures price to back out the value of the
cheapest-to-deliver option the contract confers on the seller. The appendix de-
scribes the closed-form algorithm used to solve for the value of this option. In
general, the value of the option is very small due to the high correlation among
the notes that are eligible for delivery into the five-year Treasury note futures
contract.
     Figure 1 plots the time series of implied repo rates and repo rates during
the sample period. As shown, both implied repo rates and repo rates vary sig-
nificantly over time, with both taking their highest values during the 1990s, and
their lowest values during the post-2008 financial crisis period. Despite the wide
range of variation, however, Figure 1 shows that the implied repo rate is generally
higher than the repo rate throughout most of the sample period. This implies
that balance sheet costs exist throughout the sample and not just as a result of
17
  The cheapest-to-deliver note is the note with highest implied repo rate among
all notes eligible for delivery into the note futures contract. See Burghardt and
Belton (2005) and Choudhry (2006).


                                         15
post-crisis financial regulation.
     Table 3 presents summary statistics for the estimated balance sheet costs
which are computed as the difference between the implied repo rate and the repo
rate with the same horizon. The results show that the balance sheet costs are
predominantly positive throughout the sample period and are significant from
both a statistical and economic perspective. In particular, the average value of
the balance sheet costs during the entire sample period is 81.05 basis points. This
average value is highly statistically significant. Furthermore, the average value
of the balance sheet costs is positive for 23 of the 26 years in the sample period.
Overall, 82.68 percent of the balance sheet cost estimates are positive. For 16
of the 26 years in the sample period, the percentage of positive balance sheet
estimates is greater than 90 percent, including five years in which 100.00 percent
of the estimates are positive. On the other hand, a few years have relatively
small percentages of positive estimates, including years in which only 10 to 20
percent of the estimates are positive.
     These results have many important implications for financial markets. In
particular, they suggest that the cumulative effect of balance sheet constraints
effectively adds 81 basis points to the cost of capital of financial intermediaries.
To put these costs into perspective, we observe that the average term repo rate
during the sample period is 281 basis. Similarly, the cost of funding earning assets
for all U.S. banks as reported by the FDIC averages 256 basis during the same
period. Thus, the incremental shadow funding costs imposed by balance sheet
constraints are on the order of 30 percent of the total direct funding costs faced
by U.S. financial intermediaries. Far from being a minor friction, balance sheet
costs of this magnitude clearly have the potential to be of first-order importance
in their effects on financial intermediaries and on asset pricing.

     Figure 2 plots the time series of balance sheet costs throughout the sample
period. The plot confirms that the balance sheet costs are predominantly posi-
tive. As shown, however, there is significant time series variation in their values.
The balance sheet costs typically lie in the range of zero to 200 basis points, but
there are clearly periods during which their values are higher or lower. Figure
2 also shows that many of the largest values appear to coincide with major dis-
ruptive events in the financial markets. For example, balance sheet costs spike
during the Mexican Debt Crisis, the Asian Financial Crisis, the Long-Term Cap-
ital Management Crisis, the 2008 Financial Crisis, and the European Sovereign
Debt Crisis. In contrast, the period from January 1999 to April 2002 is partic-
ularly noteworthy since the average value of the balance sheet costs is slightly
negative during this period.




                                        16
           7. THE IMPACT OF CAPITAL CONSTRAINTS


In this section, we explore the relation between the estimated balance sheet costs
and the capital constraints faced by financial intermediaries. We first examine
whether the balance sheet costs reflect the cost of debt and equity capital of
financial institutions. We then examine whether the balance sheet costs are
related to the amount of capital that financial institutions are constrained to
hold.

7.1 The Cost of Capital

If financial institutions shift their capital structures towards longer-term financ-
ing and/or higher levels of equity as a result of tighter balance sheet constraints,
then we would expect that balance sheet costs should reflect the costs of these
sources of funds. To provide a specific example, consider the case of a broker-
dealer that holds Treasury bonds in inventory. Even if most of the Treasury
bond position is financed using a secured repo loan, the broker-dealer may re-
quire additional capital because of the haircut on the repo loan and Basel III
supplementary leverage ratio requirements. To the extent that the cost of this
additional capital exceeds the cost of secured repo financing, the financial insti-
tution will view the incremental expense as a balance sheet cost. To explore this,
we regress the balance sheet costs on various measures of the cost of debt and
equity capital for financial institutions.

     As proxies for the cost of equity, we use the average earnings/price ratio
and the dividend yield for the banks in the banking industry portfolio defined
by the Fama-French 49 industry classification. To reflect the possibility that
regulatory capital and liquidity requirements may require financial institutions
to reduce debt rollover risk by using more stable longer-term borrowing, we also
include the slope of the term structure as measured by the difference between
the ten-year and three-month Treasury rates. To capture the credit dimension
of the cost of a financial institution’s capital, we include several credit spread
measures. The first is a measure of the marginal funding cost for financial assets
faced by banks. This measure is computed as the quarter-over-quarter change in
the average funding cost for earning assets of all banks reported by the FDIC.18
By including the change in the average, this measure reflects the incremental
funding costs that a bank would face in acquiring new financial assets. The
second is the spread between three-month Libor and three-month Treasury rates.
This important spread—known as the TED spread—reflects the incremental cost
18
  The funding cost for earning assets is defined as total interest expense paid on
deposits and other borrowed money as a percentage of average earning assets.
See https://www.fdic.gov/bank/ analytical/qbp/glossary.html.


                                        17
faced by banks that borrow short-term funds in the Libor market. The third is
the ten-year swap spread which reflects the longer-term incremental funding costs
for financial institutions relative to Treasury borrowing costs. Table A1 of the
appendix describes each of the variables and the associated data sources.

     Some of the time variation in balance sheet costs could also be due to sea-
sonality in the way that financial information is reported. In particular, financial
information is typically reported to regulators on a quarterly cycle (for example
in quarterly call reports). Other disclosures occur on an annual cycle. Thus,
compliance with capital requirements and other regulatory constraints may be
assessed on a periodic basis as financial information is made public. In addition,
there is an extensive literature discussing the incentives firms may have to engage
in the practice of “window dressing” in which they may improve the appearance
of their balance sheets by temporarily reducing their holdings of securities or
their leverage for key reporting dates.19 In that case, balance sheet constraints
could be less binding at some times than others. We control for this possibility
in the regression by including quarter-end dummy variables.

     We begin by first computing monthly averages of the balance sheet costs
throughout the sample period. We then regress these monthly measures of bal-
ance sheet costs on the cost of capital variables described above as well as on
dummy variables that take a value of one for the months of March, June, Septem-
ber, and December that mark the end of the quarter or year, and zero otherwise.
We also include the lagged values of the balance sheet cost measure as a control
for time series dependence in the dependent variable of the regression.
     Table 4 reports the results from the regression. The results provide strong
support for the hypothesis that there are seasonal effects in balance sheet costs.
In particular, the coefficient for the December dummy variable is significantly
negative. The value of the coefficient indicates that the balance sheet costs are
roughly 44 basis points lower at year end than during other months. Intuitively,
this result makes sense since if security broker-dealers engage in year-end window
dressing, then they may actually be less financially constrained during December.
In turn, this implies that their marginal balance sheet costs could be lower in
December, consistent with these empirical results. Similarly, the coefficient for
the September quarter-end dummy variable is significantly negative (at the ten-
percent level).

     The regression results also provide strong support for the hypothesis that
the estimated balance sheet costs reflect the cost of debt and equity capital for
financial institutions. The coefficient for the earnings/price measure is positive
19
  For example, see Griffith and Winters (1997), Copeland, Martin, and Walker
(2014), Owens and Wu (2014), and Munyan (2015).


                                        18
and statistically significant. The positive sign of this coefficient suggests that
balance sheets costs increase directly with the required rate of return on equity
capital. This result is not only very intuitive, but is also fully consistent with
the interpretation that regulatory capital requirements impose significant costs
on financial institutions that carry over into their implicit financing terms.

     The coefficient for the slope of the term structure is also positive and sig-
nificant, indicating that balance sheet costs increase as it becomes more costly
to borrow longer-term funds. Similarly, the coefficient for the marginal funding
costs for earning assets is positive and significant. Finally, the coefficient for the
Libor-Treasury spread is positive, but is only significant at the ten-percent level.
Together, these results provide strong evidence that balance sheet costs increase
as the cost of debt capital increases. This is again intuitive and consistent with
the hypothesis that regulatory capital requirements are costly and reflected in
implicit borrowing rates.
     Finally, the monthly balance sheet cost measures display a significant degree
of persistence over time. In particular, the coefficient on the lagged balance sheet
cost measure is 0.5534 and highly significant.

7.2 Capital Requirements
The previous section showed that the cost of capital is correlated with balance
sheet costs. In this section, we explore the closely-related issue of how balance
sheet costs are related to the capital held by financial intermediaries. In par-
ticular, we focus on the relation between estimated balance sheet costs and the
key capital and equity ratios that play central roles in the current Basel III reg-
ulatory environment. Even though we focus on this set of ratios, however, it is
important to observe that regulatory capital requirements are present throughout
the entire sample period—not just since the Basel III framework was adopted.
In particular, Tier 1 capital ratio and total capital ratio requirements were im-
plemented with Basel I in the early 1990s, and the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation Act (FDICA) from December 1991 included leverage restrictions.
A three percent leverage ratio was part of the Basel II capital rules from the
early 2000s. The timeline in Table 1 illustrates that financial institutions have
continuously faced varying types of capital requirements during the sample pe-
riod. Furthermore, financial institutions that appear too leveraged are always at
risk for downgrades by credit rating agencies or may face higher margin require-
ments and haircuts from their counterparties. Thus, financial institutions face
both explicit and implicit capital requirements.

     Intuitively, it is clear that an increase in the amount of capital held by a
financial institution should be directly related to their balance sheet costs. This
follows since increases in capital ratios are likely driven primarily by tighter

                                         19
regulatory capital requirements. The tighter the requirements, the higher is the
marginal balance sheet cost of acquiring additional financial assets. Thus, we
would expect to see a positive relation between capital ratios and balance sheet
costs.

     We include five key capital and equity ratios in our first regression analysis.
Specifically, we select capital ratios based on Tier 1 capital, total capital, and
equity capital because these variables were key components of capital regulation
starting with the Basel I framework and the FDICA in the early 1990s, almost
two decades before the set of rules introduced in the wake of the financial crisis.
The first is the Tier 1 Capital Ratio which is defined as total Tier 1 capital
as a percentage of total risk-weighted assets. The second is the Core Capital
Ratio which is defined as total Tier 1 capital as a percentage of average total
assets minus ineligible intangibles. The third is the Equity Ratio which is defined
as total equity capital as a percentage of total assets. Fourth, the Total Capital
Ratio is defined as total risk-based capital as a percentage of risk-weighted assets.
The fifth is total equity of broker-dealers expressed as a percentage of total assets,
where we first subtract out all repo positions from the aggregate broker-dealer
balance sheet. All of these capital ratios are quarterly averages over all banks or
broker-dealers and are obtained from either the FDIC or the Z.1 flow of funds
data from the Federal Reserve Board. Table A1 of the appendix provides the
definitions and sources of these ratios.

     Table 5 reports the results from regressing the balance sheet costs (averaged
over the quarter) on the contemporaneous change and first two lagged changes
in the individual capital ratios. We focus on changes in order to gauge the effect
of marginal changes in capital requirements on balance sheet costs. As before,
we include the lagged dependent variable to control for time series effects. We
also use fixed effects by quarter of the year to control for potential seasonality.
Specifically, we include a dummy variable that takes a value of one for the first
quarter, and zero otherwise, a dummy variable that takes a value of one for
the second quarter, and zero otherwise, etc. The regression is estimated at a
quarterly frequency.
     The regression results strongly support the hypothesis that balance sheet
costs increase as financial institutions are required to hold additional capital. In
particular, the coefficient for the contemporaneous change in the capital ratio is
positive and significant in each of the five regressions. Furthermore, the magni-
tudes of the coefficients are economically significant. For example, an increase in
the Tier 1 Capital Ratio of one percentage point (say from five to six percent)
translates into an increase of 85.67 basis points in the estimated balance sheet
costs over the quarter.



                                         20
    8. DO BALANCE SHEET COSTS HAVE REAL EFFECTS?


In this section, we extend the analysis to examine whether balance sheet costs
have real effects on financial intermediaries. In particular, we study whether
balance sheet costs affect the asset holding and leverage decisions of financial
intermediaries.
     Intuitively, we would expect that as it becomes more expensive for financial
institutions to own Treasury securities on their balance sheet, they would reduce
their holdings of Treasuries. To examine this hypothesis, we collect data on the
aggregate Treasury bond holdings of broker-dealers using the flow of funds data
of the Federal Reserve Board.

     The effect of an increase in balance sheet costs, however, might not be limited
simply to holdings of Treasury securities. A financial intermediary might also find
it optimal to limit the size of its balance sheet by either selling assets or restricting
future asset growth. Alternatively, the financial intermediary could also choose
to limit the size of its balance sheet by reducing its leverage. As described by
Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) and Adrien and Shin (2010), the deleveraging
of institutional balance sheets played a major part in the aftermath of the 2008
financial crisis. To explore these effects, we also collect data on the growth rates
of assets and leverage ratios of broker-dealers using the flow of funds data of the
Federal Reserve Board.

     Since prices and quantities are determined jointly in equilibrium, it is im-
portant to specify the regression in a way that mitigates the potential effects of
endogeneity on the results. Accordingly, we examine whether changes in bal-
ance sheet costs are associated with subsequent (rather than contemporaneous)
changes in the broker-dealer variables. Specifically, we regress changes in each
of the broker-dealer variables on the first three lagged changes in that variable
and on the first three lagged changes in the balance sheet costs. As in previous
regressions, we also include quarter-of-the-year fixed effects.

     Table 6 reports the regression results. As shown, the results provide strong
evidence that balance sheet costs have real effects on financial intermediaries. In
particular, even after controlling for lagged changes in the dependent variables,
the lagged changes in the balance sheet costs have significant predictive power
for all three of the broker-dealer measures.

     Focusing first on the Treasury holdings regression, Table 6 shows that the
coefficient for the first lagged change in balance sheet costs is negative and highly
significant, while the second lagged change is also negative and significant (at the
ten-percent level). Thus, an increase in balance sheet costs is followed by a signif-


                                           21
icant decline in Treasury holdings. This intuitive result suggests that changes in
balance sheet costs directly impact the investment decisions and market-making
activities of financial intermediaries.

     Turning next to the asset growth rate regression, the results indicate that
the second lagged change in balance sheet costs has significant predictive power
for the asset growth rates of broker-dealers. In particular, the negative sign
of the coefficient implies that an increase in balance sheet costs is associated
with a significant decline in subsequent asset growth rates. Again, these results
are intuitive and consistent with financial intermediaries reducing investment
activities in the face of rising balance sheet costs.
     Finally, Table 6 shows that increases in balance sheet costs are associated
with declines in broker-dealer leverage. Specifically, the coefficient for the second
lagged change in balance sheet costs is negative and significant, while the third
lagged change is negative and significant (at the ten-percent level). Thus, these
results are consistent with a scenario in which financial intermediaries respond
to increases in balance sheet costs by deleveraging their balance sheets.

     Finding that balance sheet costs have real effects on financial intermediaries
has many important implications for asset pricing and markets. For example, if
an increase in balance sheet costs results in market makers holding fewer Trea-
suries in inventory, then the liquidity of the Treasury market could suffer. This
is consistent with Duffie (2017) who argues that increases in the capital require-
ments of bank-affiliated dealers have drained liquidity from over-the-counter mar-
kets, especially for products that occupy a lot of space on dealer balance sheets
such as bonds and repo. Similarly, finding that financial institutions reduce as-
set growth and/or deleverage when balance sheet costs increase suggests that
these costs could directly impact the willingness of financial intermediaries to
make new loans or extend credit. For example, from a recent article by Marlin
(2017):20

     Earlier this year, a large international bank reluctantly jettisoned one
     of its US lending portfolios. The loans were perfectly healthy and would
     have remained on the firms books were it not for the capital they required
     under the US Federal Reserves Comprehensive Capital Analysis and
     Review (CCAR).

As discussed by Schularick and Taylor (2012) and others, the historical evidence
points to a link between credit availability and business fluctuations.

20
  See https://www.risk.net/risk-management/5311911/in-a-bind-how-ccar-con
strains-us-bank-strategy.


                                         22
          9. THE EFFECTS ON DERIVATIVES MARKETS


Given that the real effects of balance sheet costs on financial intermediaries have
important implications for liquidity in the cash markets, a natural next step is to
explore the effects that balance sheet costs may have on derivatives markets. In
this section, we examine the relation between balance sheet costs and the demand
for two types of derivatives that allow investors to take synthetic positions in
bonds—interest rate swaps and Treasury note futures.

     In principle, an increase in balance sheet costs could have multiple effects
on the derivatives market. Intuitively, if a financial intermediary were to face an
increase in its balance sheet costs, the intermediary could have short-term incen-
tives to swap out of cash positions into synthetic derivative positions, potentially
resulting in a temporary increase in the demand for derivatives. In equilibrium,
however, the implicit rental rate in derivatives should reflect the increase in bal-
ance sheet costs. Thus, the long-term effect of an increase in balance sheet costs
could be to reduce the demand for both cash instruments and derivative contracts
as financial institutions reduce their risk positions.

     We focus first on the effects of balance sheet costs on the demand for interest
rate swaps. Specifically, we collect data on the total notional amount of interest
rate swaps of all U.S. banks from the Federal Reserve flow of funds data. We
then regress the quarterly growth rate in the total notional amount on its first
three lagged values and on the contemporaneous and first three lagged changes
in balance sheet costs. As before, we include fixed effects for quarters.
     Table 7 reports the regression results. As shown, the coefficient for the
contemporaneous change in balance sheet costs is positive and significant at the
ten-percent level. The coefficient for the first lagged change in balance sheet
costs is also positive and highly significant. These results are consistent with the
notion that an increase in balance sheet costs may provide financial institutions
with short-term incentives to substitute derivatives for cash positions.

     In contrast, the coefficient for the third lagged change in balance sheet costs
is negative and significant at the ten-percent level. This result, in conjunction
with the results in the previous section about the effects on the Treasury holdings
of broker-dealers, provides support for the view that increases in balance sheet
costs may induce financial institutions to scale back their risk-taking activities.
This clearly has major implications not only for financial markets, but also for
monetary policy authorities and regulators.

    We turn next to the relation between balance sheet costs and the use of
Treasury futures contracts. Specifically, we explore the effects of an increase in


                                        23
balance sheet costs on the open interest in the Treasury note futures market.
We focus on open interest rather than trading volume since open interest reflects
overnight positions that are subject to clearing and margin restrictions. In con-
trast, trading volume may include intraday positions that are closed out rapidly
without carrying costs.

     In particular, we regress changes in open interest on its own lagged val-
ues, and contemporaneous and lagged changes in trading volume, average initial
margin requirements, and changes in balance sheet costs. We also include month-
of-the-year fixed effects (a dummy variable that takes a value of one in January,
and zero otherwise, a dummy variable that takes a value of one for February, and
zero otherwise, etc.). The regression is estimated at a monthly frequency.

     Table 8 reports the regression results. As indicated, there is a significant
positive relation between open interest and lagged trading volume. This makes
sense of course since trading activity is a prerequisite for increased open interest.
The results for the relation between open interest of Treasury note futures and
balance sheet costs closely parallel those for interest rate swaps. In particular, the
coefficient for the contemporaneous change in the balance sheet costs is positive
and significant at the ten-percent level. By contrast, the coefficient for the second
lagged change in balance sheet costs is negative and significant. This mirrors the
notion that an increase in balance sheet costs is associated with a short-term
increase in demand for synthetic positions, but also results in a decline in long-
term demand for risk positions.


             10. COMMONALITIES ACROSS MARKETS


In previous sections, we have shown that balance sheet costs create a wedge be-
tween the funding costs implicit in Treasury note futures and the direct financing
costs of Treasury notes in cash markets. An important question is if similar ef-
fects could be present in other markets in which these intermediaries participate,
when financial intermediaries face tight capital constraints.

     One important market in which fixed income broker-dealers are likely to
trade is the interest rate swap market. As of the end of 2016, the Bank for
International Settlements reports that the total notional size of interest rate
swap contracts outstanding was in excess of $275 billion. As discussed earlier,
receiving fixed in an interest rate swap can be viewed as a synthetic position in a
fixed rate bond, while paying fixed in a swap is the equivalent of a short position.
Thus, abstracting from Libor and swap counterparty credit risk issues, the spread
between swap rates and Treasury yields—known as the swap spread—may also
reflect the impact of the balance sheet costs faced by intermediaries in the fixed

                                         24
income markets (see Klingler and Sundaresan (2016) and Jermann (2016)).
     To explore this, we collect data on swap spreads from the Bloomberg system.
We then regress changes in swap spreads for maturities ranging from 5 to 30 years
on their lagged values, and on the contemporaneous and lagged changes in the
two-year swap spread and balance sheet costs. We include the lagged values of
the dependent variable to control for potential time series effects and changes
in the two-year swap spread to control for the possibility that variation in swap
spreads includes a common liquidity component.21

     Table 9 reports the regression results. As shown, even after controlling for
potential time series and liquidity effects, the coefficient for the first or second
lagged change in the balance sheet costs is positive and statistically significant for
all maturities (the only exception is the five-year swap spread regression in which
the coefficient for the second lagged change in balance sheet costs is positive, but
just short of significance at the ten-percent level).
     These results provide support for the hypothesis that balance sheet costs
may affect funding spreads between synthetic and cash positions in multiple
markets. In particular, these results suggest that variation in balance sheet costs
has predictive power for subsequent changes in swap spreads. Furthermore, the
positive sign of the significant coefficients is consistent with increases in balance
sheet costs leading to higher spreads between the funding costs of derivative and
cash markets.

     It is important to acknowledge, however, that these results are limited in
scope. In particular, it is clear from the relatively low adjusted R2 s of the
regressions that swap spreads are driven by factors other than the funding spread
between Treasury notes and Treasury note futures. Thus, the spread between
the funding costs in the Treasury note and Treasury note futures markets may
not provide a full explanation for all differences between cash and derivatives
markets. On the other hand, market participants are increasing concerned about
spillovers from the repo market to the swap market. For example, from a recent
article by Wood (2017):22

     The future health of over-the-counter derivatives trading is increasingly
     dependent on the ailing repo market, buy- and sell-side participants have
     warned. Ties between the two markets are not new, but the growing

21
  For example, Liu, Longstaff, and Mandell (2006) find a significant liquidity
component in swap spreads for horizons beyond a few years.
22
  See https://www.risk.net/derivatives/5263741/swaps-markets-health-seen-as-
resting-on-sickly-repo.


                                         25
    need for collateral to support both cleared and non-cleared OTC trading
    means swaps market participants are more reliant on the ability both
    to exchange cash and securities via repo and to continue rolling those
    repo transactions over—roughly 70% of the 2.2 trillion dollar US repo
    market.


Nonetheless, these results indicate that the funding costs associated with bal-
ance sheet constraints may provide at least a partial explanation for asset pricing
anomalies that are difficult to reconcile with standard asset pricing theory such
as the pricing differences between CDS contracts and corporate bonds (Duffie
(2010)), deviations from covered interest rate parity (Brunnermeier, Nagel, and
Pedersen (2008), Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2017)), the relative pricing of in-
flation swaps and Treasury Inflation Protected Securities or TIPS (Fleckenstein,
Longstaff, and Lustig (2014)), or violations of the martingale property in stock
index options (Longstaff (1995)).


                              11. CONCLUSION


Recent theory argues that the funding frictions and capital constraints faced by
financial intermediaries not only create limits to arbitrage, but may also have
major asset pricing implications through their effects on stochastic discount fac-
tors. To date, however, it has proven difficult to quantify the impact of these
balance sheet constraints on the funding costs of financial intermediaries.

     We propose a novel new measure of these balance sheet or shadow funding
costs that is based on the implicit cost of renting intermediary balance sheet
space. Specifically, we estimate balance sheet costs using the implied repo rate
in Treasury note futures and the term repo rate for financing cash Treasury note
positions. The difference between these on- and off-balance-sheet financing rates
provides a direct measure of the shadow costs of balance sheet constraints.

     We find that these indirect balance sheet costs are significant relative to the
direct funding costs of financial institutions. On average, balance sheet costs
add 81 basis points to the effective cost of capital of financial intermediaries.
We verify that our measure of balance sheet costs is related to the cost of debt
and equity of financial intermediaries. We find that increases in balance sheet
costs are associated with declines in banks’ holdings of Treasury securities as
well as with declines in their leverage and asset growth rates. These results
strongly support the view that balance sheet constraints can have major effects
on market liquidity and on risk-taking by financial institutions which, in turn,
may have important implications for the macroeconomy.

                                        26
     The results also have implications for derivatives markets. Balance sheet
costs create a wedge between the funding costs of on- and off-balance-sheet in-
vestments. Thus, balance sheet costs have the potential to help resolve a number
of perplexing asset pricing puzzles involving the relative pricing of cash market
securities and their derivative market counterparts.

     Finally, having a direct measure of the impact of capital constraints and
regulatory requirements on financial institutions provides a simple way for mon-
etary policy authorities, regulators, and other market participants to assess the
impact of these constraints on financial markets and the economy. Our results
suggest that these impacts can be large, but also vary significantly through time.




                                       27
                                 APPENDIX



A.1 Data Sources

Table A1 provides a description of all the data and variables used in the study
along with their definitions and corresponding sources for the data.


A.2 The Impact of Direct and Synthetic Positions on SLR and LCR

Tables A2 and A3 present illustrative examples of the differential impact on an
institution’s balance sheet and SLR and LCR ratios resulting from taking direct
vs. synthetic positions in Treasury securities.


A.3 The Treasury Note Futures Contract

U.S. Treasury futures are standardized contracts for the purchase and sale of
notes and bonds issued by the U.S. Treasury and are traded on the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange (CME).

     The markets for Treasury notes and bonds futures are among the largest
and most liquid in the world. The contracts were first listed in 1977 with the
introduction of the 20-year U.S. Treasury bond futures contract. Over time, other
maturities were introduced, with trading in ten-year, five-year, and ultra-long
Treasury note and bond futures contracts beginning in 1982, 1988, and 2010,
respectively. Since inception, the Treasury note and bond futures market has
exhibited significant growth. Average daily trading volume is currently in excess
of two million contracts per day, with most trading taking place in five-year and
ten-year contracts. The average daily trading volume increased significantly from
roughly 20,000 contracts in 1991 to more than 700,000 contracts in 2016. The
CME reports that transaction volume (measured as aggregate notional trading
volume in the five-year Treasury futures contracts as a percentage of notional
trade by primary dealers in the cash market for five-year Treasury notes) exceeded
62 percent at the end of 2015.

     In this study, we use the five-year Treasury note futures contract which
requires the seller to deliver a $100,000 par amount of a U.S. Treasury note at
expiration of the futures contract. The specific notes eligible for delivery into
the futures are published by the CME, and consist of Treasury notes with an
original maturity of not more than five years and three months and a remaining
maturity of not less than four years and two months as of the first day of the
delivery month. Futures prices are quoted in points ($1,000) and quarters of 1/32


                                       28
of a point with price increments of one-quarter of one thirty-second (1/32) of one
point ($7.8125 rounded up to the nearest cent per contract). Listed contract
expiration months are the first five consecutive contracts in the March, June,
September, and December quarterly cycle. Treasury note futures cease trading
on the last business day of the contract expiration month and the last delivery
day is the third business day following the last trading day (detailed contract
specifications are available at www.cmegroup.com/education/about-us-treasury-
futures-and-options.html).

     The pricing of Treasury note and bond futures contracts is complex because
the seller has options to choose the timing of delivery as well as which bond to
deliver in fulfillment of the contract. The futures seller’s options with regard to
the time of delivery include the timing option (delivery can occur on any day
during the future’s expiration month), the wildcard option (intent to deliver can
be declared at any time during the day until the bond market closes, rather than
only during the shorter trading hours of the futures exchange), and the end-of-
month option (the futures cease to trade a number of business days before the
end of the month, but intent to deliver can occur until the last delivery date).
Moreover, the futures seller has the option (cheapest-to-deliver or quality option)
to deliver any bond among the bonds eligible for delivery. A large literature
analyzes how these options impact the prices of U.S. Treasury note and bond
futures contracts. See, for example, Carr (1988), Boyle (1989), Hegde (1989),
Hemler (1990), and Ritchken and Sankarasubramanian (1992).

     We choose the five-year Treasury note futures contract as opposed to a dif-
ferent Treasury note or bond futures contract for several reasons. First, Brandt,
Kavajecz and Underwood (2007) and Mizrach and Neely (2008) find that price
discovery in the Treasury futures market is most efficient for the five-year Trea-
sury note futures contract. In particular, Mizrach and Neely find that the con-
tribution of the five-year Treasury note futures contract to intra-day price dis-
covery in the futures and cash markets increases significantly after 1999 and
exceeds that of the ten-year contract by 2001. Overall, they show that the 5-
year Treasury cash note and the 30-year Treasury futures contract are significant
drivers of price discovery in the Treasury market. Brandt, Kavajecz, and Under-
wood study price discovery in the futures and cash Treasury market in response
to order flow and find that trades in the two- and five-year notes are signifi-
cantly related to both cash and futures price movements, whereas the impact
of trading in the 10- and 30-year securities is far less pronounced. Second, by
choosing the five-year Treasury note futures contract, we are reducing the im-
pact of the end-of-the-month option compared to other contract tenors. That is
because the futures seller has fewer days to exercise the end-of-the month option
in the case of the five-year futures contract. Specifically, the last trading day
for the five-year notes futures contract is the last business day of the delivery

                                        29
month, and the last day to declare intent to deliver is the first business day of
the next calendar month. In contrast, the 10-year Treasury note futures and
the Treasury bond futures contracts cease to trade on the seventh business day
before the last business day of the delivery month, and the short can declare
intent to deliver until the second business day before the last business day of
the delivery month. For details on the specific differences between the Trea-
sury note and bond futures contracts, see “Treasury Futures Delivery Options,
Basis Spreads, and Delivery Tails,” CME Group, September 2016, available at
https://www.cmegroup.com/education/files/treasury-futures-basis-spreads.pdf.


A.4 The Repo Market
A repo transaction is structured legally as a simultaneous agreement between
counterparties to engage in a sale of securities on an initial date, with a repurchase
of the securities by the initial seller at a later date. U.S. repo transactions are
typically documented with the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Asso-
ciation’s (SIFMA) Master Repurchase Agreement and the SIFMA/International
Capital Market Association (ICMA) Global Master Repurchase Agreement, but
there can also be customized agreements between repo counterparties.

     The economic effect of a repo transaction is similar to that of a secured loan.
In contrast to a secured loan, however, a repo transaction provides significant
protections to creditors from the normal operation of U.S. bankruptcy laws, such
as the automatic stay and avoidance provisions (11 U.S.C. paragraphs 362(b)(7)
and 546(f)). Consequently, in the event of insolvency, the counterparty holding
the securities (the cash lender) may liquidate the securities held, and accelerate
or terminate the agreement (11 U.S.C. paragraph 559).

      Copeland, Duffie, Martin, and McLaughlin (2012) estimate the outstanding
value of repo and reverse repo activity in the U.S. at $3 trillion and $2 tril-
lion, respectively. Comparable or even higher estimates are provided by Gorton
and Metrick (2012), Aitken and Singh (2010), and Baklanova, Copeland, and
McCaughrin (2015). Also see Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2014). Deal-
ers’ reliance on repo financing peaked in 2007 at 32 percent of total liabilities,
and has declined steadily since. Dealers have also extended the tenor and stag-
gered the maturity of their repo funding. While a substantial amount of repo
is still financed overnight, there has been a lengthening in the maturity of repo
funding, particularly for lower-quality collateral (see Baklanova, Copeland, and
McCaughrin). Despite the decline in repo activity by U.S. securities dealers and
U.S.–chartered banks, repo continues to be a significant source of financing for
U.S.–based foreign bank offices which is partly due to differences in regulation
(for example, see Mackenzie Smith (2016)). Between 2008 and 2014, repo and
fed funds liabilities of foreign bank offices in the U.S. have increased by over 20

                                         30
percent, bringing their reliance on this type of funding to 18 percent of total
liabilities as of the end of 2014 (Baklanova, Copeland, and McCaughrin).
     A repo trade involves the sale of an asset, with an agreement at the time
of sale to “repurchase” the same or an identical asset at a specified date in the
future. While legal title to collateral is transferred to the “buyer,” the accounting
treatment of a repo is as a financing transaction, and bonds given as collateral
remain on the repo seller’s balance sheet. In particular, the seller is entitled to
receive the security’s coupon interest. The repo buyer treats the repo transaction
as a secured loan.
     As a collateralized financing transaction, repos are on-balance-sheet trans-
actions. Repo interest is treated as payment of interest and is taken as a charge
on an accrual basis. The regulatory treatment of repo transactions is defined in
the Statements of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) in the United States.
Specifically, in SFAS 125, “Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial
Assets and Extinguishments of Liabilities,” repo transactions are classified as se-
cured loans (repos to maturity, however, are treated as sales and purchases of the
securities under SFAS 125 and not as financing transactions). For tax purposes,
the Internal Revenue Service treats the repo seller as the tax owner of the as-
set which means that the repurchase price differential is taxable interest income
to the purchaser and interest expense to the seller, and the reverse applies for
coupon interest (referred to as ”manufactured dividend”) during the term of the
repo which is taxable income to the repo seller (Internal Revenue Code, Section
864(e)).
     Under Basel I, the capital requirements for off-balance-sheet instruments
are significantly lower than under Basel III and Dodd-Frank. For instance,
interest-rate derivatives such as forward rate agreements (FRAs) and Treasury
bond futures of less than one year’s maturity had no capital requirements (see
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, “International Convergence of Cap-
ital Measurement and Capital Standards,” July, 1988, Annex 3, available at:
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs04a.pdf).
     Repo transactions are treated similarly to secured lending under Basel I and
are weighted according to the type of asset and not according to the type of coun-
terparty with whom the transaction has been entered into. Since repo is treated
as a secured deposit on the banking book, no counterparty risk exposure need
be calculated. Reverse repos (i.e. purchase and resale agreement where the bank
is the receiver of the asset) are treated as collateralized loans and risk is mea-
sured as an exposure to the counterparty. However, where the asset temporarily
acquired is a security which attracts a preferential risk weighting, this would
be recognized as collateral and the risk weighting would be reduced accordingly
(see Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, “International Convergence of

                                         31
Capital Measurement and Capital Standards,” July, 1988, Annex 3, footnote 1,
available at: http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs04a.pdf). The implications of Basel
II for repo transactions are for the most part minor, because the framework pro-
vides for collateralization to reduce credit risk exposure and thus to lower risk
based capital requirements. In contrast, the introduction of Basel III, and the
SLR in particular, imply substantial changes in terms of their regulatory capital
requirements.


A.5 The Basel III Framework

The Basel III framework, introduced by the Basel Committee in December 2010,
redefined regulatory capital, established a global leverage ratio, and increased
banks’ required risk-weighted capital ratios. In addition to tightening equity and
Tier 1 capital requirements, U.S. regulators increased the minimum leverage ra-
tio from three to four percent for all banks (the leverage ratio is measured as
Tier 1 capital to average consolidated assets). The supplementary leverage ratio
(SLR) was first introduced in June 2012 (finalized in July 2013) and applies to
large financial institutions with $250 billion or more in total consolidated assets,
or $10 billion or more in on-balance-sheet foreign exposures. Regulators set the
minimum of Tier 1 capital as a percent of total non-risk weighted exposures
at three percent. The SLR is calculated as Tier 1 capital divided by total ex-
posures (including some off-balance-sheet assets and derivatives exposures) and
total exposures have a risk-weight of one, regardless of whether assets have lower
risk weights in calculating risk-based capital ratios. Total exposure is defined as
the sum of on-balance-sheet assets; potential future exposure from derivatives;
repo-style transactions; and repo exposure when acting as an agent, less any re-
duction due to netting agreements. Total exposure is typically higher than total
on-balance-sheet assets (Allahrakha, Glasserman, and Young (2015) report that
for the largest top-Tier U.S. banks, total exposures are 44 percent greater than
total assets and 27 percent greater for all large U.S. banks). Netting rules also
became more stringent and banks were no longer allowed to net repo activity
because short-term wholesale funding transactions were required to be reported
on a gross basis, thus greatly reducing balance sheet efficiencies (netting rules
apply to qualified activities between banks/dealers).
     The SLR faces criticism from a number of large banks as a binding constraint
on their use of capital. In particular, the SLR requires that transactions in the
triparty repo market be included in the Basel III total exposure measure. This
can adversely effect banks’ leverage ratios and market participants expressed con-
cern that the SLR could negatively impact dealers’ participation in the triparty
repo market, a low margin business, where dealers and banks fund asset positions
from market making (Baklanova, Copeland and McCaughrin (2015)). Copeland


                                        32
et al. (2012, 2014) estimate that the estimated average share of triparty repo
activity attributed to primary dealers has declined from 90 percent to 80 percent
since 2012.

     In addition to the SLR, U.S. regulators introduced the Enhanced Supple-
mentary Leverage Ratio (eSLR) as an additional component in determining reg-
ulatory capital requirements. The eSLR, introduced in July 2013, increased the
capital buffer above the three percent supplementary leverage ratio to a mini-
mum of five percent of Tier 1 capital divided by total exposures for a covered
bank holding company. In addition, any insured depository institution that is
a subsidiary must maintain a minimum of six percent to pay out unrestricted
bonuses and dividends. The eSLR applies only to the largest, most complex U.S.
bank holding companies, those with assets of at least $700 billion or with as-
sets in custody of at least $10 trillion on a consolidated basis with their insured
banking subsidiaries. As of 2016, eight U.S. bank holding companies fit this
description. These same banks have been identified by the Basel Committee as
G-SIBs (the G-SIBs as of November 2016 are published by the Financial Stability
Board and are available at http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/2016-list-of-
global-systemically-important-banks-G-SIBs.pdf).
     In addition to stricter leverage ratio requirements, Basel III introduced the
liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) and the net stable funding ratio (NSFR). The
liquidity coverage ratio requires a banking organization to hold unencumbered
high-quality liquid assets that exceed its expected net cash outflows over a 30-
day stress period. Covered bank holding companies’ ratios must be equal to
or greater than one and cash outflows include repo activities of broker-dealer
subsidiaries. To qualify as high-quality liquid assets, assets must meet certain
operational requirements including that the assets be unencumbered and un-
der the control of the treasury function (Section 22, p. 61530 of the U.S. final
rule implementing the LCR, available at www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2014-10-
10/pdf/2014-22520.pdf). In particular, this requirement implies that the assets
cannot be financed in repo and must be available to the bank’s treasury function
to liquidate. The liquidity coverage ratio uses the same outflow rates to secured
funding transactions and haircuts to collateral. When a bank holding company
funds securities via repo, only outflows associated with the secured funding are
used in determining the LCR as the collateral would not meet the operational
requirements of high-quality liquid assets. Through this mechanism, repos can
negatively impact the LCR and bank holding companies may choose to move
away from repo transactions to fund less liquid high-quality asset positions. Al-
lahrakha, Cetina and Munyan (2016) document using data on tri-party repos
that following the 2012 introduction of the supplementary leverage ratio, broker-
dealers affiliated with bank holding companies decreased their repo borrowing
but increased their use of repo backed by more price-volatile collateral. In ad-

                                        33
dition to the LCR, the Basel III framework implemented the net stable funding
ratio which is a measure of a bank’s liquidity needs over a one-year horizon. The
NSFR matters for repo financing because U.S. bank holding company-affiliated
dealers that lend cash and receive collateral in the repo, are required to set aside
stable funding in the amount of ten percent of the repo loan to meet net stable
funding requirements.
A.6 Computing the Balance Sheet Cost Measure

The balance sheet cost measure is computed as the difference between the im-
plied repo rate implicit in the five-year Treasury note futures contract and the
corresponding term repo rate for the underlying Treasury notes. To provide
greater clarity, we will distinguish between the implied repo rate for the futures
contract and the implied financing rates for individual securities. Note, however,
that what we term implied financing rates are often referred to as implied repo
rates by practitioners.
     To solve for the implied repo rate, we use a multistep procedure. First, we
compute implied financing rates for each of the deliverable notes. Second, we
use these implied financing rates to identify the cheapest-to-deliver note. Third,
given this identification, we solve for the value of the cheapest-to-deliver option
embedded in the Treasury note futures contract. Finally, we adjust the market
futures price by the value of this option to obtain the futures price F and then
solve for the implied repo rate IR.

     Implied financing rates can be calculated for each day and for each note
eligible for delivery into the futures contract. Let the current (time-t) price of
the i-th deliverable Treasury note be Pi , where i = 1, ..., K denotes the i-th note
among the set of K notes that are eligible for delivery. For the present, we focus
on a specific deliverable Treasury note and omit subscripts except when needed
for clarity. Let I denote the price to be paid for the note at the time of its delivery
in N days (designated the invoice price), and denote the current Treasury note
price (clean price at settlement time) simply as P . Let IF denote the implied
financing rate associated with the delivery of the note in N days. The implied
financing rate is given by

                                       I −P   360
                                IF =        ×     .                              (A1)
                                         P     N

The first eligible delivery day for the five-year Treasury note futures is the first
business day of the contract delivery month. The short can declare intent to
deliver starting from the second business day before the first business day of an
expiring contract’s delivery month. The last trading day for the futures contract
is the last business day of the delivery month. The short must declare intent to

                                          34
deliver by the first business day of the calendar month following the contract’s
delivery month. The last delivery day is the third business day of the following
calendar month.

     If the deliverable Treasury note pays a coupon between trade settlement and
the delivery date, its implied financing rate is adjusted for coupon reinvestment
income. Standard practice is to assume that intermediate coupons are reinvested
at the implied financing rate, the note’s yield-to-maturity, or at the overnight repo
rate and rolled over. We adopt the first convention where the notes’ semi-annual
coupon C/2 is reinvested at the implied financing rate. Let N again denote the
number of days from settlement to delivery and let N 0 be the number of days
between the intermediate coupon payment and the delivery date. The implied
financing rate adjusted for the interim coupon is

                                  I + C/2 − P
                       IF =                           × 360,                   (A2)
                              (P × N ) − (C/2 × N 0 )

where C/2 is the semi-annual coupon of the note (see Choudhry (2006), p. 25).

     The Treasury note i ∈ {1, ..., K} with the highest implied financing rate
among the notes eligible for delivery into the futures contract is designated
cheapest-to-deliver (CTD) because it is the cheapest note to deliver into the
futures contract in terms of its carrying costs. The CTD can change over time
if there are changes in relative yield levels of the deliverable notes, if the shape
of the yield curve changes, or if specific issues trade on special in the repo mar-
ket. Benninga and Wiener (1999) show that in many cases, the CTD will be
the deliverable note with the highest coupon rate when yields are lower than the
five-year Treasury note future’s notional coupon of six percent, and that under
a flat term structure, the CTD has the shortest maturity of all deliverable notes
when yields are lower than the five-year Treasury note future’s notional coupon.
     The CTD can be delivered on any business day of the delivery month. How-
ever, delivery predominantly occurs either on the first day of the delivery month
or on the last delivery day of the month (Choudhry (2006) p. 92). As shown
by Bowen, Hawryzs, Sturm, and Zangrill (2016), physical delivery occurred only
for 2.7 percent of the open interest between March 1991 and December 2015.
Given this, we will assume that if the yield on the CTD currently exceeds the
implied financing rate, delivery is on the last business day of the month, other-
wise, delivery is the first business day of the delivery month. Let N F and N L
denote the number of days between the current date and the first and the last
business day of the month, respectively. Intuitively, delivery occurs on the last
day of the delivery month because the short future earns more by carrying the
note than by making delivery and investing the proceeds at money market rates.

                                         35
This delivery day convention is widely adopted in the academic literature and
allows us to abstract from wild card or timing options (see Kane and Marcus
(1986a, 1986b) and Hemler (1990)).

      When delivery occurs in N ∈ {N F , N L } days, we roll the futures contract
forward to the next futures maturity, and a new set of notes becomes eligible
for delivery. For instance, we roll the March 1995 futures over to the June 1995
contract on March 1, 1995, which is the first day of the delivery month, or
first delivery day. At any date prior to delivery, the reference futures contract
is the contract closest to expiration, which is designated the first-near futures.
Using the first-near contract is a common approach in the literature as this
roll methodology excludes futures trading activity in the delivery month which
might be affected by settlement induced illiquidity (see Brandt, Kavajecz, and
Underwood (2007) and Mizrach and Neely (2008)), as well as the shift in trading
activity from the current futures to the next nearby contract month (see Hemler
(1990) and Johnston, Kracaw, and McConnell (1991)).
     For brevity, we will refer to the implied financing rate of the CTD, as the
implied financing rate and use the following algorithm to identify the delivery
dates for each contract. On each date t and for each note i in the deliverable
basket i ∈ {1, ..., K}, we calculate the implied financing rate to the first delivery
date and the implied financing rate to the last delivery date. If the implied
financing rate to the first delivery date exceeds the implied financing rate to the
last delivery date, we assume that delivery of note i is on the first business day
of the delivery month and set N = N F . Alternatively, if the implied financing
rate to the first delivery date is less than or equal to the implied financing rate
to the last delivery date, we assume that delivery of note i is on the last business
day of the delivery month, N = N L .

     As described above, the deliverable note i from the set of i = 1, ..., K deliv-
erable notes with the highest implied financing rate is designated the cheapest-
to-deliver security. Without loss of generality, we index the CTD by j where,


                     IFj > IFi    ∀ i ∈ {1, . . . , K},   i 6= j.              (A3)


and where IFi is given by Equation (A1), or Equation (A2) if an interim coupon is
paid. Next, given the current CTD note and its delivery date in N ∈ {N F , N L }
days, the number of days to delivery of all deliverable notes is set to N . In
our sample, no designated CTD is delivered on the first delivery date and last
delivery is always optimal. Hence, this approach does not affect our results, but
it ensures that comparisons of the implied repo rate between eligible-for-delivery
notes use the same delivery date.

                                          36
     Obtaining the invoice price I in Equations (A1) and (A2) is straightforward
because the calculation is specified by the exchange. Specifically, the invoice
price of a deliverable note can be expressed as


                                I = M × CF + A,                               (A4)


where M is the current market futures prices, CF denotes the conversion factor
of the deliverable note, and A denotes the accrued coupon on the note from
its last coupon payment date to the delivery date in N days. Delivery invoice
conversion factors for Treasury futures are published by the exchange. For any
Treasury futures contract for a given delivery month, the conversion factors for
all deliverable grade securities are determined before the contract is listed for
trading, and remain fixed throughout the life of the contract. Note that the
notional coupon in the contract specification determines each deliverable note’s
conversion factor. Accrued interest is calculated using standard Treasury market
conventions on the basis of the actual number of days in the semi-annual interval
between the date of the last coupon payment preceding delivery and the date
of the next coupon payment following delivery. Accrued interest includes any
coupon interest that has accrued but has not been paid as of the delivery date.
Details on conversion factors and the calculation of the invoice price are provided
in Burghardt and Belton (2005) and Kronstein, Lao, Mirza, and Sturm (2016).

     As discussed earlier, in addition to the CTD or quality option, a short Trea-
sury note futures position also has a timing option which is the short’s right to
decide when to deliver during the delivery month. The futures contract confers
the right to the short to declare the intent to deliver at the end of the delivery
month after the futures contract has ceased trading. From the last trading day
through the last delivery date, the futures price used to calculate the invoice
price remains fixed at the last settlement price, while the prices of the deliver-
able issues and financing rates may fluctuate, thus potentially affecting which
note is cheapest to deliver. This option is referred to as the end-of-the-month
option. The wild-card option refers to the short’s privilege to declare intent to
deliver on any given day during the delivery month after the daily futures settle-
ment has been fixed, but the cash Treasury market remains open. Prior research
suggests that any effect from these timing options is expected to be of second-
or third-order importance and that the most significant impact on the futures
is due to the CTD option. For an overview of this literature, see Chance and
Hemler (1993). In addition, our results indicate that the value of the timing
option should be close to zero, because throughout our entire sample there is no
case in which early delivery on the first business date of the delivery month is
optimal.

                                        37
     We will make the mild assumptions that the timing option, the wildcard
option, and the end-of-month option are negligible. Furthermore, since the time
to expiration for all of the futures contracts in the sample is only on the order of
months, the difference between futures and forward contracts is easily shown to
be negligible. Accordingly, we will also abstract from forward/futures differences.

     We index the three notes with the highest individual implied repo rates
among the set of deliverable notes by j, k, and l, where j specifically denotes
the index of the note that is currently the CTD note. From Equation (A4), the
invoice prices for these notes can be expressed as


                    Ii = M × CFi + Ai ,              i ∈ {j, k, l}.            (A5)

Let P̃i , where i ∈ {j, k, l}, denote the prices of these bonds at the contract
expiration date in N days.
     Standard valuation results imply that the current market futures price is
given by solving for the implicit value of M that sets the expected cash flow to
the short from the futures contract equal to zero (for example, see Cox, Ingersoll,
and Ross (1981)),

                          h                                    i
                     0 = E max(Ij − P̃j , Ik − P̃k , Il − P̃l ) .              (A6)

This can be rewritten as,


       h        i   h                                                      i
  0 = E Ij − P̃j + E max(0, Ik − P̃k − (Ij − P̃j ), Il − P̃l − (Ij − P̃j )) . (A7)


The second expectation in this expression represents the value of the cheapest-to-
deliver or quality option. Let us denote the value of this second expectation by V .
Substituting in the definition of Ij , recalling that the expected value of P̃j under
the risk-neutral measure equals the futures price F of the cheapest-to-deliver
note (see Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross), and rearranging implies,


                             F = M × CFj + Aj + V.                             (A8)

    We model the CTD option as a three-asset exchange option which parallels
commonly used approaches in the literature. For example, Gay and Manaster
(1984) use a two-asset approximation to value the exchange option in the wheat

                                         38
futures market. Hemler (1990) extends Gay and Manaster to more than two
deliverable assets and applies the model to price Treasury futures contracts.
The value of the CTD option has also been studied by Benninga and Smirlock
(1985), Hegde (1989), Boyle (1989), Barnhill (1990), Kane and Marcus (1986a),
and Ritchken and Sankarasubramanian (1992). We note that while computations
for more than three assets could be done, the results in Hemler (1990) suggest
that there is little chance that the cheapest-to-deliver issue will not be among
the set of three currently cheapest-to-deliver issues.

    Let the random variables X ≡ Ik − P̃k − (Ij − P̃j ) and Y ≡ Il − P̃l − (Ij − P̃j )
be normally distributed. We denote their means by µX and µY , their variances
    2
by σX and σY2 , and the correlation by ρ. Define Z ≡ max(X, Y ). From Equation
(A9), we can express V as



                          V = E [ max(0, X, Y ) ] ,                             (A9)
                             = E [ max(0, max(X, Y )) ] ,                      (A10)
                             = E [ max(0, Z) ] .                               (A11)


From Equations (1) and (2) of Nadarajah and Kotz (2008), the density f(Z) of
Z can be expressed as


                                                             !
               1       −Z + µX        ρ(−Z + µX )     −Z + µY
       f(Z) =    φ               ×N       p       −    p
              σX          σX          σX 1 − ρ2      σY 1 − ρ2
                                                              !
                   1     −Z + µY        ρ(−Z + µY )    −Z + µX
                +    φ             ×N               −             , (A12)
                  σY       σY
                                           p            p
                                        σY 1 − ρ2     σX 1 − ρ2


where φ(·) and N (·) are, respectively, the probability density function and cumu-
lative distribution function of the standard normal distribution. Thus, the value
of V can be determined by straightforward integration,


                                                                !
                ∞               
                  1      −Z + µX        ρ(−Z + µX )    −Z + µY
            Z
       V =           φ             ×N               −
                 σX         σX
                                           p            p
            0                           σX 1 − ρ2     σY 1 − ρ2
                                                            !
               1      −Z + µY        ρ(−Z + µY )     −Z + µX
           +     φ               ×N     p        −    p         dZ. (A13)
              σY         σY           σY 1 − ρ2     σX 1 − ρ2

                                         39
Once we have solved for V , the futures/forward price F is given directly from
Equation (A8). The implied repo rate in Equation (1) is given by simply solving
for the interest rate that equates the present value of receiving F in N days to
the current price of the CTD note P .

     Evaluation of the density of Z requires the correlation matrix of the three
note prices P̃j , P̃k , and P̃l . We estimate these covariances from the historical
prices of the three cheapest-to-deliver notes for each futures contract. Specif-
ically, for each date t in the sample, we identify the three CTD notes for the
futures contract that we reference as per our roll methodology. For these three
CTD notes, we then collect all historical prices since issuance to date t from the
Bloomberg system. If there are more than 100 observations, we use a 100-day
window to compute the correlation matrix of changes in note prices. If there are
fewer than 100 observations, but more than 30 observations, we use all available
prices to compute correlations, and if there are fewer than 30 observations, we
use the last prior correlation matrix. Since the CTD status may change over
time, the correlation matrix may not necessarily be computed using the same set
of notes over time. However, our data shows very little variation in the set of
CTD notes (changes occur only on 56 days out of 6,640 days). Due to missing
note price data, prior correlations are used on 950 days. Our results are not
sensitive to alternative rolling window specifications.

     To evaluate the density of Z, we also use interest rate swaption volatility
data to estimate the covariance matrix of P̃j , P̃k , and P̃l . At each date t, we
linearly interpolate the swaption volatility surface obtained from the Bloomberg
system. To obtain annual basis point volatilities for the notes, we multiply the
n-month into m-year swaption volatility by the forward swap rate of the same
tenor which we calculate from the constant maturity swap (CMS) data using
standard techniques. For the period, May 1995 through December 1996, daily
swaption data is not available, and we use monthly data on one-month into four-
year, three-month into four-year, one-month into five-year, and three-month into
five-year swaption volatilities, obtained from the broker Tradition Inc.

     For the period from June 1991 to December 1995, swaption data is not
available, and we use monthly cap volatilities from Tradition Inc. To estimate
the covariance matrix from 1991 through 1995, we regress the swaption basis
point volatilities on the cap basis point volatilities for the period 1995 to 1999
where we have both cap and swaption volatilities and use the fitted regression to
estimate swaption basis point volatilities for the out-of-sample period from 1991
through 1995 where only cap volatilities are available.

     Specifically, we regress one-month into four-year, one-month into five-year,
three-month into four-year, and three-month into five-year swaption volatilities
on interest rate cap volatilities for maturities of one, two, three, four, five, seven,

                                          40
and ten years. The annual basis point volatility of an n-year cap is obtained by
multiplying the n-year swap rate by the n-year cap volatility. The annual basis
point volatility of n-month into m-year swaption is calculated by multiplying
the forward starting swap rate (one-month into four-year, one-month into five-
year, three-month into four-year, and three-month into five-year) by the quoted
swaption volatility of the n-month into m-year swaption.




                                      41
                                                           Table A1

Data Definitions and Sources.


         Data                                  Frequency   Description and Source


   1     Treasury Note Futures Data            Daily       Five-year U.S. Treasury Note Futures end-of-day closing prices, trading volume,
                                                           open interest, margin requirements, and the set of deliverable Treasury notes and
                                                           their conversion factors provided by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME)
                                                           and downloaded from the Bloomberg system.
   2     Treasury Note Data                    Daily       Five-year U.S. Treasury notes end-of-day prices, yields, coupon rates, issue, and
                                                           maturity dates from the Bloomberg system and identified by CUSIPS.
   3     Repo Rates                            Daily       General collateral overnight, and 1-week, 2-week, 3-week, 1-month, 2-month,
                                                           3-month, 4-month, 5-month, and 6-month term repo rates from the Bloomberg
                                                           system.
   4     Treasury CMT Data                     Daily       Constant maturity Treasury rates from the Federal Reserve H.15 Selected Interest
                                                           Rates Release.
   5     Discount Function                     Daily       Discount function out to 30 years bootstrapped from Treasury CMT rates as
                                                           described in Liu, Longstaff, Mandell (2006).
   6     Interest Rate Swaptions Data          Daily       Interest rate swaptions volatilities swaptions volatilities for n-month into m-year
                                                           contracts (n = 1, ..., 12 and m = 1, ..., 5) from January 1997 to December 2016.
                                                           Data from the Bloomberg system.
   7     Interest Rate Swaption Volatilities   Monthly     Proprietary data provided by a major broker dealer (Tradition Inc.) from June
                                                           1991 to December 1996 consisting of swaption volatilities on 1-month into 4-year,
                                                           3-month into 4-year, 1-month into 5-year, and 3-month into 5-year swaptions.
   8     CMS Swaps                             Daily       Mid market constant maturity swap (CMS) rates for maturities of 1, 2, 3, 5,
                                                           and 10 years from June 1991 to December 2016. Data from the Bloomberg
                                                           system.
   9     Interest Rate Cap Volatilities        Monthly     Proprietary data provided by a major broker dealer (Tradition Inc.) from June
                                                           1991 to December 1996 consisting of at-the-money cap volatilities for 1-, 2-, 3-,
                                                           4-, 5-, 7-, and 10-year maturities.
   10    Earnings/Price Ratio                  Monthly     Average earnings/price ratio for the banks in the banking industry portfolio
                                                           defined by the Fama-French 49 industry classification. Data from WRDS.
   11    Dividend Yield                        Monthly     Average dividend yield ratio for the banks in the banking industry portfolio
                                                           defined by the Fama-French 49 industry classification. Data from WRDS.
   12    Funding Cost                          Monthly     The basis-point change in the average cost of funding earning assets for all banks
                                                           as reported by the FDIC (https://www.fdic.gov/bank/statistical/).
   13    Term Structure Slope                  Daily       The basis-point difference between 10-year and 3-month Treasury rates.
                                                           Data obtained from the Bloomberg system.
                                              Table A1 - Continued


     Data                         Frequency       Description and Source


14   Libor-Treasury Spread        Daily           The basis-point difference between the 3-month Libor rate and the 3-month
                                                  Treasury bill rate. Data from the Bloomberg system.
15   Swap Spreads                 Daily           U.S. swap spreads for 2-, 5-, 7-, 10-, 15-, 20-, and 30-year tenors. Data from the
                                                  Bloomberg system.
16   Tier 1 Ratio                 Quarterly       Tier 1 capital as a percentage of risk-weighted assets. Data are averages over all
                                                  banks provided by the FDIC (https://www.fdic.gov/bank/statistical/).
17   Core Ratio                   Quarterly       Tier 1 capital as a percentage of average total assets minus ineligible intangibles.
                                                  Data are averages over all banks provided by the FDIC (https://www.fdic.gov/
                                                  bank/statistical/).
18   Equity Ratio                 Quarterly       Total equity capital as a percentage of total assets. Data are averages over all
                                                  banks provided by the FDIC (https://www.fdic.gov/bank/statistical/).
19   Total Capital Ratio          Quarterly       Total risk-based capital as a percentage of risk-weighted assets. Data are averages
                                                  over all banks provided by the FDIC (https://www.fdic.gov/bank/statistical/).
20   Non-Repo Capital Ratio       Quarterly       Total broker-dealer equity expressed as a percentage of total broker-dealer assets
                                                  (excluding repo positions from total assets). Data are quarterly and obtained from
                                                  the Federal Reserve Financial Accounts of the United States (Z.1).
21   Broker-Dealer Leverage       Quarterly       The ratio of broker-dealer assets to broker-dealer assets less broker-dealer
                                                  liabilities. Data are quarterly averages across all broker-dealers and reported by
                                                  the Federal Reserve in the Financial Accounts of the United States (Z.1).
22   Broker-Dealer Holdings       Quarterly       Outright positions in Treasury securities by broker-dealers. Data are quarterly
                                                  averages across all broker-dealers and reported by the Federal Reserve in the
                                                  Financial Accounts of the United States (Z.1).
23   Broker-Dealer Asset Growth   Quarterly       Quarterly percentage changes in total broker dealer assets. Data are quarterly
                                                  averages across all broker-dealers and reported by the Federal Reserve in the
                                                  Financial Accounts of the United States (Z.1).
                                                           Table A2

Example of the Impact from Direct/Synthetic Positions in a Treasury Security on the SLR. This table
example shows a financial institution (FI) subject to Basel III supplementary leverage ratio (SLR) requirements
that finances a $40m position in a Treasury Note using two alternative approaches. Under the first alternative, the
FI purchases the note outright and under the second alternative, the FI creates synthetic exposure via the futures
market. As shown, the FI fails to meet the SLR requirement of having a 5% leverage ratio using the direct approach.


                                                       Direct Position
                 Assets                                               Liabilities
                 Cash                                          11     Deposits                                182
                 5 Year Treasury Note                          60     Short-term Debt                          42
                 Lending to Banks                              30     Shareholders’ Funds
                 Housing loans with mortgages                  52     Ordinary capital                            7
                 Commercial loans                              64     Redeemable preference shares                3
                 Goodwill                                       3     Retained earnings                           8
                 Shareholding in other bank                     3     Revaluation reserve                         4
                 Fixed assets                                  25
                 General provision for bad debts              −2
                                                              246                                             246

                  Off-Balance Sheet                              0

                  Tier 1 Capital                                      Total Leverage Exposure
                 Ordinary capital (or equity)                    7    On-balance Sheet Assets                 246
                 Retained earnings                               8    Derivatives Exposure                      0
                 less Goodwill                                   3    Other Exposures                           0
                                                                18                                            246

                  SLR                                      4.88%

                                                    Synthetic Position
                 Assets                                               Liabilities
                 Cash                                          11     Deposits                                182
                 5 Year Treasury Note                          20     Short-term Debt                           2
                 Lending to Banks                              30     Shareholders’ Funds
                 Housing loans with mortgages                  52     Ordinary capital                            7
                 Commercial loans                              64     Redeemable preference shares                3
                 Goodwill                                       3     Retained earnings                           8
                 Shareholding in other bank                     3     Revaluation reserve                         4
                 Fixed assets                                  25
                 General provision for bad debts              −2
                                                              206                                             206

                  Off-Balance Sheet                             40

                  Tier 1 Capital                                      Total Leverage Exposure
                 Ordinary capital (or equity)                    7    On-balance Sheet Assets                 206
                 Retained earnings                               8    Derivatives Exposure*                     0
                 less Goodwill                                   3    Other Exposures                           0
                                                                18                                            206

                  SLR                                      5.83%
                   *
                    Derivatives Exposure is calculated as notional amount times an add-on Factor. The
                   add-on Factor is zero for interest rate contracts with remaining maturity of 1 year or less.
                                                              Table A3

Example of the Impact from Direct/Synthetic Positions in a Treasury Security on the LCR. This table
shows a financial institution (FI) subject to Basel III liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) requirements that finances a
$1m position in a Treasury Note using a repo transaction. As shown, the FI fails to meet the LCR requirement of
having a LCR ratio greater than 100% when it finances a virtually risk-free government bond position via repo. In
contrast, by creating a synthetic $1 exposure via the futures market, the FI’s LCR ratio would be unaffected.


                                  Synthetic Position in Treasury note via futures
        Assets                                                       Liabilities
        Gov. Bonds                                             5     Deposits                                                80
        Retail loans (due in 30 days or less)                 18     Shorterm funding (due in 30 days or less)               10
        Longterm loans                                        77     Longterm wholesale funding                              10
                                                             100                                                            100

         Off-Balance Sheet                                      1

         Capital In-/Outflows                                        High-Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA)
        Capital Inflows                                         9    HQLA                                                         5
        Capital Outflows                                       14
        Net Capital Flows                                       5

         LCR                                           100.00%


                                             Treasury note financed via repo
        Assets                                                      Liabilities
        Gov. Notes(1)                                         1     Repo                                                      1
        Gov. Bonds                                            5     Deposits                                                 80
        Retail loans (due in 30 days or less)                18     Shorterm funding (due in 30 days or less)                10
        Longterm loans                                       77     Longterm wholesale funding                               10
                                                            101                                                             101

         Off-Balance Sheet                                     0

         Capital In-/Outflows                                       High-Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA)
                           (2)
        Capital Inflows                                        9    HQLA(1)                                                       5
        Capital Outflows                                      15
        Net Capital Flows                                      6

         LCR                                            83.33%
          (1)
              For assets to qualify as HQLA, the assets cannot be financed in repo. Thus, when a FI is using repo to fund a
          security holding, only the outflows associated with maturing secured funding because the collateral fails HQLA
          requirements.
          (2)
              The LCR defines specific inflow and runoff rates, as well as haircuts. The calculations use the following: Inflow
          rate retail loan of 0%, HQLA haircut on government securities of 0% (applies to all U.S. Treasury securities),
          haircut on repo 100% (applies to all repos), runoff rate deposit of 5%, runoff rate wholesale borrowing of 100%,
          runoff rate repo borrowing of 100% (assuming repo with 30 days or less). These assumptions are consistent with
          Allahrakha, Cetina, Munyan (2016).
                              REFERENCES


Adrien, Tobias, and Nina Boyarchenko, 2012, Intermediary Leverage Cycles and
Financial Stability, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 567.

Adrien, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir, 2014, Financial Intermediaries and
the Cross-Section of Asset Returns, Journal of Finance 69, 2557-2596.
Adrien, Tobias, Michael Fleming, Jonathan Goldberg, Morgan Lewis, Fabio Na-
talucci, and Jason Wu, 2013, Dealer Balance Sheet Capacity and Market Liquid-
ity during the 2013 Selloff in Fixed-Income Markets, Liberty Street Economics,
October 16, 2013, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Adrien, Tobias, Michael Fleming, Or Shachar, and Erik Vogt, 2016, Market
Liquidity after the Financial Crisis, Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York.
Adrien, Tobias, Michael Fleming, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt, 2015, What’s
Driving Dealer Balance Sheet Stagnation?, Liberty Street Economics, August 21,
2015, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Adrien, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2010, Liquidity and Leverage, Journal of
Financial Intermediation 19, 418-437.

Aitken, James, and Manmohan Singh, 2010, The (Sizable) Role of Rehypothe-
cation in the Shadow Banking System, IMF Working Paper, No. 10/172.
Albanese, Claudio, and Leif Andersen, 2014, Accounting for OTC Derivatives:
Funding Adjustments and the Re-Hypothecation Option, Working paper, CASS
School of Business.

Allahrakha, Meraj, Jill Cetina, and Benjamin Munyan, 2016, Do Higher Capital
Standards Always Reduce Bank Risk? The Impact of the Basel Leverage Ratio
on the U.S. Tri-Party Repo Market, Working paper, Office of Financial Research.

Allahrakha, Meraj, Paul Glasserman, and H. Peyton Young, 2015, Systemic
Importance Indicators for 33 U.S. Bank Holding Companies: An Overview of
Recent Data, Office of Financial Research, OFR Brief Series, February.

Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 2000, Financial Contagion, Journal of Polit-
ical Economy 108, 1-33.
Andersen, Leif, Darrell Duffie, and Yang Song, 2016, Funding Value Adjustments,
Working paper, Stanford University.

Baklanova, Viktoria, Adam M. Copeland, and Rebecca McCaughrin, 2015, Ref-
erence Guide to U.S. Repo and Securities Lending Markets, Office of Financial
Research Working Paper No. 15-17, September.
Bao, Jack, Maureen O’Hara, and Alex Zhou, 2016, The Volcker Rule and Market-
Making in Times of Stress, Working paper, The Federal Reserve Board.

Baranova, Yuliya, Zijun Liu, and Joseph Noss, 2016, The Role of Collateral in
Supporting Liquidity, Staff Working Paper 609, Bank of England.

Barnhill, Theodore M., 1990, Quality Option Profits, Switching Option Profits,
and Variation Margin Costs: An Evaluation of their Size and Impact on Treasury
Bond Futures Prices, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 25, 65-86.
Basak, Suleyman, and Benjamin Croitoru, 2000, Equilibrium Mispricing in a
Capital Market with Portfolio Constraints, Review of Financial Studies 13, 715-
748.
Basak, Suleyman, and Anna Pavlova, 2013, Asset Prices and Institutional In-
vestors, American Economic Review 103, 1728-1758.

Benninga, Simon, and Michael Smirlock, 1985, An Empirical Analysis of the
Delivery Option, Marking to Market, and the Pricing of Treasury Bond Futures,
Journal of Futures Markets 5, 361-374.

Benninga, Simon, and Zvi Wiener, 1999, An Investigation of Cheapest to Deliver
on Treasury Bond Futures Contracts, Journal of Computational Finance 2, 39-55.
Bowen, Christopher, Joe Hawryzs, Frederick Sturm, and Anthony Zangrill, 2016,
The Treasury Futures Delivery Process, Tech. Report, CME Group.

Boyle, Phelim, 1989, The Quality Option and Timing Option in Futures Con-
tracts, Journal of Finance 44, 101-113.
Brandt, Michael W., and Kenneth A. Kavajecz, 2004, Price Discovery in the U.S.
Treasury Market: The Impact of Orderflow and Liquidity on the Yield Curve,
Journal of Finance 59, 2623-2754.
Brandt, Michael W., Kenneth A., Kavajecz, and Shane E. Underwood, 2007,
Price Discovery in the Treasury Futures Market, Journal of Futures Markets 27,
1021-1051.

Brenner, Menachem, and Dan Galai, 1986, Implied Interest Rates, Journal of
Business 59, 493-507.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., Stefan Nagel, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2008, Carry
Trades and Currency Crashes, ed. Kenneth Rogoff, Michael Woodford, & Daron
Acemoglu, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 23, 313-347.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2009, Market Liquidity and Fund-
ing Liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201-2238.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A Macroeconomic Model with
a Financial Sector, American Economic Review 104, 379-421.

Burghardt, Galen, and Terry M. Belton, 2005, The Treasury Bond Basis-An In-
Depth Analysis for Hedgers, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill Professional Publishing,

Carr, Peter, 1988, The Valuation of Sequential Exchange Opportunities, The
Journal of Finance 43, 1235-1256.
Chance, Don M., and Michael L. Hemler, 1993, The Impact of Delivery Options
on Futures Prices: A Survey, Journal of Futures Markets 13, 127-155.

Chen, Mirand, Praveen Korapaty, and Mahesh Swaminathan, 2016, What’s Bal-
ance Sheet got to do with Asset Prices?, Credit Suisse Fixed Income Research,
18 February, 1-18.

Choudhry, Moorad, 2006, An Introduction to Repo Markets, 3rd Edition, Wiley.

Chowdhry, Bhagwan, and Vikram Nanda, 1998, Leverage and Market Stability:
The Role of Margin Rules and Price Limits, Journal of Business 71, 179-210.

Copeland, Adam, Antoine Martin, and Michael Walker, 2010, The Tri-Party
Repo Market before the 2010 Reforms, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff
Reports, No. 477, November.
Copeland, Adam, Darrell Duffie, Antoine Martin, and Susan McLaughlin, 2012,
Key Mechanics of the U.S. Tri-Party Repo Market, FRBNY Economic Policy
Review November, 17-28.
Copeland, Adam, Antoine Martin, and Michael Walker, 2014, Repo Runs: Evi-
dence from the Tri-Party Repo Market, Journal of Finance 69, 2343-2380.

Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll, Jr., and Stephen A. Ross, 1981, The Rela-
tion Between Forward Prices and Futures Prices, Journal of Financial Economics
9, 321-346.

Danielsson, Jon, Hyun Song Shin, and Jean-Pierre Zigrand, 2011, Balance Sheet
Capacity and Endogenous Risk, Working paper, London School of Economics.
Du, Wenxin, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2017, Deviations from
Covered Interest Rate Parity, NBER Working Paper 23170.

Duffie, Darrell, 2010, Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital, Journal
of Finance 65, 1237-1267.
Duffie, Darrell, 2016, Financial Regulatory Reform After the Crisis: An Assess-
ment, Management Science, forthcoming.
Duffie, Darrell (2017), FVA: Off the Mark, Risk.net, 24 January 2017, available
at http://www.risk.net/cutting-edge/views/2480639/fva-off-the-mark

Eisfeldt, Andrea, and Adriano Rampini, 2009, Leasing, Ability to Repossess, and
Debt Capacity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 16 21-1657,

Engle, Robert F., Michael J. Fleming, Eric Ghysels, and Giang Nguyen, 2012,
Liquidity, Volatility, and Flights to Safety in the U.S. Treasury Market: Evidence
from a New Class of Dynamic Order Book Models, Federal Reserve Banks of New
York Staff Report No. 590.

Fett, Nicolas, and Richard Haynes, 2017, Liquidity in Selected Futures Markets,
Commodity Futures Trading Commission Working paper.
Fleckenstein, Matthias, Francis A. Longstaff, Hanno Lustig, 2014, The TIPS-
Treasury Puzzle, Journal of Finance 69, 2151-2197.

Fleming, Michael J., 2003, Measuring Treasury Market Liquidity, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review 9, 83-108.
Fleming, Michael J., and Asani Sarkar, 1999, Liquidity in U.S. Treasury Spot and
Futures Markets, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Market Liquidity Research
Findings and Selected Policy Implications.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos, 2008, Collateral Restrictions and Liquidity
Under-Supply: A Simple Model, Economic Theory 35, 441-467.

Gârleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2011, Margin-Based Asset Pricing and
Deviations from the Law of One Price, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4259-4299.
Gay, Gerald, and Steven Manaster, 1984, The Quality Option Implicit in Futures
Contracts, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 353-370.

Golez, Benjamin, Jens C. Jackwerth, and Anna Slavutskaya, 2017, Funding Illiq-
uidity Implied by S&P 500 Derivatives, Working paper, University of Konstanz.

Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick, 2012, Securitized Banking and the Run on
Repo, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 425-451
Griffiths, Mark D., and Drew B. Winters, 1997, On a Preferred Habitat for Liq-
uidity at the Turn-of-the-Year: Evidence from the Term-Repo Market, Journal
of Financial Services Research 12, 21-38.

Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets
with Financial Constrained Arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66,
361-407.
Gunther, Nicolas L., Robert M. Anderson, Lisa R. Goldberg, 2016, The Implied
Futures Financing Rate, Working paper, University of California, Berkeley.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2012, A Model of Capital and Crises,
Review of Economic Studies 79, 735-777.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, Intermediary Asset Pricing, Amer-
ican Economic Review 103, 732-770.
He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, 2016, Intermediary Asset Pricing:
New Evidence from Many Asset Classes, Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Hegde, Shantaram P., 1989, On the Value of the Implicit Delivery Options, Jour-
nal of Futures Markets 5, 421-437.
Hemler, Michael L., 1990, the Quality Delivery Option in Treasury Bond Futures
Contracts, Journal of Finance X, 1565-1586.

Holder, Mark E., and Sinha, Amit K., 2009, Bid-Ask Spread Determinants in
Treasury Note Futures Contracts at the Chicago Board of Trade, Journal of
Financial and Economic Practice (Fall), 1-14.

Holod, Dmytro, and Yuriy Kitsul, 2010, Capital Constraints and Systematic
Risk, Working paper, Federal Reserve Board.
Hull, John, and Alan White, 2012, The FVA Debate, Risk 25th Anniversary
Edition, July, 83-85.

Hull John, and Alan White, 2014a, Valuing Derivatives: Funding Value Adjust-
ments and Fair Value Financial Analysts Journal 70, 3 (May/June), 46-56.

Hull, John, and Alan White, 2014b, Collateral and Credit Issues in Derivatives
Pricing Journal of Credit Risk 10, 3, 3-28.
International Capital Market Association, 2015, Perspectives from the Eye of the
Storm: The Current State and Future Evolution of the European Repo Market,
ICMA Working paper, November 2015.

Jermann, Urban J., 2016, Negative Swap Spreads and Limited Arbitrage, Work-
ing paper, University of Pennsylvania.

Johannes, Michael, and M. Suresh Sundaresan, 2007, The Impact of Collateral-
ization on Swap Rates, Journal of Finance 62, 383-410
Johnston, Elizabeth T., William A. Kracaw, and John J. McConnell, 1991, Day-
of-the-Week Effects in Financial Futures: An Analysis of GNMA, T-Bond, T-
Note, and T-Bill Contracts, The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
26, 23-44.

Kane, Alex, and Alan J. Marcus, 1986a, The Quality Option in the Treasury
Bond Futures Market: An Empirical Assessment, Journal of Futures Markets 6,
231-248.

Kane, Alex, and Alan J. Marcus, 1986b, Valuation and Optimal Exercise of the
Wild Card Option in the Treasury Bond Futures Market, Journal of Finance 41,
195-208.

Kho, Bong-Chan, Dong Lee, and Rene M. Stulz, 2000, U.S. Banks, Crises, and
Bailouts: From Mexico to LTCM, American Economic Review 90, 28-31

Kiema, Ilkka, and Esa Jokivuolle, 2014, Does a Leverage Ratio Requirement
Increase Bank Stability?, Journal of Banking and Finance 39, 240-254.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit Cycles, Journal of Political
Economy 105, 211-248.
Klingler, Sven, and M. Suresh Sundaresan, 2016, An Explanation of Negative
Swap Spreads: Demand for Duration from Underfunded Pension Plans, Working
paper, Columbia University.

Kondor, Peter, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2015, Liquidity Risk and the Dynamics of
Arbitrage Capital, Working Paper London School of Economics.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2002, The Bond/Old-Bond Spread, Journal of Financial
Economics 66, 463-506.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2003, Collateral Constraints and the Amplification
Mechanism, Journal of Economic Theory 111, 277-292.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2010, Amplification Mechanisms in Liquidity Crises,
American Economic Journal – Macroeconomics 2, 1-30.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, Stefan Nagel, and Dmitri Orlov, 2014, Sizing Up Repo,
Journal of Finance 69, 2381-2417.

Kronstein, Jonathan, J. Lao, Agha Mirza, and Frederick Sturm, 2016, Treasury
Futures Delivery Options, Basis Spreads, and Delivery Tails, Tech. Report, CME
Group.

Kyle, Albert S., and Wei Xiong, 2001, Contagion as a Wealth Effect, Journal of
Finance 56, 1401-1440.
Liu, Jun, Francis A. Longstaff, and Ravit Mandell, 2006, The Market Price of
Risk in Interest Rate Swaps: The Roles of Default and Liquidity Risk, Journal
of Business 79, 2337-2360.

Longstaff, Francis A., 1995, Option Prices and the Martingale Restriction, Review
of Financial Studies 8, 1091-1124.
Mackenzie Smith, Robert, 2016, L’exception francaise: why French banks domi-
nate US repo trading, Risk.net, September 1, 2016, available at: http://www.risk.
net/derivatives/2469133/lexception-francaise-why-french-banks-dominate-us-re
po-trading.
Manaster, Steven, and Richard J. Rendleman, 1982, Option Prices as Predictors
of Equilibrium Stock Prices, Journal of Finance 37, 1043-1057.

Mizrach, Bruce, and Christopher J. Neely, 2008, Information Shares in the U.S.
Treasury Market, Journal of Banking and Finance 32, 1221-1233.
Munyan, Benjamin, 2015, Regulatory Arbitrage in Repo Markets, Working pa-
per, Vanderbilt University.

Nadarajah, Saralees, and Samuel Kotz, 2008, Exact Distribution of the Max/Min
of Two Gaussian Random Variables, IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale
Integration (VLSI) Systems 16, 210-212.

Naranjo, Lorenzo, 2009, Implied Interest Rates in a Market with Frictions, Work-
ing paper, New York University.
Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-
definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Correlation Matrix,
Econometrica 59, 703-708.
Omprakash, Anand, 2014, A New Normal in Equity Repo, Risk Management 29
(March), 20-23.

Owens, Edward L., and Joanna Shuang Wu, 2014, Quarter-end Repo Borrowing
Dynamics and Bank Risk Opacity, Working paper, University of Rochester.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2014. This Time is Different: A
Panoramic View of Eight Centuries of Financial Crises, Annals of Economics
and Finance, Society for AEF, vol. 15(2), pages 1065-1188, November.
Ritchken, Peter, and L. Sankarsubramanian, 1992, Pricing the Quality Option
in Treasury Bond Futures, Mathematical Finance 2, 197-214.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer, 2015, New Evidence on the Impact
of Financial Crises in Advanced Countries. NBER Working paper, No. 21021.
Ronn, Aimee Gerbarg, and Ehud Ronn, 1989, The Box Spread Arbitrage Con-
dition: Theory, Tests, and Investment Strategies, Review of Financial Studies 2,
91-108.

Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor, 2012, Credit Booms Gone Bust: Mon-
etary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008, American Eco-
nomic Review 102, 1029-1061.
Sharpe, Steven A., and Hien H. Nguyen, 1995, Capital Market Imperfections and
the Incentive to Lease, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 271-294.

Song, Zhaogang, and Haoxiang Zhu, 2016, Mortgage Dollar Roll, Working paper,
MIT.

Tuckman, Bruce, 2013, Embedded Financing: The Unsung Virtue of Derivatives,
Journal of Fixed Income 21 (Fall), 73-82.
Xiong, Wei, 2001, Convergence Trading with Wealth Effects: An Amplification
Mechanism in Financial Markets, Journal of Financial Economics 62, 247-292.
          12
                                                             Implied Repo Rate
                                                             GC Repo Rate
          10



           7
Percent




           5



           3



           0
               1992   1996     2000       2004       2008       2012         2016




     Figure 1. The Implied Repo and Term Repo Rates. This figure shows
     the implied repo rate from five-year Treasury note futures contracts and the
     corresponding term general collateral Treasury repo rate. The rates shown are
     monthly averages of daily rates.
               600
                             Black Wednesday                                  Lehman Brothers
                                Askin Capital                                 Contagion Fears
                                   Mexican Crisis            Fed Tightening         European Crisis
               440                          Asian Crisis                              US Downgrade
                                                LTCM


               280
Basis Points




               120



                -40



               -200
                      1992        1996          2000       2004       2008         2012          2016




               Figure 2. Balance Sheet Costs. This figure plots the time series of balance
               sheet costs which are computed as the difference between the implied repo rate
               and the corresponding term general collateral Treasury repo rate. Key finan-
               cial market events are superimposed on the plot. The balance sheet costs are
               expressed in basis points and are shown as monthly averages of daily values.
                                                       Table 1


Timeline of Major Events and Changes in Financial Regulation. This table presents a timeline of economic
events affecting financial markets and changes in financial regulations. Financial and economic crises are from Kho,
Lee, and Stulz (2000), Romer and Romer (2015), and Reinhart and Rogoff (2008). Data on financial regulation and
financial market conditions are from the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Federal Register, FDIC, and
the OECD Economic Outlook. The sample period is from June 3, 1991 to December 30, 2016.



      Dec    1991   •   FDIC Improvement Act — Regulators introduce new bank capital thresholds.
      Sep    1992   •   Black Wednesday — UK withdraws from European Exchange Rate Mechanism.
      Apr    1994   •   Askin Capital Management — Collapse sends shock wave through mortgage market.
      Dec    1994   •   Mexican Crisis — Mexico forced to devalue the Peso, receives IMF aid in January.
      Aug    1997   •   Asian Crisis — Thailand forced to devalue the Baht, receives IMF bailout.
      Aug    1998   •   Russian Financial Crisis — Russia declares default on government debt.
      Aug    1998   •   Long Term Capital Management Crisis — Federal Reserve organizes bailout of LTCM.
      Nov    1998   •   Crisis in Brazil — IMF steps in as capital outflows from Brazil surge.
      Jun    1999   •   Basel II — Basel committee proposes new capital adequacy framework.
      Nov    2002   •   Yield curve steepens as the Fed decreases the Fed Funds rate to 1.25 percent.
      Dec    2003   •   Long-term yields increase due to signs of monetary tightening and robust growth.
      Apr    2004   •   Net Capital Rule — SEC issues new rule to determine net capital for broker dealers.
      Jun    2004   •   Basel II — Final Basel II framework includes strict minimum capital requirements.
      Jun    2006   •   Basel II — Basel Committee finalizes rules for trading books of banks.
      Oct    2007   •   Subprime Mortgage crisis — Distress in interbank markets due to loan losses.
      Sep    2008   •   Lehman Brothers bankruptcy — Uncertainty about solvency of banks.
      Mar    2009   •   Fears of contagion from subprime markets and its impact on banks’ balance sheets.
       Jul   2009   •   Dodd-Frank Act — Proposal to establish strict bank capital and liquidity rules.
      Jan    2010   •   Collins Amendment — Proposal to establish Basel III leverage and capital rules.
      May    2010   •   European Debt Crisis — Fears of default from Portugal, Ireland, Greece and Spain.
       Jul   2010   •   Dodd-Frank Act signed into law, mandating strict capital requirements for banks.
      Nov    2010   •   European Debt Crisis — Bailout of Ireland, concerns about Portugal and Italy.
      Dec    2010   •   Basel III — Framework tightens banks’ capital and liquidity requirements.
      Feb    2011   •   European Debt Crisis — Greece receives second bailout and restructures its debt.
      Apr    2011   •   European Debt Crisis — Portugal receives IMF bailout, fears of contagion in EU.
      Aug    2011   •   S&P downgrades the credit rating of the United States.
      Jun    2012   •   Supplementary Leverage Ratio — Leverage includes on- and off-balance sheet risks.
       Jul   2013   •   Enhanced Supplementary Leverage Ratio — Stricter leverage rules for large banks.
      Oct    2013   •   Liquidity Coverage Ratio — Requirement for banks to hold liquid assets.
      Sep    2014   •   Supplementary Leverage Ratio and Liquidity Coverage Ratio finalized.
                                                                       Table 2

Summary Statistics for Five-Year Treasury Note Futures Contracts. This table presents summary statistics for the five-year Treasury note
futures contracts. Year and Months denote the year and contract expiration months during that year in the sample. Vol and Open denote the
average daily total trading volume and open interest across all Treasury note future contracts traded during the year. Min, Ave, and Max denote
the minimum, average, and maximum prices for the futures contracts during the year. Num, Time, and Coup denote the average number of notes
deliverable, the average time to maturity at issuance of the deliverable notes, and the average coupon rates for the deliverable bonds for all contracts
during the year. Init and Maint denote the average initial and maintenance margins for speculators for the year (expressed as dollars per contract).


   Year              Months             Vol         Open        Min         Ave       Max       Num        Time       Coup          Init     Maint


   1991                   9,   12     8,573        40,902      98.61     101.69     106.83      9.00     5.0146      7.5139         945        700
   1992         3,   6,   9,   12    11,380        57,358      99.91     105.02     111.61     12.00     5.0024      6.5243         945        700
   1993         3,   6,   9,   12    14,316        64,678     102.25     109.19     114.23     10.75     5.0014      5.3889         945        700
   1994         3,   6,   9,   12    22,769        75,976     100.34     106.79     113.03      9.00     5.0018      5.8889         945        700
   1995         3,   6,   9,   12    23,967        68,873      99.06     103.50     109.89      9.25     5.0032      6.8542         945        700
   1996         3,   6,   9,   12    19,385        60,077     103.72     107.29     111.41      9.50     5.0001      6.0486       1,215        900
   1997         3,   6,   9,   12    35,001        85,722     103.53     106.07     108.73     10.00     5.0013      6.2847       1,114        825
   1998         3,   6,   9,   12    37,762       128,845     106.09     109.66     115.97      8.50     5.0007      5.5608         996        738
   1999         3,   6,   9,   12    33,254       121,507     106.84     110.87     116.28      3.25     5.0009      5.1745       1,148        850
   2000         3,   6,   9,   12    46,641       191,548      96.41      98.81     103.16      2.50     5.0033      6.1198         890        638
   2001         3,   6,   9,   12    60,960       193,859      99.69     102.62     110.31      2.00     5.0027      5.1719       1,080        800
   2002         3,   6,   9,   12    99,575       278,873      99.95     103.35     114.34      2.50     5.0027      3.8125       1,316        975
   2003         3,   6,   9,   12   139,529       380,050      99.95     105.58     117.69      5.00     5.0020      3.1250       1,215        900
   2004         3,   6,   9,   12   180,234       508,081     100.00     108.82     115.19     10.50     5.0027      3.2879         979        725
   2005         3,   6,   9,   12   200,707       502,924     105.12     108.16     112.47     11.00     5.0016      3.7557         675        500
   2006         3,   6,   9,   12   227,845       467,887     102.88     105.84     109.20     10.50     5.0016      4.5040         540        413
   2007         3,   6,   9,   12   306,553       740,968     102.88     105.28     111.06     11.25     5.0028      4.5450         827        613
   2008         3,   6,   9,   12   346,137       840,356     103.17     109.66     122.30     11.00     5.0029      3.2926       1,586      1,175
   2009         3,   6,   9,   12   199,759       422,587     107.97     114.68     120.48     10.75     5.0010      2.2778       1,384      1,025
   2010         3,   6,   9,   12   258,682       423,986     110.10     115.55     122.25     11.00     5.0015      2.1591       1,131        838
   2011         3,   6,   9,   12   353,301       647,732     109.32     117.52     124.13     10.75     5.0035      1.6676       1,215        900
   2012         3,   6,   9,   12   275,396       656,619     112.60     121.19     124.95     10.25     5.0026      0.8849         810        600
   2013         3,   6,   9,   12   348,569       808,238     118.46     122.63     124.77     10.50     5.1841      0.8960         866        756
   2014         3,   6,   9,   12   392,439     1,002,394     117.70     120.13     124.42     11.00     5.1837      1.5028         990        900
   2015         3,   6,   9,   12   391,657     1,011,450     117.00     119.00     121.35     11.00     5.0026      1.4915         990        900
   2016         3,   6,   9,   12   381,187     1,196,905     103.00     116.63     122.51     10.75     5.0028      1.3497         949        863


   Average                          172,992      429,723       96.41     109.99     124.95       8.98    5.0166      3.9736     1026.23     783.58
                                                            Table 3

Summary Statistics for Balance Sheet Costs. This table presents summary statistics for the balance sheet costs. The balance sheet
costs are computed as the difference between the implied repo rate and the corresponding term repo rate and are expressed in basis points.
Positive denotes the percentage of observations that are positive. The columns with headings 5%, 50%, and 95% denote the 5th, 50th, and
95th percentiles of the distribution. N denotes the number of observations. The sample period is from June 3, 1991 to December 30, 2016.



       Year                   Mean          Positive        St. Dev.              5%            50%            95%             N


       1991                 119.94           100.00            70.62           40.43           95.60         262.08           148
       1992                 183.77           100.00           167.72           31.71          113.02         528.93           253
       1993                  46.85            83.79            69.89          −99.89           49.91         159.63           253
       1994                 165.89            99.21           132.68           40.41          124.32         467.30           252
       1995                 146.14            97.20           119.40            9.97           99.37         353.49           250
       1996                  86.96            96.43            52.77           17.47           78.57         174.41           252
       1997                 212.89           100.00           134.77           44.44          186.21         430.68           250
       1998                 125.20            95.60           117.25           11.21           89.20         359.27           250
       1999                 −53.48            16.40            52.64         −133.38          −62.48          29.46           250
       2000                 −17.49            41.27            68.04         −116.28          −31.02          98.02           252
       2001                 −71.97            10.71            67.53         −182.62          −65.04          13.27           252
       2002                  39.59            58.33           129.29         −143.07           32.88         295.14           252
       2003                 110.75            86.11           109.28          −37.14           97.64         347.82           252
       2004                 157.99            97.23           145.31            6.25          102.82         440.66           253
       2005                  28.37            76.40            40.60          −32.21           28.30          96.69           250
       2006                  22.51            73.20            43.09          −44.23           22.61          99.01           250
       2007                  25.51            76.89            50.89          −55.70           29.18          86.32           251
       2008                  63.18            61.66           196.91          −92.46           15.82         384.31           253
       2009                 181.82           100.00           113.72           72.31          143.83         429.02           252
       2010                 141.25           100.00            88.64           61.28          116.23         347.38           253
       2011                 107.57            98.81            79.26           25.90           88.72         284.04           253
       2012                  65.09            99.21            30.67           29.70           59.46         126.39           253
       2013                  66.69            98.02            35.57           17.15           64.91         118.06           252
       2014                  49.97            95.63            35.58            0.64           43.12         114.57           252
       2015                  57.48            97.63            33.86           11.90           55.83         107.76           253
       2016                  59.82            96.43            34.52           10.80           57.55         123.18           252


       All                    81.05           82.68           120.37          −78.24           63.32         332.13         6,443
                                                 Table 4

Results from Regressions of Balance Sheet Costs on Cost of Capital Measures. This table reports
the results from regressions of the balance sheet cost measure on its lagged value, on quarter-end dummy
variables, and on measures of the cost of debt and equity capital. Balance sheet costs are measured in
basis points. March, June, September, and December are dummy variables that take a value of one for
the respective months, and zero otherwise. Earnings/Price Ratio and Dividend Yield represent averages for
the banks in the banking industry portfolio defined by the Fama-French 49 Industry Classification. Term
Structure Slope denotes the basis-point difference between ten-year and three-month Treasury rates. Funding
Cost denotes the marginal cost of funding bank assets and is computed as the basis-point change over the
previous quarter in the average cost of funding earning assets for all banks as reported by FDIC. Libor-
Treasury Spread denotes the basis-point difference between the three-month Libor rate and the three-month
Treasury bill rate. Swap Spread denotes the ten-year swap spread measured in basis points. The superscript
∗
  denotes significance at the ten-percent level; the superscript ∗∗ denotes significance at the five-percent
level. The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West (1987) heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent
estimate of the covariance matrix (five lags). The sample period is monthly from June 1991 to December
2016.


             Variable                                          Coefficient              t-Stat


             Intercept                                          −22.4244                −0.06
             Lagged Cost                                          0.5534                 7.37∗∗

             March                                               13.9473                 0.67
             June                                               −19.0888                −1.08
             September                                          −20.3773                −1.68∗
             December                                           −43.6123                −2.06∗∗

             Earnings/Price Ratio                               286.4263                 2.26∗∗
             Dividend Yield                                    −203.9691                −0.10
             Term Structure Slope                                 0.1535                 2.29∗∗
             Funding Cost                                        72.4798                 2.38∗∗
             Libor-Treasury Spread                                0.3127                 1.70∗
             Swap Spread                                        −0.3519                 −1.52


             Adj. R2                                                                    0.431
             N                                                                            307
                                                                       Table 5

Results from Regressions of Balance Sheet Costs on Capital Ratios. This table reports the results from regressions of the balance sheet
cost measure on its lagged value and on contemporaneous and lagged changes in capital ratios. Balance sheet costs are measured in basis points.
Tier 1 Ratio represents Tier 1 capital as a percentage of risk-weighted assets. Core Ratio represents Tier 1 capital as a percentage of average total
assets minus ineligible intangibles. Equity ratio represents total equity capital as a percentage of total assets. Total Capital Ratio represents total
risk-based capital as a percentage of risk-weighted assets. Non-Repo Equity represents total broker-dealer equity as a percentage of total assets,
where the value of repo contracts is first subtracted out from the balance sheet. The first four capital ratios are averages over all banks using data
provided by the FDIC. The fifth is computed using flow of funds data from Federal Reserve Board. We allow for quarterly fixed effects by including
dummy variables that take a value of one for the first, second, third, and fourth quarters, respectively, and zero otherwise. The superscript ∗ denotes
significance at the ten-percent level; the superscript ∗∗ denotes significance at the five-percent level. The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West
(1987) heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent estimate of the covariance matrix (five lags). The sample period is quarterly from June 1991
to December 2016.


 Variable                       Coefficient   t-Stat     Coefficient   t-Stat    Coefficient   t-Stat    Coefficient   t-Stat    Coefficient   t-Stat


 Cost t−1                            0.4787     4.85∗∗       0.4806     5.22∗∗       0.4855     5.07∗∗       0.4806     4.84∗∗       0.4893     5.09∗∗

 ∆ Tier 1 Ratio t                  85.6668     2.44∗∗
 ∆ Tier 1 Ratio t−1               −25.9852    −0.70
 ∆ Tier 1 Ratio t−2               −37.6417    −0.73

 ∆ Core Ratio t                                           244.1550      2.19∗∗
 ∆ Core Ratio t−1                                         −15.1301     −0.70
 ∆ Core Ratio t−2                                        −191.3880     −2.53∗∗

 ∆ Equity Ratio t                                                                 169.2156      2.17∗∗
 ∆ Equity Ratio t−1                                                               −80.7738     −1.65
 ∆ Equity Ratio t−2                                                              −167.2945     −2.78∗∗

 ∆ Total Capital Ratio t                                                                                   74.4266      2.56∗∗
 ∆ Total Capital Ratio t−1                                                                                −27.6095     −0.52
 ∆ Total Capital Ratio t−2                                                                                −26.1866     −0.43

 ∆ Non-Repo Equity t                                                                                                                8.0894      1.96∗
 ∆ Non-Repo Equity t−1                                                                                                             −0.0578     −0.01
 ∆ Non-Repo Equity t−2                                                                                                             −7.5170     −1.37


 Fixed Effects for Quarter                      Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes

 Adj. R2                                      0.204                    0.263                   0.286                   0.194                   0.197
 N                                              103                      103                     103                     103                     103
                                                                    Table 6

Results from Regressions of Changes in Broker-Dealer Treasury Holdings, Asset Growth, and Changes in Leverage on Changes
in Balance Sheet Costs. This table reports the results from regressions of the indicated dependent variable (shown in the column heading) on
lagged values of the dependent variable and on lagged changes in balance sheet costs. Treasury holdings are expressed in $ billions. Asset growth
rate is expressed as a percentage. Leverage is expressed as a percentage. Balance sheet costs are measured in basis points. We allow for quarterly
fixed effects by including dummy variables that take a value of one for the first, second, third, and fourth quarters, respectively, and zero otherwise.
The superscript ∗ denotes significance at the ten-percent level; the superscript ∗∗ denotes significance at the five-percent level. The t-statistics are
based on the Newey-West (1987) heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent estimate of the covariance matrix (five lags). The sample period
is quarterly from June 1991 to December 2016.


                                                   ∆ Holdings                        Asset Growth Rate                        ∆ Leverage

      Variable                               Coefficient        t-Stat             Coefficient       t-Stat             Coefficient        t-Stat


      ∆ Holdings t−1                            −0.1106         −1.42
      ∆ Holdings t−2                             0.1322          1.29
      ∆ Holdings t−3                             0.2508          2.80∗∗

      Asset Growth Rate t−1                                                            0.1680          2.36∗∗
      Asset Growth Rate t−2                                                            0.2193          1.80∗
      Asset Growth Rate t−3                                                            0.0538          0.68

      ∆ Leverage t−1                                                                                                       −0.0767          0.62
      ∆ Leverage t−2                                                                                                        0.3979          3.29∗∗
      ∆ Leverage t−3                                                                                                       −0.0564         −0.79

      ∆ Cost t−1                               −88.4581         −3.07∗∗              −0.0043         −0.93                 −0.0009         −0.67
      ∆ Cost t−2                               −67.0479         −1.80∗               −0.0083         −2.35∗∗               −0.0023         −2.24∗∗
      ∆ Cost t−3                                 6.9128          0.23                −0.0055         −1.02                 −0.0017         −1.77∗



      Fixed Effects for Quarter                                   Yes                                  Yes                                   Yes

      Adj. R2                                                   0.370                                0.244                                 0.185
      N                                                           103                                  103                                   103
                                                 Table 7

Results from Regression of Growth Rates in Total Swap Notional on Changes in Balance
Sheet Costs. This table reports the results from regressions of the quarterly percentage change in the
total notional amount of interest rate swaps for U.S. banks on its lagged values and on contemporaneous
and lagged changes in balance sheet costs. Balance sheet costs are measured in basis points. We allow for
monthly fixed effects by including dummy variables that take a value of one for January, February, March,
etc., respectively, and zero otherwise. The superscript ∗ denotes significance at the ten-percent level; the
superscript ∗∗ denotes significance at the five-percent level. The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West
(1987) heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent estimate of the covariance matrix (five lags). The
sample period is quarterly from June 1991 to December 2016.


            Variable                                            Coefficient             t-Stat


            Swap Growth Rate t−1                                   0.05659                0.34
            Swap Growth Rate t−2                                   0.21832                3.39∗∗
            Swap Growth Rate t−3                                   0.39712                3.19∗∗

            Change    in   Cost t                                 0.00014                1.84∗
            Change    in   Cost t−1                               0.00021                2.51∗∗
            Change    in   Cost t−2                               0.00004                0.53
            Change    in   Cost t−3                              −0.00008               −1.71∗


            Fixed Effects for Quarter                                                     Yes

            Adj. R2                                                                      0.193
            N                                                                              103
                                                 Table 8

Results from Regression of Changes in Treasury Note Futures Open Interest on Changes in
Balance Sheet Costs. This table reports the results from regressions of the monthly change in the open
interest of Treasury note futures contracts on its lagged changes, on contemporaneous and lagged changes
in trading volume, on contemporaneous and lagged values of the initial margin, and on contemporaneous
and lagged changes in balance sheet costs. Open Interest denotes the average monthly open interest for
the current five-year Treasury note futures contract. Volume denotes the average monthly volume for the
current five-year Treasury note futures contract. Margin denotes the average initial margin for the current
five-year Treasury note futures contract and is measured in dollars per contract. Cost denotes the balance
sheet cost measure computed as the difference between the implied repo and repo rates. Balance sheet costs
are measured in basis points. We allow for monthly fixed effects by including dummy variables that take a
value of one for January, February, March, etc., respectively, and zero otherwise. The superscript ∗ denotes
significance at the ten-percent level; the superscript ∗∗ denotes significance at the five-percent level. The
t-statistics are based on the Newey-West (1987) heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent estimate
of the covariance matrix (five lags). The sample period is monthly from June 1991 to December 2016.


            Variable                                              Coefficient             t-Stat


            Change in Open Interest t−1                            −0.46409               −6.79∗∗
            Change in Open Interest t−2                            −0.49901               −8.54∗∗

            Change in Volume t                                     −0.03464               −0.37
            Change in Volume t−1                                    0.37069                3.88∗∗
            Change in Volume t−2                                    0.28599                2.75∗∗

            Margin t                                              −46.98730               −1.00
            Margin t−1                                            −73.76279               −1.00
            Margin t−2                                             37.85035                0.61

            Change in Cost t                                       72.68979                1.77∗
            Change in Cost t−1                                     35.11487                0.75
            Change in Cost t−2                                   −101.77580               −2.22∗∗


            Fixed Effects for Month                                                         Yes

            Adj. R2                                                                       0.658
            N                                                                               307
                                                                        Table 9

Results from Regressions of Changes in Swap Spreads on Changes in Balance Sheet Costs. This table reports the results from individual
regressions of changes in the N -year swap spread (for the value of N shown in the column heading) on its lagged values, on contemporaneous and
lagged changes in the two-year swap spread, and on contemporaneous and lagged changes in balance sheet costs. SS denotes the swap spread. Swap
spreads and balance sheet costs are measured in basis points. We allow for quarterly fixed effects by including dummy variables that take a value
of one for the first, second, third, and fourth quarters, respectively, and zero otherwise. The superscript ∗ denotes significance at the ten-percent
level; the superscript ∗∗ denotes significance at the five-percent level. The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West (1987) heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent estimate of the covariance matrix (five lags). The sample period is monthly from June 1991 to December 2016.


                                      N =5               N =7                N = 10             N = 15             N = 20              N = 30

 Variable                          Coeff   t-Stat     Coeff   t-Stat       Coeff   t-Stat     Coeff   t-Stat     Coeff   t-Stat     Coeff   t-Stat


 Intercept                        −0.182   −0.86     −0.219   −0.91      −0.245    −0.84     −0.333   −0.89     −0.398   −0.95     −0.440   −0.97

 Change in N -Year SS t−1         −0.207   −2.92∗∗   −0.095   −1.56      −0.075    −0.91      0.039    0.43      0.037    0.34     −0.021   −0.22
 Change in N -Year SS t−2         −0.135   −1.73∗    −0.081   −1.10      −0.023    −0.29     −0.156   −2.45∗∗   −0.140   −1.86∗    −0.045   −0.70
 Change in N -Year SS t−3         −0.023   −0.46     −0.047   −0.76      −0.077    −0.90     −0.137   −2.02∗∗   −0.020   −0.27      0.006    0.07

 Change    in   2-Year   SS t      0.689    8.59∗∗    0.551    6.17∗∗     0.399     3.76∗∗    0.235    2.49∗∗    0.249    2.22∗∗    0.235    2.22∗∗
 Change    in   2-Year   SS t−1    0.191    3.80∗∗    0.116    2.60∗∗     0.006     0.08     −0.005   −0.05     −0.075   −0.65     −0.002   −0.02
 Change    in   2-Year   SS t−2    0.022    0.38     −0.030   −0.51      −0.155    −2.09∗∗   −0.165   −1.77∗    −0.134   −1.21     −0.189   −1.60
 Change    in   2-Year   SS t−3   −0.054   −1.04      0.030    0.56       0.066     0.99      0.141    1.58      0.052    0.41      0.028    0.18

 Change    in   Cost t            −0.001   −0.50     −0.004   −1.16      −0.005    −1.11     −0.015   −1.60     −0.019   −1.55     −0.023   −1.90∗
 Change    in   Cost t−1           0.000    0.13      0.002    0.53       0.007     2.06∗∗    0.015    2.52∗∗    0.018    2.44∗∗    0.015    2.12∗∗
 Change    in   Cost t−2           0.005    1.62      0.006    2.08∗∗     0.001     0.23     −0.001   −0.15     −0.003   −0.40     −0.013   −1.94∗
 Change    in   Cost t−3           0.002    0.79     −0.006   −1.49      −0.002    −0.48     −0.003   −0.60     −0.001   −0.29     −0.007   −1.12


 Adj. R2                                   0.578              0.415                0.257              0.218              0.167               0.179
 Number                                      307                307                  307                271                271                 271
