                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 FINANCIAL HETEROGENEITY AND THE INVESTMENT CHANNEL OF MONETARY
                              POLICY

                                          Pablo Ottonello
                                         Thomas Winberry

                                       Working Paper 24221
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24221


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2018




We thank the editor Gianluca Violante, four anonymous referees, and Andy Abel, Adrien
Auclert, Cristina Arellano, Neele Balke, Paco Buera, Simon Gilchrist, Nils Gornermann, Chris
House, Erik Hurst, Alejandro Justiniano, Greg Kaplan, Rohan Kekre, Aubhik Khan, John Leahy,
Yueran Ma, Alisdair McKay, Fabrizio Perri, Felipe Schwartzman, Linda Tesar, Julia Thomas, Joe
Vavra, Ivan Werning, Toni Whited, Christian Wolf, Arlene Wong, and Mark Wright for helpful
conversations. We thank Alberto Arredondo, Mike Mei, Richard Ryan, Samuel Stern, Yuyao
Wang, and Liangjie Wu for excellent research assistance. This research was funded in part by the
Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business and the
Michigan Institute for Teaching and Research in Economics. Winberry also gratefully
acknowledges financial support from Chicago Booth. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Pablo Ottonello and Thomas Winberry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Financial Heterogeneity and the Investment Channel of Monetary Policy
Pablo Ottonello and Thomas Winberry
NBER Working Paper No. 24221
January 2018, Revised June 2020
JEL No. D22,D25,E22,E44,E52

                                        ABSTRACT

We study the role of financial frictions and firm heterogeneity in determining the investment
channel of monetary policy. Empirically, we find that firms with low default risk – those with
low debt burdens and high “distance to default” – are the most responsive to monetary shocks.
We interpret these findings using a heterogeneous firm New Keynesian model with default risk.
In our model, low-risk firms are more responsive to monetary shocks because they face a flatter
marginal cost curve for financing investment. The aggregate effect of monetary policy may
therefore depend on the distribution of default risk, which varies over time.


Pablo Ottonello
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
ottonellopablo@gmail.com

Thomas Winberry
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
thomas.winberry@chicagobooth.edu
1    Introduction
Aggregate investment is one of the most responsive components of GDP to monetary shocks.
Our goal in this paper is to understand the role of financial frictions in determining this
investment channel of monetary policy. Given the rich heterogeneity in financial positions
across firms, a key question is: which firms are the most responsive to changes in monetary
policy? The answer to this question is theoretically ambiguous. On the one hand, financial
frictions generate an upward-sloping marginal cost curve for investment, which dampens
the response of investment to monetary policy for firms that are more severely affected by
financial frictions. On the other hand, monetary policy may flatten out this marginal cost
curve – for example, by increasing cash flows or improving collateral values – which amplifies
the response of investment for affected firms. This latter view is the conventional wisdom in
the literature, informed by applying the financial accelerator logic across firms.
    We address the question of which firms respond the most to monetary policy using new
cross-sectional evidence and a heterogeneous firm New Keynesian model. Our empirical
work combines monetary shocks, measured using the high-frequency event-study approach,
with quarterly Compustat data. We find that investment done by firms with low default risk
is significantly and robustly more responsive to monetary policy than investment done by
firms with high default risk. Motivated by this evidence, our model embeds a heterogeneous
firm investment model with default risk into the benchmark New Keynesian environment
and studies the effect of a monetary shock. In our calibrated model, firms with low default
risk are more responsive to monetary policy, similar to our empirical estimates. We perform
a simple calculation to show how these heterogeneous responses imply that the effect of
monetary policy may become smaller when default risk in the economy is high. At the same
time, we find that all firms affected by default risk in our model are more responsive to
monetary policy than they would be in a version of our model without any default risk at
all, consistent with Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999).
    Our baseline empirical specification estimates how the semi-elasticity of firm investment
with respect to a monetary policy shock depends on two measures of the firm’s default risk:
its leverage ratio and its “distance to default” (which estimates the probability of default from


                                               2
the values of equity and liabilities). We control for firm fixed effects to capture permanent
differences across firms and control for sector-by-quarter fixed effects to capture differences
in how sectors respond to aggregate shocks. Conditional on our set of controls, leverage is
negatively correlated with distance to default and credit rating, and distance to default is
positively correlated with credit rating. Therefore, we view low leverage and high distance
to default as proxies for low default risk.
   We find that having one standard deviation lower leverage implies that a firm is ap-
proximately one-fourth more responsive to monetary policy and that having one standard
deviation higher distance to default implies that the firm is one-half more responsive. These
differences across firms persist for up to three years after the shock and imply large differ-
ences in accumulated capital over time. Consistent with the idea that default risk drives
these heterogeneous responses, borrowing costs and the use of external finance increase by
less for high-risk firms than for low-risk firms following a monetary expansion.
   In order to interpret these empirical results, we embed a model of heterogeneous firms
facing default risk into the benchmark New Keynesian framework. These firms invest in
capital using either internal funds or external borrowing; they can default on their debt,
leading to an external finance premium. There is also a group of “retailer” firms with sticky
prices, generating a New Keynesian Phillips curve linking nominal variables to real outcomes.
We calibrate the model to match key features of firms’ investment, borrowing, and lifecycle
dynamics in the micro data. Our model generates realistic behavior along non-targeted
dimensions of the micro data, and the peak responses of aggregate investment, output,
and consumption to a monetary policy shock are broadly in line with the peak responses
estimated in the data by Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005).
   We simulate a panel of firms from our calibrated model and find that firms with low
measured default risk are more responsive to monetary policy, as in the data. These het-
erogeneous responses reflect how monetary policy directly changes the expected return on
capital, which drives the response of low-risk firms, and indirectly changes cash flows and
recovery values, which drive the response of the high-risk firms. Since low-risk firms are more
responsive overall, our empirical results indicate that the direct effects of monetary policy
dominate the indirect ones.


                                              3
   Finally, we quantify how changes in the distribution of default risk may alter the aggre-
gate effect of monetary policy by fixing the firm-level response to monetary shocks while
varying the initial distribution of firms. We find that a monetary shock generates an ap-
proximately 30% smaller change in the aggregate capital stock starting from a distribution
with 50% less net worth than the steady state distribution. This calculation suggests a po-
tentially important source of time-variation in monetary transmission: monetary policy is
less powerful when default risk is higher.


Related Literature      Our paper contributes to five strands of literature. The first studies
the role of financial frictions in the transmission of monetary policy to the aggregate economy.
Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999) embed the financial accelerator in a representative
firm New Keynesian model; we build on Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999)’s framework
to include firm heterogeneity. Consistent with their results, we find that the response of
aggregate investment to a monetary shock is larger in our model than in a model without
financial frictions at all. However, among the 99.4% of firms affected by financial frictions in
our model, those with low default risk are more responsive to a monetary shock than those
with high default risk, creating the potential for distributional dependence.
   Second, we contribute to the literature that studies how the effect of monetary policy
varies across firms by showing that firms with low default risk are more responsive to mone-
tary policy. Other studies argue that the firm-level response also depends on size (Gertler and
Gilchrist (1994)), liquidity (Jeenas (2019)), or age (Cloyne et al. (2018)). Online Appendix
C shows that our results are robust to controlling for these other firm characteristics. Our
results do not necessarily contradict these other studies; instead, we simply study different
features of the data.
   Third, we contribute to the literature which incorporates micro-level heterogeneity into
the New Keynesian model. To date, this literature has focused on how household-level
heterogeneity affects the consumption channel of monetary policy; see, for example, McKay,
Nakamura and Steinsson (2016); Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018); Auclert (2019); or Wong
(2019). We instead explore the role of firm-level heterogeneity in determining the investment




                                               4
channel of monetary policy.1 In contrast to the consumption channel, we find that both direct
and indirect effects of monetary policy play a quantitatively important role in driving the
investment channel. The direct effect of changes in the real interest rate are smaller for
households because they have a consumption-smoothing motive which firms lack.
       Fourth, we contribute to a growing literature which argues that monetary policy is less
effective in recessions by suggesting that changes in the distribution of default risk are another
reason monetary policy may become less effective. Tenreyro and Thwaites (2016) estimate
a nonlinear time-series model and find that monetary policy shocks have a smaller impact
on real economic activity in recessions than in normal times. Vavra (2013) and McKay and
Wieland (2020) provide models in which monetary policy is less powerful in recessions due
to changes in the distribution of price adjustment or durable expenditures.
       Finally, we contribute to the literature which studies the role of financial heterogeneity
in determining the business cycle dynamics of aggregate investment by introducing sticky
prices and studying the effect of monetary policy shocks. Our model of firm-level investment
builds heavily on Khan, Senga and Thomas (2016), who study the effect of financial shocks
in a flexible price model. We extend the model to include capital quality shocks and a time-
varying price of capital in order to generate variation in lenders’ recovery value of capital,
as in the financial accelerator literature.


Road Map          Our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides empirical evidence that
the firm-level response to monetary policy varies with default risk. Section 3 develops our
heterogeneous firm New Keynesian model to interpret this evidence. Section 4 provides a
theoretical characterization of the channels through which monetary policy drives investment
in our model. Section 5 then calibrates the model and verifies that it is consistent with key
features of the joint distribution of investment and leverage in the micro data. Section 6
uses the model to study the monetary transmission mechanism. Section 7 concludes.
   1
    Reiter, Sveen and Weinke (2013) show that a model with firm heterogeneity and fixed capital adjustment
costs generates a counterfactually large and short-lived response of investment to monetary policy because,
conditional on adjusting, investment is extremely interest-sensitive in their model. We dampen the interest-
sensitivity of investment using financial frictions and convex adjustment costs to aggregate capital. Koby
and Wolf (2020) dampen the interest-sensitivity using convex adjustment costs at the firm level and find
that the fixed costs generate state-dependent responses to monetary policy.



                                                     5
2     Empirical Results
We document that firms with low default risk – proxied by low debt burdens and high
distance to default – are significantly more responsive to changes in monetary policy than
other firms in the economy.


2.1    Data Description

Our sample combines monetary policy shocks with quarterly Compustat data.


Monetary Policy Shocks We measure monetary shocks using the high-frequency, event-
study approach pioneered by Cook and Hahn (1989). Following Gurkaynak, Sack and Swan-
son (2005) and Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016), we construct our shock εm
                                                                       t as



                              εm
                               t = τ (t) × (ffrt+∆+ − ffrt−∆− ),                                (1)


where t is the time of the monetary announcement, ffrt is the implied Fed Funds Rate
from a current-month Federal Funds future contract at time t, ∆+ and ∆− control the size
                                                               n (t)
of the time window around the announcement, τ (t) ≡           τm
                                                           n (t)−τ d (t)
                                                          τm
                                                                           is an adjustment for the
                                                                   m
                                              d
timing of the announcement within the month, τm (t) denotes the day of the meeting in the
            n
month, and τm (t) the number of days in the month. We focus on a window of ∆− = fifteen
minutes before the announcement and ∆+ = forty five minutes after the announcement. Our
shock series begins in January 1990, when the Fed Funds futures market opened, and ends
in December 2007, in order to focus on conventional monetary policy. During this time there
were 164 shocks with a mean of approximately zero and a standard deviation of 9bp.
    We time aggregate the high-frequency shocks to the quarterly frequency in order to merge
them with our firm-level data. We construct a moving average of the raw shocks weighted by
the number of days in the quarter after the shock occurs (see Supplemental Materials A for
details). Our time aggregation strategy ensures that we weight shocks by the amount of time
firms have had to react to them. Table 1 indicates that these “smoothed” shocks have similar
features to the original high-frequency shocks. For robustness, we also use the alternative
time aggregation of simply summing all the shocks that occur within the quarter, as in Wong

                                              6
                                       Table 1
                    Summary Statistics of Monetary Policy Shocks
                                        High Frequency      Smoothed         Sum
                       Mean                 -0.0185          -0.0429       -0.0421
                       Median                   0            -0.0127      -0.00509
                       S.D.                 0.0855            0.108         0.124
                       Min                   -0.463           -0.480        -0.479
                       Max                    0.152           0.233         0.261
                       Observations            164              71            72

Notes: Summary statistics of monetary policy shocks for the period 1/1/1990 to 12/31/2007. “High
frequency” shocks are estimated using the event study strategy in (1). “Smoothed” shocks are time
aggregated to a quarterly frequency using the weighted average described in Supplemental Materials A.
“Sum” refers to time aggregating by simply summing all shocks within a quarter.


(2019). Table 1 shows that the moments of these alternative shocks do not significantly differ
from the moments of the smoothed shocks, and Supplemental Materials B shows that our
main results are robust to using this alternative form of time aggregation.


Firm-Level Variables We draw firm-level variables from quarterly Compustat, a panel
of publicly listed U.S. firms. Compustat satisfies three key requirements for our study: it
is quarterly, a high enough frequency to study monetary policy; it is a long panel, allowing
us to use within-firm variation; and it contains rich balance-sheet information, allowing us
to construct our key variables of interest. To our knowledge, Compustat is the only U.S.
dataset that satisfies these three requirements. The main disadvantage of Compustat is that
it excludes privately held firms.2 In Section 5, we calibrate our economic model to match a
broad sample of firms, not just those in Compustat.
       Our main measure of investment is ∆ log kjt+1 , where kjt+1 is the book value of the
tangible capital stock of firm j at the end of period t. We use two measures of a firm’s
financial position to proxy for default risk. First, we measure leverage ℓjt as the firm’s debt-
to-asset ratio, where debt is the sum of short term and long term debt and assets is the book
value of assets. Second, we measure the firm’s distance to default ddjt following Gilchrist
   2
    The main attractive alternatives, covering a much broader set of firm sizes than Compustat, are the
datasets constructed in Crouzet and Mehrotra (2020) (using data from the Quarterly Financial Reports)
and in Dinlersoz et al. (2018) (combining data from the U.S. Census Longitudinal Business Database, Orbis,
and Compustat). However, the dataset in Crouzet and Mehrotra (2020) only follows small firms for eight
quarters, which limits the ability to use within-firm variation, while the dataset in Dinlersoz et al. (2018)
contains data for small firms at an annual frequency.


                                                     7
                                        Table 2
                       Summary Statistics of Firm-Level Variables
                                        (a) Marginal Distributions
                                        ∆ log kjt+1   ℓjt      ddjt          1{crjt ≥ A}
                    Mean                   0.004     0.263     5.788             0.025
                    Median                -0.004     0.201     4.742             0.000
                    S.D.                   0.091     0.348     5.082             0.156
                    95th Percentile        0.128     0.719    15.213             0.000
                    Observations          343276    343276 238531               343276
       (b) Correlation Matrix (raw variables)                    (c) Correlation matrix (residualized)
                     ℓjt   ddjt    1{crjt ≥ A}                                ℓjt    ddjt    1{crjt ≥ A}
   ℓjt              1.00                                   ℓjt               1.00

   ddjt             -0.39     1.00                         ddjt              -0.28    1.00
                   (0.00)                                                   (0.00)
   1{crjt ≥ A}      -0.02     0.20         1.00            1{crjt ≥ A}       -0.01    0.05         1.00
                   (0.00)    (0.00)                                         (0.00)   (0.00)
   p-values in parentheses                                 p-values in parentheses

Notes: summary statistics of firm-level variables for the period 1983q3 to 2014q4. ∆ log kjt+1 is the change
in the capital stock, ℓjt is the ratio of total debt to total assets, ddjt is the firm’s distance to default, and
1{crjt ≥ A} is an indicator variable for whether the firm’s credit rating is above an A. Panel (a) computes
summary statistics of these variables in our sample before winsorization, Panel (b) computes their pairwise
correlations, and Panel (c) computes pairwise correlations of the residuals from the regression
xjt = αj + αst + Γ′ Zjt−1 + ejt , where xjt ∈ {ℓjt , ddjt , 1{crjt ≥ A}}, αj is a firm fixed effect, αst is a
sector-by-quarter fixed effect, and Zjt−1 is a vector of firm-level controls containing sales growth, size,
current assets as a share of total assets, and an indicator for fiscal quarter.


and Zakrajšek (2012). Distance to default ddjt has been shown by Schaefer and Strebulaev
(2008) to account well for variation in corporate bond prices due to default risk and is widely
used in the finance industry. In order to validate these proxies, we correlate them with credit
rating crjt , measured as S&P’s long-term issue rating of the firm. Supplemental Materials
A provides details of our data construction.
    Panel (a) of Table 2 presents simple summary statistics of the final sample used in our
analysis. The mean distance to default implies that a 6 standard deviation shock over a
given year will drive the average firm to default, in line with Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012).
We winsorize our sample at the top and bottom 0.5% of observations of investment, leverage,
and distance to default in order to ensure our results are not driven by outliers.
    Panel (b) of Table 2 shows the correlation structure of leverage, distance to default, and
credit rating. Higher leverage is positively correlated with a smaller distance to default and

                                                       8
a lower credit rating, indicating that higher debt burdens are associated with higher default
risk. Firms with higher distance to default also have higher credit ratings, validating our
interpretation of distance to default. Panel (c) of Table 2 shows that these correlations are
all also true conditional on the controls in our baseline regression specification (2) below.


2.2       Heterogeneous Responses to Monetary Policy

Specification       We estimate variants of the baseline empirical specification

                                                                     ′
                  ∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + β(xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                                                t + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt ,                      (2)


where αj is a firm j fixed effect, αst is a sector s by quarter t fixed effect, εm
                                                                                 t is the quarterly

monetary policy shock, xjt ∈ {ℓjt , ddjt } is the firm’s leverage ratio or distance to default,
Ej [xjt ] is the average value of xjt for a given firm over the sample, Zjt−1 is a vector of
controls, and ejt is a residual.3 Our main coefficient of interest is β, which measures how
the semi-elasticity of investment ∆ log kjt+1 with respect to monetary shocks εm
                                                                               t depends on

the within-firm variation in the financial position xjt − Ej [xjt ] (we discuss the rationale for
using within-firm variation in financial position below). We do not estimate the specification
with credit ratings xjt = crjt because the within-firm variation in credit ratings is limited.
Throughout, we cluster standard errors two ways to account for correlation within firms and
within quarters.
       We control for a number of factors that may simultaneously affect investment and finan-
cial position but which are outside the scope of our economic model in Section 3. The firm
fixed effects αj capture permanent differences in investment behavior across firms and the
sector-by-quarter fixed effects αst capture differences in how broad sectors are exposed to
aggregate shocks. The vector Zjt−1 includes the level of the financial position xjt−1 , total
assets, sales growth, current assets as a share of total assets, and a fiscal quarter dummy.
The vector Zjt−1 also includes the interaction of financial position with the previous quarter’s
   3
    The sectors s we consider, based on SIC codes, are: agriculture, forestry, and fishing; mining; construc-
tion; manufacturing; transportation communications, electric, gas, and sanitary services; wholesale trade;
retail trade; and services. We do not include finance, insurance, and real estate, and public administration.




                                                     9
GDP growth in order to control for differences in cyclical sensitivities across firms.4
       Online Appendix A.1 shows that using the interaction of within-firm variation in financial
position with the monetary shock (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                                     t ensures that our results are not driven

by permanent heterogeneity in responsiveness across firms. This choice is motivated by our
economic model in Section 3, in which firms are ex-ante homogenous. In contrast, firms in
the data may be ex-ante heterogeneous in how they respond to monetary policy according
to their financial position xjt . For example, firms in risky markets may be permanently
more exposed to interest rate fluctuations and also permanently more likely to default. If
we had instead interacted the level of financial position with the monetary shock xjt εm
                                                                                       t , then

our results would be partly determined by such permanent differences in responsiveness.
By demeaning financial position within firms, (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                                                  t , our estimates are instead

driven by how a given firm responds to monetary policy when it has higher or lower default
risk than usual.


Results       Table 3 reports the results from estimating the baseline specification (2). We
perform two normalizations to make the estimated coefficient β easily interpretable. First, we
standardize the firm’s demeaned leverage ℓjt − Ej [ℓjt ] and distance to default ddjt − Ej [ddjt ]
over the entire sample, so their units are standard deviations in our sample. Second, we
normalize the sign of the monetary shock εm
                                          t so that a positive value corresponds to a cut in

interest rates.
       The first three columns in Table 3 show that firms with lower leverage and higher distance
to default are more responsive to monetary shocks εm
                                                   t . Column (1) implies that a firm has

approximately a 0.7 units lower semi-elasticity of investment to monetary policy when it is
one standard deviation more indebted than it typically is in our sample. Adding firm-level
controls Zjt−1 in Column (2) does not significantly change this point estimate; therefore,
we focus on specifications with firm-level controls Zjt−1 for the remainder of the paper.
   4
     If the monetary shock εm t is truly exogenous, then this control would be unnecessary in large samples.
However, we find that the largest shocks occur at the beginning of the two recessions in our small sample.
Failing to incorporate this fact may bias our results if firms with different financial positions are differentially
exposed to business cycle events. Online Appendix A.2 shows that controlling for differences in cyclical
sensitivities strengthens the differential responses to monetary shocks, but that our results are qualitatively
robust to excluding those controls as well.



                                                        10
                                     Table 3
             Heterogeneous Responses of Investment to Monetary Policy

                                               (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)
                                                  ∗∗          ∗∗
                      leverage × ffr shock   -0.69      -0.57                 -0.26      -0.14
                                              (0.29)     (0.27)              (0.35)     (0.58)
                      dd × ffr shock                               1.14∗∗∗   1.01∗∗    1.16∗∗
                                                                    (0.41)   (0.40)     (0.47)
                      ffr shock                                                        2.14∗∗∗
                                                                                        (0.61)
                      Observations           219402     219402     151027    151027    119750
                      R2                      0.113      0.124      0.141     0.142     0.151
                      Firm controls            no         yes        yes       yes       yes
                      Time sector FE           yes        yes        yes       yes       no
                      Time clustering          yes        yes        yes       yes       yes

                                                                                          ′
Notes: results from estimating ∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + β(xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm      t + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt , where αj is a
firm fixed effect, αst is a sector-by-quarter fixed effect, xjt ∈ {ℓjt , ddjt } is leverage or distance to default,
Ej [xjt ] is the average of xjt for firm j in the sample, εm
                                                           t is the monetary shock, and Zjt−1 is a vector of
firm-level controls containing xjt−1 , sales growth, size, current assets as a share of total assets, an indicator
for fiscal quarter, and the interaction of demeaned financial position with lagged GDP growth. Standard
errors are two-way clustered by firms and quarter. We have normalized the sign of the monetary shock εm             t
so that a positive shock corresponds to a decrease in interest rates. We have standardized (ℓjt − E[ℓjt ]) and
(ddjt − E[ddjt ]) over the entire sample. Column (5) removes the sector-quarter fixed effect αst and
                                                                          ′            ′
estimates ∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αsq + γεm    t + β(xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εt + Γ1 Zjt−1 + Γ2 Yt−1 + ejt , where Yt is a
                                                                   m

vector with four lags of GDP growth, the inflation rate, and the unemployment rate.


Column (3) shows that a firm has approximately a 1.1 unit higher semi-elasticity when it
is one standard deviation further from default than usual. Column (4) shows that leverage
is rendered statistically insignificant conditional on distance to default, indicating that our
results are primarily driven by distance to default, which we view as our most direct measure
of default risk.
       Column (5) removes the sector-by-quarter fixed effects in order to estimate the average
effect of a monetary shock:

                                                                    ′          ′
           ∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αsq + γεm                        m
                                      t + β(xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εt + Γ1 Zjt−1 + Γ2 Yt−1 + ejt ,                    (3)


where αsq is a sector s by quarter q seasonal fixed effect and Yt is a vector with four lags of
GDP growth, the inflation rate, and the unemployment rate. The average investment semi-
elasticity is roughly 2.5 Hence, our interaction coefficients in the previous columns imply an
   5
       Assuming an annual depreciation rate of δ = 0.1, this estimated coefficient implies that a one percentage


                                                         11
               Figure 1: Dynamics of Differential Response to Monetary Shocks
                       (a) Leverage                (b) Distance to Default
                 6                                                               10


                 4
                                                                                 8


                 2
                                                                                 6

                 0
                                                                                 4
                -2

                                                                                 2
                -4


                                                                                 0
                -6


                -8                                                               -2
                     0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12             0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12




Notes: dynamics of the interaction coefficient between financial positions and monetary shocks over time.
Reports the coefficient βh over quarters h from
                                                               ′
log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + βh (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                                          t + Γh Zjt−1 + ejth , where all variables are defined in
the notes for Table 3. Dashed lines report 90% error bands.


economically meaningful degree of heterogeneity.


Dynamics        In order to estimate the dynamics of these differential responses across firms,
we estimate the Jorda (2005)-style local projection of specification (2):

                                                                           ′
            log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + βh (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                                                      t + Γh Zjt−1 + ejth ,                                                  (4)


where h ≥ 1 indexes the forecast horizon. The coefficient βh measures how the cumulative
response of investment in quarter t + h to a monetary policy shock in quarter t depends on
the firm’s demeaned financial position xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ] in quarter t − 1. We use the cumulative
change in capital on the left-hand side in order to easily assess the implications of our
estimates for the capital stock itself. Online Appendix B.1 estimates a dynamic version of
the specification (3) without the sector-time fixed effects αsth and shows that the average
firm’s response is persistent, peaking two to four quarters after the shock.
    Figure 1 shows that firms with low leverage and high distance to default are consistently
more responsive to the shock for up to three years later. Panel (a) shows that the peak
of the differences by leverage occurs after four quarters and that the differences disappear
after twelve quarters. Panel (b) shows that the differences by distance to default are larger
point cut in the interest rate increases annualized investment by 20%, which is at the upper end of estimated
user-cost elasticities in the literature (see, for example, Zwick and Mahon (2017)).



                                                                            12
and significantly more persistent than for leverage. However, these long-run differences are
imprecisely estimated with large standard errors, so we focus on the impact effect of the
shock for the rest of the paper.


Additional Empirical Results          Online Appendix B and the Supplemental Materials B
contain three sets of additional empirical results. The first set of additional results contains
a number of robustness checks of our main results. Online Appendix B.3 shows that the
results hold when controlling for the information channel of monetary policy using Greenbook
forecast revisions (following Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco (2019)) and that the results hold
when we start the sample in 1994 rather than 1990. We also perform robustness checks
regarding firm-level heterogeneity, including controlling for lagged investment, controlling
for interactions of the monetary shock with other firm-level covariates (such as sales growth,
future sales growth, size, or liquidity), and investigating other indices of financial constraints.
   The second set of results includes some additional analysis of the data. First, as described
above, Online Appendix B.1 estimates the dynamics of the average response to monetary
policy. Second, Online Appendix B.2 shows that the heterogeneous responses are primarily
driven by expansionary shocks. Third, Supplemental Materials B shows that our results hold
if we measure leverage using only short term debt, only long term debt, only other liabilities,
or using leverage net of liquid assets, though the estimates are less precise for individual
categories of debt.
   The third set of additional results, in Online Appendix C, relates our work to various
strands of the existing literature. First, we show that small firms, measured using Gertler and
Gilchrist (1994)’s methodology, are more responsive to monetary shocks in our sample; our
results are robust to controlling for this effect. Second, we show that older firms are slightly
less responsive to monetary shocks, consistent with recent work by Cloyne et al. (2018);
again, our results are robust to controlling for this effect. Third, we reconcile our results
with recent work by Jeenas (2019), who argues that low-leverage firms are less responsive
to monetary policy over longer horizons. We argue that these results are largely driven by
permanent heterogeneity in responsiveness, which is outside the scope of our analysis. We
also show that our results are not driven by heterogeneity in liquidity across firms, which


                                                13
Jeenas (2019) emphasizes. Supplemental Materials C also shows that our results are not
driven by differences in firm-level sales volatility.



3     Model
We now develop a heterogeneous firm New Keynesian model in order to interpret this cross-
sectional evidence and study its aggregate implications. We describe the model in three
blocks: an investment block, which captures heterogeneous responses to monetary policy;
a New Keynesian block, which generates a Phillips curve; and a representative household,
which closes the model.


3.1    Investment Block

The investment block contains a fixed mass of heterogeneous firms that invest in capital
subject to financial frictions. It builds heavily on the flexible-price model developed in Khan,
Senga and Thomas (2016). Besides incorporating sticky prices, we extend Khan, Senga and
Thomas (2016)’s framework in three ways. First, we add idiosyncratic capital quality shocks,
which help us match observed default rates in the data. Second, we incorporate aggregate
adjustment costs in order to generate time-variation in the relative price of capital, as in
the financial accelerator literature (e.g., Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999)). Third, we
assume that new entrants have lower initial productivity than incumbents, which helps us
match lifecycle dynamics.


Production firms        Time is discrete and infinite. There is no aggregate uncertainty; in
Sections 4 and 6 below, we study the transition path in response to an unexpected monetary
shock. Each period, there is a fixed mass 1 of production firms. Each firm j ∈ [0, 1] produces
an undifferentiated good yjt using the production function yjt = zjt (ωjt kjt )θ ljt
                                                                                  ν
                                                                                     , where zjt is
an idiosyncratic total factor productivity shock, ωjt is an idiosyncratic capital quality shock,
kjt is the firm’s capital stock, ljt is the firm’s labor input, and θ + ν < 1. The idiosyncratic
TFP shock follows a log-AR(1) process log zjt+1 = ρ log zjt + εjt+1 , where εjt+1 ∼ N (0, σ 2 ).



                                                14
    The capital quality shock is i.i.d. across firms and time and follows a truncated log-
normal process with support [−4σω , 0], where σω is the standard deviation of the underlying
normal distribution. This process implies that with some probability pω , no capital quality
shock is realized (log ωjt = 0), but with probability 1 − pω , capital quality is drawn from the
region of a normal distribution within [−4σω , 0]. The capital quality shock also affects the
value of the firm’s undepreciated capital at the end of the period, (1 − δ)ωjt kjt . We view
capital quality shocks as capturing unmodeled forces which reduce the value of the firm’s
capital, such as frictions in the resale market, breakdown of machinery, or obsolescence.6
    The timing of events within each period is as follows.

  (i) A mass µt of new firms enter the economy. We assume that the mass of new entrants
      is equal to the mass of firms that exit the economy so that the total mass of production
      firms is fixed in each period t. Each of these new entrants draws
                                                                     ( idiosyncratic produc-
                                                                                          )
      tivity zjt from the time-invariant distribution µ (z) ∼ log N −m √
                                                       ent                   σ
                                                                               2
                                                                                 ,√   σ
                                                                                        2
                                                                                            ,
                                                                                         (1−ρ )    (1−ρ )
      where m ≥ 0 is a parameter governing the average productivity of new entrants.7 New
      entrants are endowed with k0 units of capital from the household and have no debt.
      They then proceed as incumbent firms.

 (ii) Idiosyncratic shocks to TFP and capital quality are realized.

 (iii) With probability πd each firm receives an i.i.d. exit shock and must exit the economy
      after producing.

 (iv) Each firm decides whether or not to default. If a firm defaults, it immediately and
      permanently exits the economy. In the event of default, lenders recover a fraction of
      the firm’s capital stock (described in more detail below) and equity holders receive a
      zero payoff. The fraction of a defaulting firms’ capital not recovered by its lenders is
      transferred lump-sum to households. In order to continue operation, the firm must
   6
     Mechanically, the capital quality shocks allow the model to generate positive default risk for a large
cross-section of firms. In our model, the value of a firm is dominated by the value of its undepreciated
capital stock; without risk to this stock, our model would have the counterfactual prediction that only firms
with very low net worth would have positive probability of default.
   7
     The parameter m is motivated by the evidence in Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2016) that young
firms have persistently low levels of measured productivity.



                                                     15
         pay back the face value of its outstanding debt, bjt , and pay a fixed operating cost ξ
         in units of the final good.

  (v) Continuing firms produce by hiring labor ljt from a competitive labor market at real
         wage wt . Firms sell their output to retailers (described below) in a competitive mar-
         ket at relative price pt expressed in terms of the final good (which is our numeraire,
         described below). At this point, firms that received the i.i.d. exit shock sell their
         undepreciated capital and exit the economy.

 (vi) Continuing firms purchase new capital kjt+1 at relative price qt . Firms have two sources
         of investment finance, each of which is subject to a friction. First, firms can issue
                                                                Bjt+1
         new nominal debt with real face value bjt+1 =           Pt
                                                                      ,   where Bjt+1 is the nominal face
         value and Pt is the nominal price of the final good. Lenders offer a price schedule
         Qt (zjt , kjt+1 , bjt+1 ) for this debt (we derive this price schedule below). Second, firms
         can use internal finance by lowering dividend payments djt but cannot issue new equity,
         which bounds dividend payments djt ≥ 0.8

       We write the firm’s optimization problem recursively. The individual state variables of
a firm are its total factor productivity z and its net worth

                                                                              1
                         n = max pt z(ωk)θ lν − wt l + qt (1 − δ)ωk − b          − ξ,
                                l                                             Πt

                 Pt
where Πt =      Pt−1
                       is realized gross inflation. Net worth n is the total amount of resources
available to the firm other than additional borrowing. Conditional on continuing, the real
   8
    The non-negative dividend constraint captures two key facts about external equity documented in the
corporate finance literature. First, firms face significant costs of issuing new equity, both direct flotation
costs and indirect costs. Second, firms issue external equity very infrequently. This specific form of the
non-negativity constraint is widely used in the macro literature because it allows for efficient computation
of the model in general equilibrium.




                                                     16
equity value vt (z, n) solves the Bellman equation9

                            ′            ′ ′ ′
                                                      [      (
 vt (z, n) = max
              ′ ′
                  n − q t k   + Qt (z, k  , b )b + Et  Λ t+1   πd χ1 (n̂t+1 (z ′ , ω ′ , k ′ , b′ ))n̂t+1 (z ′ , ω ′ , k ′ , b′ )
                k ,b
                                                                                                                        )]
                       (1 − πd )χ2t+1 (z ′ , n̂t+1 (z ′ , ω ′ , k ′ , b′ ))vt+1 (z ′ , n̂t+1 (z ′ , ω ′ , k ′ , b′ ))

                       such that n − qt k ′ + Qt (z, k ′ , b′ )b′ ≥ 0                                                         (5)


where n̂t+1 (z ′ , ω ′ , k ′ , b′ ) ≡ maxl′ pt+1 z ′ (ω ′ k ′ )θ (l′ )ν − wt+1 l′ + qt+1 (1 − δ)ω ′ k ′ − b′ Πt+1
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                  − ξ is the
net worth implied by k ′ , b′ , and the realization of z ′ and ω ′ ; χ1 (n) and χ2t (z, n) are indicator
variables taking the value of zero if the firm defaults, conditional on exogenously exiting and
not exiting; and Λt+1 is the stochastic discount factor.
       Proposition 1 characterizes the decision rules which solve this Bellman equation:

Proposition 1. Consider a firm at time t that is eligible to continue into the next period, has
idiosyncratic productivity z, and has net worth n. The firm’s optimal decision is characterized
by one of the following three cases.

  (i) Default: there exists a threshold nt (z) such that the firm defaults if n < nt (z). These
         firms cannot satisfy the non-negativity constraint on dividends.

 (ii) Unconstrained: there exists a threshold nt (z) such that the firm is financially
         unconstrained if n > nt (z). Unconstrained firms follow the “frictionless” capital
         accumulation policy kt′ (z, n) = kt∗ (z) which solves
         qt = Et [Λt+1 MRPKt+1 (z ′ , kt∗ (z))|z], where MRPKt+1 (z ′ , k ′ ) = Eω′ [ ∂k∂ ′ (maxl′ pt+1 z ′ (ω ′ k ′ )θ (l′ )ν −
         wt+1 l′ + qt+1 (1 − δ)ω ′ k ′ )] is the return on capital to the firm. Unconstrained firms are
         indifferent over any combination of b′ and d such that they remain unconstrained for
         every period with probability one.

(iii) Constrained: firms with n ∈ [nt (z), nt (z)] are financially constrained. Con-
         strained firms’ optimal investment kt′ (z, n) and borrowing b′t (z, n) decisions solve the
         Bellman equation (5). Constrained firms also pay zero dividends because the value of
   9
    Firms which receive the exogenous exit shock have simple decision rules. Those that do not default
simply sell their undepreciated capital after production. Since these firms cannot borrow, they default
whenever net worth n < 0.


                                                                     17
       resources inside the firm, used to lower borrowing costs, is higher than the value of
       resources outside the firm.

Proof. See Supplemental Materials E.                                                                                               ■


Lenders       There is a representative financial intermediary that lends resources from the
representative household to firms at the firm-specific price schedule Qt (z, k ′ , b′ ). If the firm
defaults on the loan in the following period, the lender recovers a fraction α of the market
value of the firm’s capital stock qt+1 ω ′ k ′ . The debt price schedule prices this default risk
competitively:
                                         (                                                                                                  ) 
                                1       1 − 1 − (πd χ1 (n̂t+1 (z ′ , ω ′ , k ′ , b′ )) + (1 − πd )χ2t+1 (z ′ , n̂t+1 (z ′ , ω ′ , k ′ , b′ )))
Qt (z, k ′ , b′ ) = Et Λt+1                                      (                                          )                                  ,
                               Πt+1                                                          (1−δ)ω ′ k′
                                                               × 1 − min{ αqt+1            ′
                                                                                          b /Πt+1        , 1}
                                                                                                                                   (6)



3.2      New Keynesian Block

The New Keynesian block of the model is designed to parsimoniously generate a New Key-
nesian Phillips curve relating nominal variables to the real economy.


Retailers and Final Good Producer                             There is a fixed mass of retailers i ∈ [0, 1]. Each
retailer produces a differentiated variety yeit using the heterogeneous production firms’ good
as its only input: yeit = yit , where yit is the amount of the undifferentiated good demanded
by retailer i. Retailers set a relative price for their variety peit but must pay a quadratic
                         (          )2
                            peit
price adjustment cost φ2 peit−1  − 1 Yt , where Yt is the final good. The retailers’ demand
curve is generated by the representative final good producer, which has production function
     ( γ−1 ) γ−1  γ
       ∫ γ
Yt =     yeit di     , where γ is the elasticity of substitution over intermediate goods. This
final good is the numeraire.
    The retailers and final good producers aggregate into the familiar New Keynesian Phillips
Curve:
                                                     γ−1    pt
                                       log Πt =          log ∗ + βEt log Πt+1 ,                                                  (7)
                                                      φ     p



                                                                18
where p∗ =       γ−1
                  γ
                       is the steady state relative price of the heterogeneous production firm
output.10 The Phillips Curve links the New Keynesian block to the investment block through
the relative price pt . When aggregate demand for the final good Yt increases, retailers must
increase production of their differentiated goods. Because of the nominal rigidities, this force
increases demand for the heterogeneous firms’ goods yit , which increases their relative price
pt and generates inflation through (7).


Capital Good Producer                There is a representative capital good producer who produces
new aggregate capital using the technology Φ( KItt )Kt , where It are units of the final good
                                 ∫
used to produce capital, Kt = kjt dj is the aggregate capital stock at the beginning of the
                            ( )1−1/ϕ
                     δ̂ 1/ϕ
period, Φ( KItt ) = 1−1/ϕ    It
                             Kt
                                     − ϕ−1
                                        δ̂
                                           , and δ̂ is the steady-state investment rate.11 Profit
maximization pins down the relative price of capital as

                                                           (            )1/ϕ
                                                1              It /Kt
                                        q t = ′ It =                           .                                 (8)
                                             Φ ( Kt )            δ̂

Monetary Authority The monetary authority sets the nominal risk-free interest rate

                                                                     t , where εt ∼ N (0, σm ),
Rtnom according to the Taylor rule log Rtnom = log β1 + φπ log Πt + εm          m          2


φπ is the weight on inflation in the reaction function, and εm
                                                             t is the monetary policy shock.




3.3     Representative Household and Equilibrium

There is a representative household with preferences over consumption Ct and labor supply
Lt represented by the expected utility function

                                               ∑
                                               ∞
                                          E0        β t (log Ct − ΨLt ) ,
                                                t


where β is the discount factor and Ψ controls the disutility of labor supply. The household
owns all firms in the economy. We study perfect foresight transition paths with respect
  10
    We focus directly on the linearized formulation for computational simplicity.
  11
    Because the capital quality shock follows a truncated log-normal process, the steady-state investment
rate is δ̂ = (1 − (1 − δ)E[ω])(1 + kK0 ∗µ ), where K ∗ is the steady-state capital stock and µ the steady-state level
of new entrants. For more details see Supplemental Materials D.



                                                         19
to aggregate states, so the stochastic discount factor and nominal interest rate are linked
                                                                        1
through the Euler equation for bonds, Λt+1 =                       Rtnom /Πt+1
                                                                               .
     An equilibrium is a set of value functions vt (z, n); decision rules kt′ (z, n), b′t (z, n), lt (z, n);
measure of firms µt (z, ω, k, b); debt price schedule Qt (z, k ′ , b′ ); and prices wt , qt , pt , Πt , Λt+1
such that (i) all firms optimize, (ii) lenders price default risk competitively, (iii) the household
optimizes, (iv) the distribution of firms is consistent with decision rules, and (v) all markets
clear. Supplemental Materials D precisely defines an equilibrium of our model.



4      Channels of Monetary Transmission
Before performing the quantitative analysis, we theoretically characterize the channels through
which monetary policy affects investment in our model. This exercise identifies the key
sources of heterogeneous responses across firms, which motivates our calibration in Section
5.


Monetary policy experiment We study the effect of an unexpected innovation to the
Taylor rule εm
             t followed by a perfect foresight transition back to steady state. This approach

allows for clean analytical results because there is no distinction between ex-ante expected
real interest rates and ex-post realized real interest rates. We focus on financially constrained
firms as defined in Proposition 1 because they make up more than 99.4% of the firms in our
calibration.


Impact on decision rules                   The optimal choice of investment k ′ and borrowing b′ satisfy
the following two conditions:

                                     1
             qt k ′ = n +                        b′                                                                            (9)
                            Rt (z, k ′ , b′ )
                                     Qt (z, k ′ , b′ )b′      Rtsp (z, k ′ , b′ )              1
          (qt − εQ,k′ (z, k ′ , b′ )                     )                              =         Et [MRPKt+1 (z ′ , k ′ )]   (10)
                                              k ′          1 − εR,b′ (z, k , b )′  ′         Rt
                 1 Covt (MRPKt+1 (z ′ , ω ′ k ′ ), 1 + λt+1 (z ′ , n̂t+1 (z ′ , ω ′ , k ′ , b′ )))
              +
                Rt                   Et [1 + λt+1 (z ′ , n̂t+1 (z ′ , ω ′ , k ′ , b′ )))]
                 1      [ 0                                                                        ]
              − Eω′ vt+1         (ω ′ , k ′ , b′ )gz (z(ω ′ , k ′ , b′ )|z)ẑ t+1 (ω ′ , k ′ , b′ ) ,
                Rt

                                                                20
where Rt is the real risk-free rate between t and t + 1, Rt (z, k ′ , b′ ) =                                                       1
                                                                                                                              Qt (z,k′ ,b′ )
                                                                                                                                               is the firm’s
implied interest rate schedule, εQk′ (z, k ′ , b′ ) is the elasticity of the bond price schedule with
respect to investment k ′ , Rtsp (z, k ′ , b′ ) = Rt (z, k ′ , b′ )/Rtnom is a measure of the borrowing
spread, εRb′ (z, k ′ , b′ ) is the elasticity of the interest rate schedule with respect to borrowing,
λt (z, n) is the Lagrange multiplier on the non-negativity constraint on dividends, z t (ω, k, b)
is the default threshold in terms of productivity (which inverts the net worth threshold
defined in Proposition 1), vt0 (ω, k, b) ≡ vt (z t (ω, k, b), n̂t (z t (ω, k, b), ω, k, b)) is the value of the
firm evaluated at the default threshold, gz (z ′ |z) is the density of z ′ conditional on z, and
                             ∂z t+1 (ω ′ ,k′ ,b′ )       ∂z t+1 (ω ′ ,k′ ,b′ )                       ′   ′   ′            ′     ′
ẑ t+1 (ω ′ , k ′ , b′ ) ≡         ∂k′
                                                     +          ∂b′
                                                                               (qt   − εQ,k′ Qt (z,kk′ ,b )b ) 1−εRt (z,k  ,b )
                                                                                                                      ′ (z,k ′ ,b′ )]
                                                                                                                                      . Condition (9)
                                                                                                                   R,b

is the non-negativity constraint on dividends and condition (10) is the intertemporal Euler
equation. The expectation and covariances in this expression are only taken over the states
in which the firm does not default.
                                                                                                                                                                  ′   ′   ′
     The marginal cost of capital is the product of two terms. The first term, qt −εQ,k′ (z, k ′ , b′ ) Qt (z,kk′ ,b )b ,
is the relative price of capital goods qt net of the interest savings due to higher capital,
                             ′   ′′
εQ,k′ (z, k ′ , b′ ) Qt (z,k
                          b
                             ,b
                                k ′ . The interest savings result from the fact that, all else equal, higher
capital decreases expected losses due to default to the lenders. The second term in the
                                                                                                    Rtsp (z,k′ ,b′ )
marginal cost of capital is related to borrowing costs,                                           1−εR,b′ (z,k′ ,b′ )
                                                                                                                      .   A higher interest rate
spread or a higher slope of that spread results in higher borrowing costs.
     The marginal benefit of capital is the sum of three terms. The first term,                                                      1
                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                     Rt t
                                                                                                                                               [MRPKt+1 (z ′ , k ′ )],
is the expected return on capital discounted by the real interest rate. The second term,
1 Covt (MRPKt+1 (z ′ ,ω ′ k′ ),1+λt+1 (z ′ ,ω ′ ,k′ ,b′ ))
Rt         Et [1+λt+1 (z ′ ,ω ′ ,k′ ,b′ ))]
                                                           ,       captures the covariance of the return on capital with
the firm’s shadow value of resources. The third term captures how additional investment
affects the firm’s default probability and, therefore, the value of the firm. In our calibra-
tion, this term is negligible because the value of the firm close to the default threshold,
 0
vt+1 (ω ′ , k ′ , b′ ), is essentially zero.
     Figure 2 plots the marginal benefit and marginal cost schedules as a function of capital
accumulation k ′ . In order to illustrate the key economic mechanisms, we compare how these
curves shift following an expansionary monetary policy shock for two extreme examples of
firms. These firms share the same level of productivity but the first firm has high net worth
and is currently risk-free (though it is still constrained in the sense of Proposition 1), while


                                                                                 21
           Figure 2: Response to Monetary Policy for Risk-Free and Risky Firms
                  (a) Risk-Free Firm                  (b) Risky Firm




Notes: Marginal benefit and marginal cost curves as a function of capital investment k ′ for firms with same
productivity. Left panel is for a firm with high initial net worth and right panel is for a firm with low
initial net worth. Marginal cost curve is the left-hand side of (10) and marginal benefit the right-hand side
of (10). Dashed black lines plot the curves before an expansionary monetary policy shock, and solid blue
lines plot the curves after the shock.


the second has low net worth and is risky constrained.


Risk-Free Firm         The left panel of Figure 2 plots the two schedules for the risk-free firm.
The marginal cost curve is flat when capital accumulation k ′ can be financed without in-
curring default risk, but becomes upward sloping when the borrowing required to achieve k ′
creates default risk and therefore a credit spread. The marginal benefit curve is downward
sloping due to diminishing returns to capital. In the initial equilibrium, the firm is risk-free
because the two curves intersect in the flat region of the marginal cost curve.
    The expansionary monetary shock shifts both the marginal benefit and marginal cost
curves. The marginal benefit curve shifts out for two reasons. First, the shock decreases
the real interest rate, which decreases the firm’s discount rate Rt and therefore increases
the discounted return on capital. Second, the shock also changes the relative price of out-
put pt+1 , the real wage wt+1 , and the relative price of undepreciated capital qt+1 due to
general equilibrium effects. In our calibration, these changes increase the return on capital
MRPKt+1 (z, k ′ ) and therefore further shift out the marginal benefit curve. Third, the shock
also affects the covariance term and the change in default threshold, which further shifts out
the marginal benefit curve.
    The marginal cost curve shifts up because the increase in aggregate investment demand
increases the relative price of capital qt . In the new equilibrium, the firm has increased
its capital and remains risk-free because the marginal benefit and marginal cost curves still

                                                     22
intersect along the flat region of the marginal cost curve.


Risky Firm      The right panel of Figure 2 plots how the marginal benefit and marginal
cost curves shift for the risky firm. Because this firm has low initial net worth n, it needs
to borrow more than the risk-free firm to achieve the same level of investment. Hence, its
marginal cost curve is upward-sloping over a larger region of net worth.
   The key difference between the risky and the risk-free firm is how monetary policy shifts
the marginal cost curve. As with the risk-free firm, the curve shifts up because the relative
price of capital qt increases, but there are now two additional effects. First, monetary policy
increases net worth n, which decreases the amount the firm needs to borrow to finance any
level of investment and therefore extends the flat region of the marginal cost curve. The
increase in net worth can be decomposed according to:
                      (                          )
∂ log n     1             ∂ log pt    ∂ log wt       ιt (z, ωk) ∂ log qt qt (1 − δ)ωk ∂ log Πt b/Πt
        =                          −ν                          +                     +              ,
 ∂εtm
          1−ν−θ               m
                            ∂εt         ∂εmt              n      ∂εmt          n        ∂εmt     n
                                                                                                 (11)
where ιt (z, ωk) = maxl pt z(ωk)θ lν − wt l. This expression (11) contains three ways that mon-
etary policy affects cash flows. First, monetary policy affects current revenues by changing
the relative price of output pt net of real labor costs νwt . Second, monetary policy affects
the value of firms’ undepreciated capital stock by changing the relative price of capital qt .
Finally, monetary policy changes the real value of nominal debt through inflation Πt .
   The second key difference in how monetary policy affects the risky firm’s marginal cost
curve is that it flattens the upward-sloping region, reflecting reduced credit spreads. Recall
that, in the event of default, lenders recover αqt+1 ωjt+1 kjt+1 per unit of debt; since the shock
increases the relative price of capital qt+1 , it also increases the recovery rate, which reduces
credit spreads. This channel is reminiscent of the “financial accelerator” in Bernanke, Gertler
and Gilchrist (1999). Monetary policy also decreases the probability of default, but this effect
is quantitatively small in our calibration.
   Whether the risky firm is more or less responsive than the risk-free firm depends crucially
on the size of these two shifts in the marginal cost curve. Theoretically, they may or may
not be large enough to induce the risky firm to be more responsive to monetary policy than


                                                     23
the risk-free firm. The goal of our calibration is to quantitatively discipline these shifts using
our model.12,13


Relationship to other papers               The simple framework in Figure 2 provides a powerful
tool to organize various results in the existing literature. Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist
(1999) develop a model in which firms’ production functions are constant returns to scale,
which results in a horizontal marginal benefit curve for investment. The level of investment
is determined by the point at which this curve intersects the upward-sloping region of the
marginal cost curve. Therefore, movements in the marginal cost curve have a stronger
effect on how investment responds to monetary policy shocks, increasing the strength of the
financial accelerator channel described above.
       Jeenas (2019) develops a model in which firms face collateral constraints and a fixed cost
of issuing debt but can accumulate liquid financial assets. This model implies that firms face
two kinked marginal cost curves for financing investment: one corresponding to using liquid
assets (which is flat until these assets are exhausted, and then becomes vertical) and another
corresponding to new borrowing (which is flat – at a higher lever due an exogenous spread
in borrowing costs – until firms reach the collateral constraint, at which point it becomes
vertical). Optimal investment is determined by the mix of these two marginal costs curves
that firms use when financing their investment. Many firms do not find it worthwhile to
issue new debt, so their marginal source of investment finance is liquid assets. Therefore,
firms that have more liquid assets have a larger flat region of their liquid-asset-cost curve
  12
     Online Appendix B.2 shows that the heterogeneous responses to monetary policy we find in the data are
primarily driven by expansionary shocks. While we do not emphasize that result due to its wide standard
errors, it is potentially consistent with the analysis in Figure 2. Suppose that high-risk firms tend to
position themselves at the point where their marginal cost curve just begins to be upward sloping. Then an
expansionary shock will move these firms forward along the upward-sloping part – dampening their response
relative to low-risk firms – while a contractionary shock will move them backward along the flat part – not
dampening their response.
  13
     We can use this analysis to conjecture how incorporating long-term debt would affect our results. If we
were to increase the maturity of debt but hold all other parameters fixed, then we would of course decrease
default probabilities (since firms will have to roll over less debt each period) and potentially flatten out the
marginal cost curve. Therefore, we would also need to recalibrate the parameters in order to match the same
average probability of default as in the current model. We expect that this recalibration would also imply
a similar slope of the default probabilities with respect to borrowing and, therefore, a similar slope for the
marginal cost curve. However, the marginal cost curve may become more responsive to monetary shocks if
the resulting inflation significantly decreases the real value of long-term debt (as in Gomes, Jermann and
Schmid (2016)).


                                                      24
                                             Table 4
                                        Fixed Parameters
                           Parameter Description             Value
                           Household
                           β         Discount factor         0.99
                           Firms
                           ν         Labor coefficient       0.64
                           θ         Capital coefficient     0.21
                           δ         Depreciation            0.025
                           New Keynesian Block
                           ϕ         Aggregate capital AC 4
                           γ         Demand elasticity       10
                           φπ        Taylor rule coefficient 1.25
                           φ         Price adjustment cost 90

Notes: Parameters exogenously fixed in the calibration.


and are more responsive to monetary policy.
    Cloyne et al. (2018) argue that young firms are more responsive to monetary shocks
in the U.S. and the U.K. While we show in Online Appendix C.2 that age does not drive
our empirical results, one can nevertheless interpret their findings through the lens of our
model. One possible interpretation is that young firms face a steeper marginal cost curve
than old firms, but young firms’ marginal cost curves are also more sensitive to monetary
policy. Another interpretation is that young firms’ marginal benefit curves are themselves
more responsive to monetary policy, for example if their product demand is more cyclically
sensitive.



5     Parameterization
We now calibrate the model and verify that its steady state behavior is consistent with key
features of the micro data.


5.1    Calibration

We calibrate the model in two steps. First, we exogenously fix a subset of parameters.
Second, we choose the remaining parameters in order to match moments in the data.


                                                   25
Fixed Parameters Table 4 lists the parameters that we fix. The model period is one
quarter, so we set the discount factor β = 0.99. We set the coefficient on labor ν = 0.64.
We choose the coefficient on capital θ = 0.21 to imply a total returns to scale of 85%.
Capital depreciates at rate δ = 0.025 quarterly. We choose the elasticity of substitution in
final goods production γ = 10, implying a steady state markup of 11%. This choice implies
that the steady state labor share is       γ−1
                                            γ
                                               ν   ≈ 58%, close to the U.S. labor share reported in
Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013). We choose the coefficient on inflation in the Taylor rule
φπ = 1.25, in the middle of the range commonly considered in the literature. We set the
price adjustment cost parameter φ = 90 to generate a Phillips Curve slope equal to 0.1, as in
Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018). Finally, we set the curvature of the aggregate adjustment
costs ϕ = 4 following Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999). This level of adjustment costs
roughly matches the peak response of investment relative to the peak response of output
estimated in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005).


Fitted Parameters We choose the parameters listed in Table 5 to match the empirical
moments reported in Table 6. The first set of parameters governs the idiosyncratic shocks
(ρ, σ, and σω ), the second set governs the frictions to external finance (ξ and α), and the
third set governs the firm lifecycle (m, k0 , and πd ). None of the statistics that we target are
drawn from Compustat; later on, when we compare our model to the empirical results from
Section 2, we will account for the selection of firms into Compustat.14
       We target the dispersion of plant-level investment rates in Census micro data reported by
Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), which places discipline on the degree of idiosyncratic risk
faced by firms.15 We target a number of statistics related to firms’ use of external finance.
Following Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999), we target a mean default rate of 3% as
estimated in a survey of businesses by Dun and Bradstreet. We target an average firm-level
  14
      At each step of the moment-matching process, we choose the disutility of labor supply Ψ to generate a
steady state employment rate of 60%.
   15
      We prefer to use the plant-level data from Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), rather than firm-level data
from other sources, because Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006) carefully construct measures of retirement and
sales of capital to measure negative investment, which is important in our model because capital is liquid.
Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006)’s sample is a balanced panel of plants that have survived at least sixteen
years; to mirror this sample selection in the model, we condition on firms that have survived for twenty
years, and our calibration results are robust to different choices of this cutoff.



                                                     26
                                              Table 5
                                         Fitted Parameters
                       Parameter Description                                  Value
                       Idiosyncratic shock processes
                       ρ            Persistence of TFP (fixed)                0.90
                       σ            SD of innovations to TFP                  0.03
                       σω           SD of capital quality                     0.04
                       Financial frictions
                       ξ            Operating cost                            0.04
                       α            Loan recovery rate                        0.54
                       Firm lifecycle
                       m            Mean shift of entrants’ prod.             3.12
                       k0           Initial capital                           0.18
                       πd           Exogenous exit rate                       0.01

Notes: Parameters chosen to match the moments in Table 6.


gross leverage ratio of 0.34 from the microdata underlying the Quarterly Financial Reports,
as reported in Crouzet and Mehrotra (2020). We also target the share of firms with positive
debt from Crouzet and Mehrotra (2020) in order to maintain a realistic distinction between
gross and net leverage.16
       The final two sets of moments are informative about firm lifecycle dynamics. We target
the share of employment in firms of age less than one year, between one and ten years, and
over ten years, all of which are informative about how quickly young firms grow. We also
target the average exit rate and the share of firms in the economy at age one and two, which
is informative about the exit rate of young firms. All of these statistics are computed from
the Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS), the public-release sample of statistics aggregated
from the Census’ Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).
       Table 6 shows that our model matches the targeted moments reasonably well despite the
fact that it is overidentified. The model roughly matches the dispersion of investment rates,
which captures the degree of idiosyncratic risk faced by firms. The model also matches the
average default rate, but slightly overpredicts the average gross leverage ratio and underpre-
  16
     We do not target credit spreads because observed credit spreads in the data are driven not only by the
risk-neutral pricing of default risk, as in our model, but also by aggregate risk premia, which are outside our
model. Consistent with this idea, the average annual credit spread in our model is 0.7%, compared to the
2.4% spread of BAA corporate bonds over the ten-year Treasury bond in the data.



                                                      27
                                         Table 6
                            Calibration Targets and Model Fit
           Moment           Description                                        Data   Model
           Investment
             (i)         behavior (annual)
           σ k              SD investment rate                                 0.33   0.37
           Financial behavior (annual)
           E [default
             [ ]      rate] Mean default rate                                  3.0%   3.0%
           E kb             Mean gross leverage ratio                          0.34   0.49
           Frac(b > 0)      Firms w/ positive debt                             0.81   0.70
           Firm Growth (annual)
           N1 /N            Share of employment in age ≤ 1                     0.03   0.02
           N1−10 /N         Share of employment in age ∈ (1, 10)               0.21   0.36
           N11+ /N          Share of employment in age ≥ 10                    0.76   0.62
           Firm Exit (annual)
           E [exit rate]    Mean exit rate                                     8.7%   8.8%
           M1 /M            Share of firms at age 1                            0.10   0.08
           M2 /M            Share of firms at age 2                            0.08   0.06

Notes: Empirical targets in the calibration. See main text for data sources.


dicts the fraction of firms with positive debt. The model matches the share of employment
in young firms, but somewhat overpredicts the share of employment in 1-10 year old firms.
    The calibrated parameters in Table 5 are broadly comparable to existing estimates in
the literature. Idiosyncratic TFP shocks are less persistent and more volatile than measured
aggregate TFP shocks, consistent with direct measurements of plant- or firm-level produc-
tivity. The calibrated loan recovery rate is 0.54, as in Khan, Senga and Thomas (2016).
New entrants start with significantly lower productivity and capital than the average firm.
The capital quality shock process implies that there is a pω = 0.59 probability of receiving
a zero shock log ωjt = 0. Online Appendix D contains a formal discussion of identification
using the local elasticities of moments with respect to parameters as well as the elasticities
of estimated parameters with respect to moments (computed using the tools from Andrews,
Gentzkow and Shapiro (2017)). The financial frictions in our calibrated model affect nearly
all firms in the stationary distribution. Using the classification from Proposition 1, 52.8% of
firms are risky constrained, 47.5% of firms are risk-free constrained, and 0.6% of firms are
unconstrained.




                                                    28
                            Figure 3: Firm Lifecycle Dynamics, Model vs. Data
                Distribution of growth rates, model vs. data                                                                      Age-growth profile
          0.6                                                                                                   0.4
                                                                            Model
                                                                            Data                               0.35
          0.5

                                                                                                                0.3




                                                                                         Average growth rate
          0.4

                                                                                                               0.25
          0.3
                                                                                                                0.2

          0.2
                                                                                                               0.15

          0.1
                                                                                                                0.1


           0                                                                                                   0.05
                 (-2.0,-0.2] (-0.2,-0.05] (-0.05,0.05) (0.05,0.2]   (0.2,2.0)                                         2   4   6   8    10     12     14   16   18   20
                                                                                                                                      Age in years



Notes: Panel (a) plots a histogram of the distribution of quarterly growth rates in the model vs. the data.
                                                       ljt+1 −ljt
In the model, we measure the firm’s growth rate as 0.5(l  jt+1 +ljt )
                                                                      where ljt is employment. “Data” is the
empirical distribution of quarterly establishment growth rates in the Business Employment Dynamics
(BED) data, reported in Davis et al. (2010). Panel (b) plots the average firm-level growth rate as a
function of age in steady state. We add 0.1 to the model’s growth profile to account for the fact that our
model does not feature trend growth. We exclude the first year of growth since firms in our model are born
significantly below optimal scale; the average growth rate in year 1 is nearly 1.


5.2     Financial Heterogeneity in the Model and the Data

Online Appendix D analyzes firms’ decision rules in steady state and identifies two key
sources of financial heterogeneity across firms. The first source is lifecycle dynamics; firms
are born below their optimal scale, i.e. k0 < k ∗ (z), and need to grow their capital stock.
These young firms initially borrow in order to accumulate capital, increasing their risk of
default and therefore borrowing costs. The second source of financial heterogeneity is TFP
shocks z; a positive shock increases the firm’s optimal scale k ∗ (z), which again induces debt-
financed capital accumulation. We show that firms more affected by these financial frictions
have a positive “marginal propensity to invest” out of net worth.
    The lifecycle dynamics of firms in our model are in line with the key features of the data
emphasized by the firm dynamics literature. Panel (a) in Figure 3 compares the distribution
of firm growth rates in steady state to the establishment-level data from the Business Em-
ployment Dynamics (BED) data, reported in Davis et al. (2010). The model matches the
empirical distribution of growth rates fairly well except for the large mass of growth rates
within (−0.05, 0.05) in the data. This discrepancy is driven by the fact that 15% of firms
have growth rates of exactly zero; these observations likely correspond to small, non-growing
establishments, which are outside our model. Panel (b) in Figure 3 shows that the model

                                                                                    29
produces a negative correlation between age and growth, as in the data (and comparable to
the model in Clementi and Palazzo (2016)).
    Online Appendix D and Supplemental Materials F further analyze the behavior of the
model in steady state and compares it to the data. First, we further analyze the lifecycle
dynamics of firms. Second, we show that the joint distribution of investment and leverage
rates in our model is comparable to Census and Compustat data. Finally, we compare our
model’s sample of public and private firms to the data.



6     Quantitative Monetary Policy Analysis
We now quantitatively analyze the effect of a monetary policy shock εm
                                                                     t . Section 6.1 begins

the analysis by computing the aggregate impulse responses to an expansionary shock in
our calibrated model. Section 6.2 then studies the heterogeneous effects of monetary policy
across firms and shows that, consistent with the empirical results from Section 2, firms with
high default risk are less responsive to monetary policy. Finally, Section 6.3 performs a
simple calculation to show that the aggregate effect of monetary policy may depend on the
distribution of default risk across firms.

                                                                          0 = −0.0025
    The economy is initially in steady state and unexpectedly receives a εm
innovation to the Taylor rule which reverts to 0 according to εm         m
                                                               t+1 = ρm εt with ρm = 0.5.

We compute the perfect foresight transition path of the economy as it converges back to
steady state.


6.1    Aggregate Response to Monetary Policy

Figure 4 plots the responses of key aggregate variables to this expansionary shock. The shock
lowers the nominal interest rate and, because prices are sticky, also lowers the real interest
rate. The lower real interest rate stimulates investment demand by shifting out the marginal
benefit of investment, as discussed in Section 4. It also stimulates consumption demand
from the household due to the standard intertemporal substitution. The higher aggregate
demand for goods changes other prices in the economy, further shifting the marginal benefit
and marginal costs curves for investment. Overall, investment increases by approximately

                                             30
                                           Figure 4: Aggregate Responses to Expansionary Monetary Shock
                                               Interest Rates and Inflation                                      Aggregate Quantities                                             Prices
                                    0.6                                                                1.5                                                        0.7
                                                                     Real rate                                                   Output                                      Intermediate Good Price
                                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                    0.4                              Inflation                                                   Consumption                                 Capital Price
                                                                     Nominal rate                                                Investment                                  Real Wage
        Annualized p.p. deviation

                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                    0.2
                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                  0.4




                                                                                         % deviation




                                                                                                                                                    % deviation
                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                  0.3
                                    -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                       0.5
                                    -0.4
                                                                                                                                                                  0.1

                                    -0.6                                                                                                                            0

                                    -0.8                                                                0                                                         -0.1
                                           2          4        6          8         10                       2      4        6        8        10                        2    4        6     8         10
                                                          Quarters                                                      Quarters                                                  Quarters




                                         0 = −0.0025 innovation to the Taylor rule which decays at rate
Notes: Aggregate impulse responses to a εm
ρm = 0.5. Computed as the perfect foresight transition in response to a series of unexpected innovations
starting from steady state.


1.4%, consumption increases by 0.4%, and output increases by 0.5%. These magnitudes
are broadly in line with the peak effects of monetary policy shocks estimated in Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans (2005); for a similarly-sized change in the nominal interest rate, they
find that investment increases by approximately 1%, consumption increases by 0.2%, and
output increases by 0.5%.17


6.2     Heterogeneous Responses to Monetary Policy

Model-Implied Regression Coefficients In order to directly compare our model to the
data, we simulate a panel of firms in response to a monetary shock and estimate our empirical
specification (2) on the simulated data:18 ∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + β(xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                                                                         t +

Γ′ Zjt−1 + ejt . We account for the sample selection into Compustat by conditioning on firms
that have survived at least seven years, which is around the median time to IPO reported
in Wilmer et al. (2017). Online Appendix D shows that the behavior of the model’s public
firms vs. private firms compares fairly well to the data along certain dimensions. We assume
  17
     Our model does not generate the hump-shaped aggregate responses emphasized by Christiano, Eichen-
baum and Evans (2005). We could do so by incorporating adjustment costs to investment rather than capital.
However, in order to be consistent with the hump-shaped responses of consumption and employment, we
would also need to add habit formation and potentially labor adjustment costs. While interesting, this
extension is outside the scope of this paper, whose goal is to focus on the role of financial heterogeneity in
monetary transmission using an otherwise basic New Keynesian model.
  18
     In the model, we use time fixed effects rather than sector-time fixed effects because our model does not
contain multiple sectors. In addition, we do not include the subset of control variables Zjt which are outside
our model, such as fiscal quarter.



                                                                                                                        31
                                            Table 7
                               Empirical results, model vs. data
                                           Standardized Not Standardized
                                          Data    Model Data    Model
                                          (1)     (2)   (3)     (4)
            demeaned leverage × ffr shock −0.57∗∗ −1.30 −3.12∗∗ −6.84
                                          (0.29)        (1.47)
            Firm controls                 yes     yes   yes     yes
            Time FE                       yes     yes   yes     yes
            R2                            0.12    0.58  0.12    0.58

Notes: Column (1) show the results from running the specification
                                                  ′
∆ log kjt = αj + αst + β(ℓjt−1 − Ej [ℓjt ])εm
                                            t + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt , where all variables are defined in the notes for
Table 3. Column (2) estimates this empirical specification on the simulated data. In the model, we use time
fixed effects rather than sector-time fixed effects and we do not include the subset of control variables Zjt
which are outside our model, such as fiscal quarter. The sample period is four quarters before the monetary
shock through ten quarters after the shock. To mirror the sample selection into Compustat, we condition
on firms that have survived at least seven years. Columns (3) and (4) do not standardize ℓjt − Ej [ℓjt ].


that the high-frequency shocks εm
                                t that we measure in the data are the innovations to the

Taylor rule in the model. We estimate the regressions using data from one year before the
shock to ten quarters after the shock.
    We estimate the empirical specification (2) using leverage ℓjt as the measure of financial
position xjt for two main reasons. First, it is not obvious how to map our model to measured
distance to default because measured distance to default is based on the volatility of firms’
equity values, which are partly driven by equity risk premia due to aggregate shocks. Second,
there is a tight relationship between leverage and default risk in the model. This relationship
occurs because there is a monotonic relationship between leverage and net worth (shown in
Figure 24 in Supplemental Materials F), and firms only default when net worth falls below
the default threshold nt (z).
    Columns (1) and (2) of Table 7 shows that high-leverage firms are less responsive to mon-
etary policy in the model, as in the data. In the data, a firm with one standard deviation
more leverage than the average firm has an investment semi-elasticity that is approximately
−0.57 percentage points lower than the average firm; in the model, that firm has an approx-
imately −1.47 lower semi-elasticity (which is just outside the 95% confidence interval of the
empirical estimate). The R2 of the regression is lower in the data than in the model, indi-



                                                      32
                  Figure 5: Dynamics of differential responses, model vs. data
                                   2

                                   1

                                   0

                                   -1

                                   -2

                                   -3

                                   -4

                                   -5

                                   -6
                                        0   1    2      3        4   5      6      7




Notes: dynamics of the interaction coefficient between leverage and monetary shocks. Reports the
coefficient βh over quarters h from
                                                               ′          ′
log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + βh (ℓjt−1 − Ej [ℓjt ])εm
                                                          t + Γh Zjt−1 + Γ2h (ℓjt−1 − Ej [ℓjt ])Yt−1 + ejt , where all
table notes from Columns (1) and (2) of Table 7 apply. Dashed lines report 90% error bands.


cating that the data contain more unexplained variation than the model. Columns (3) and
(4) estimate the same regression except that they do not standardize the leverage variable
(so that the magnitudes of the coefficients can be interpreted as a reduced-form elasticity of
the responsiveness with respect to leverage). The coefficient increases by roughly an order of
four in both the model and the data, consistent with the fact that the dispersion of leverage
in our model is similar to the data.
    Figure 5 shows that the dynamics of the differential responses of investment are persistent
in the model, consistent with the data. In this figure, we estimate the local projection
(4) on our model-simulated data using standardized leverage. Quantitatively, the model’s
differences mostly stay within the data’s 90% confidence interval up to eight quarters after
the shock.
    These heterogeneous responses indicate that high-leverage firms are positioned on the
upward-sloping part of their marginal cost curve from Figure 2, and that the shifts in that
curve are quantitatively dominated by the shift out in the marginal benefit curve. This
mechanism has two implications for the data, both of which are confirmed in Figure 6.
First, the top panel shows that firms with high default risk – either those with high leverage
or low distance to default – see an increase in their borrowing costs relative to firms with
low default risk. In the data, we measure borrowing costs as average interest payments


                                                            33
              Figure 6: Testable Implications of Model Mechanism for the Data
                          Response of Average Interest Payments
                                            by Leverage                                                  by Distance to Default
                     0.3                                                                 0.06

                                                                                         0.04
                    0.25
                                                                                         0.02

                     0.2                                                                    0

                                                                                         -0.02
                    0.15
                                                                                         -0.04
                     0.1
                                                                                         -0.06


                    0.05                                                                 -0.08

                                                                                          -0.1
                       0
                                                                                         -0.12

                    -0.05                                                                -0.14
                            0   1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12                0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12




                                             Response of External Financing Flows
                                            by Leverage                                                  by Distance to Default
                      8                                                                   14

                      6                                                                   12

                      4
                                                                                          10

                      2
                                                                                           8
                      0
                                                                                           6
                      -2
                                                                                           4
                      -4
                                                                                           2
                      -6

                                                                                           0
                      -8

                    -10                                                                   -2


                    -12                                                                   -4
                           0    1   2   3   4    5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12              0     1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12




                                                                                           ′
Notes: Reports the coefficient βh from yjt+h = αjh + αsth + βh (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm t + Γh Zjt−1 + ejth , where
yjt+h is either the average interest rate in period t + h or the external financing flows between periods t + h
and t, and all notes from Columns (1) and (2) of Table 7 apply. Dashed lines report 90% error bands.


relative to lagged liabilities; therefore, the response of interest payments after eight to ten
quarters (which is approximately the average maturity of debt in Compustat) most closely
corresponds to interest payments on new borrowing in our model.19
       The second implication of our model’s mechanism is that low-risk firms can afford to
access more external finance following a monetary shock; Figure 6 shows that this implication
also holds in the data. We define external financing flows as the sum of the change in
total debt plus the change in total equity, scaled by assets. We then estimate the dynamic
empirical specification (4) with this measure of financing flows on the left-hand side. We
include equity because it is a source of external finance for firms in the data. Figure 6 shows
  19
    The borrowing costs of high-leverage firms also rise relative to the borrowing costs of low-leverage firms
in our model, but the quantitative magnitude of this spread is smaller than in the data. However, the
marginal cost curve in the model is determined by both measured spreads and the shadow value of the net
worth (λt (z, n) from Section 4). We do not compare the quantitative implications of the model to the data
because our model is not calibrated to match credit spreads, the empirical response of credit spreads to
monetary policy are contaminated by changes in risk premia, and credit spreads do not directly correspond
to the shadow value λt (z, n).


                                                                                    34
     Figure 7: Decomposition of Semi-Elasticity of Capital to Monetary Policy Shock
                                       Low Productivity                                                                                High Productivity
                        8                                                      0.18                                      8                                                0.06

                        6
                                                      Real rate only           0.16                                      6                                                0.055
                                                      Capital price only
                        4                             Others                   0.14                                      4
                                                                                                                                                                          0.05
                        2                                                      0.12                                      2
     Semi-Elasticity




                                                                                                      Semi-Elasticity
                                                                                                                                                                          0.045




                                                                                      Mass of firms




                                                                                                                                                                                  Mass of firms
                        0                                                      0.1                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                          0.04
                        -2                                                     0.08                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                                          0.035
                        -4                                                     0.06                                      -4
                                                                                                                                                                          0.03
                        -6                                                     0.04                                      -6

                        -8                                                     0.02                                      -8                                               0.025

                       -10                                                     0                                        -10                                               0.02
                             0.5   1    1.5      2        2.5   3   3.5    4                                               0.5   1   1.5    2     2.5      3   3.5    4
                                              Net worth                                                                                    Net worth



Notes: Semi-elasticity of capital in response to monetary shock and the initial distribution of firms. “Real
rate only” refers to feeding in the path of the real interest rate Rt but keeping all other prices fixed at
steady state. “Capital price only” refers to feeding in the path of the relative price of capital qt but keeping
all other prices fixed at steady state. “Others” refers to feeding in all other prices but keeping the real rate
and capital price fixed at steady state. Dashed purple line is the initial distribution of firms. Left panel
plots for low level of idiosyncratic productivity z. Right panel plots for high level of idiosyncratic
productivity z.


that, in the data, firms with low leverage or high distance to default access more external
finance following a monetary shock.


Decomposition of Channels Driving Heterogeneous Responses                                                                                                            In order to better
understand the sources of these heterogeneous responses across firms, we now decompose
the channels through which monetary policy affects firms’ investment into three different
channels. First, we compute the “direct effect” of monetary policy by feeding in the path of
the real interest rate Rt and hold all other prices fixed at steady state. Second, we feed in
the series of the relative price of capital qt but keep all other prices fixed. Finally, we feed in
all other prices in the model – the relative price of output pt , the real wage wt , and inflation
Πt – but keep the real interest rate Rt and relative price of capital qt fixed. Figure 7 plots
the semi-elasticity of investment to each of these series in the initial period of the shock,
conditional on a particular level of idiosyncratic TFP.
    The results in Figure 7 indicate that the heterogeneous responses in our model are driven
by the fact that firms with high default risk face a steeper marginal cost curve for financing
investment. The decrease in the real interest rate shifts out the marginal benefit curve in
Figure 2; firms with higher default risk – which, in Figure 7, have low net worth – are less


                                                                                                      35
responsive to this change because they have a steeper marginal cost curve. The increase in
the relative price of capital has two offsetting effects. On the one hand, it makes new capital
more expensive and therefore shifts the marginal cost curve up for all firms; on the other
hand, it increases the recovery rate of lenders in the event of default, which flattens out
the marginal cost curve for firms with low net worth. On net, the former force outweighs
the latter, but firms with low net worth are more strongly affected by the latter. Finally,
the increase in all other prices also shifts out the marginal benefit curve by increasing the
revenue product of capital; once again, this effect is offset for low net worth firms by their
steeper marginal cost curve.20
       The fact that both the direct and indirect effects play a quantitatively important role
in driving the investment channel of monetary policy contrasts with Auclert (2019)’s and
Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018)’s decomposition of the consumption channel. In the
context of a household’s consumption-savings problem, they find that the contribution of the
direct effect of lower real interest rates is small relative to the indirect general equilibrium
effects of higher labor income. In our model, direct interest rate effects are stronger because
firms are more price-sensitive than households. In fact, without any financial frictions at
all, the partial equilibrium elasticity of investment with respect to interest rates would be
nearly infinite (see Koby and Wolf (2020) for a discussion of the role of interest-elasticities in
heterogeneous firm macro models). In contrast, households are less price sensitive because
of consumption-smoothing motives, so these direct effects are less important.


6.3       Aggregate Implications of Financial Heterogeneity

In this subsection, we illustrate two ways in which financial heterogeneity matters for under-
standing the aggregate transmission mechanism. We first show that the aggregate effect of
a given monetary shock may be smaller when the initial distribution of firms features higher
default risk. Nevertheless, we show that the aggregate effect of monetary policy is larger in
our model than in a comparable version of the model without any financial frictions (which
collapses to a representative firm).
  20
    The changes in these other prices also increase net worth by increasing cash flow and increasing the
relative value of undepreciated capital, which moves firms along the x-axis of Figure 7.


                                                  36
                                    Table 8
                Aggregate Response Depends on Initial Distribution
      (everything rel. to steady state)        Bad Distribution           Medium distribution
      Avg. capital response                    0.67                       0.84
      Avg. net worth                           0.48                       0.75
      Frac. risky constrained                  1.37                       1.17

Notes: Dependence of aggregate response on initial distribution. We compute the change in aggregate
capital for different initial distributions as described in the main text. “Bad distribution” corresponds to
b = 1 and “Medium distribution” corresponds to ω
ω                                                     b = 0.5.


State Dependence of Aggregate Transmission In order to illustrate the quantitative
scope for state dependence, we fix the semi-elasticity of capital with respect to monetary
policy as a function of firms’ state variables and vary the initial distribution of firms. We
vary the initial distribution of firms µ(z, n) by taking the weighted average of two reference
distributions. The first reference distribution is the steady-state distribution µ∗ (z, n). The
                              e(z, n) assumes that the conditional distribution of net worth
second reference distribution µ
for every level of productivity is equal to the distribution of net worth conditional on a low
realization of productivity in steady state. We then compute the initial distribution as a
                                                                   µ(z, n) + (1 − ω̂)µ∗ (z, n).
weighted average of these two reference distributions, µ(z, n) = ω̂e
    Table 8 shows that the average response of capital accumulation is 33% smaller starting
                                    e(z, n) than starting from the steady state distribution
from the low net-worth distribution µ
µ∗ (z, n). In that distribution, average net worth is 52% lower and there are 37% more risky
constrained firms in the low-net worth distribution than in the steady state distribution.
Placing a weight ω̂ = 0.5 on the steady state distribution increases the aggregate capital
response, but it is still 16% below the response starting from steady state.
    These results suggests a potentially powerful source of time-variation in the aggregate
transmission mechanism: monetary policy is less powerful when net worth is low and de-
fault risk is high. Of course, a limitation of this analysis is that we have varied the initial
distribution exogenously. The natural next step in this analysis is to incorporate various
business cycle shocks into our model and study the shapes of the distributions that actually
arise in equilibrium. We also emphasize that aggregate state dependence is an implication of
the micro-level behavior of our model and has not been validated using aggregate time-series


                                                     37
        Figure 8: Aggregate Impulse Responses in Full Model vs. Rep Firm Model
                                                                     Real Interest Rate                                                      Aggregate Investment
                                            0                                                                             1.6

                                                                                                                          1.4
                                          -0.1
                                                                                                                          1.2


              Annualized p.p. deviation
                                          -0.2
                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                            % deviation
                                          -0.3                                                                            0.8

                                          -0.4                                                                            0.6

                                                                                                                          0.4
                                          -0.5
                                                                                                                          0.2
                                          -0.6           Het agent
                                                                                                                            0
                                                         Rep agent
                                          -0.7                                                                            -0.2
                                                 1   2       3       4    5     6    7    8   9   10                             1   2   3    4    5     6    7     8   9   10
                                                                          Quarters                                                                 Quarters



Notes: “Het agent” refers to calibrated heterogeneous firm model from the main text. “Rep agent” refers to
a version of the model in which the heterogeneous production sector is replaced by a representative firm
with the same production function and no financial frictions.


evidence.21


Comparison to Frictionless Model                                                                  We now compare our full model to a model in
which we eliminate financial frictions. We do so by removing the non-negativity constraint
on dividends; in this case, the investment block of the model collapses to a financially
unconstrained representative firm (see Khan and Thomas (2008) Appendix B). Figure 8
shows that the impact effect of monetary policy on investment is larger in our full model
than in the representative firm benchmark. Hence, despite the fact that risky constrained
firms are less responsive than risk-free constrained firms, both types of constrained firms are
more responsive than in a model without financial frictions because expansionary monetary
policy increases firms’ net worth.



7      Conclusion
In this paper, we have argued that financial frictions dampen the response of investment for
firms with high default risk. Our argument had two main components. First, we showed in
the micro data that firms with high leverage or low credit ratings invest significantly less than
  21
     Tenreyro and Thwaites (2016) provide time-series evidence that monetary shocks are less powerful in
recessions, which is broadly consistent with the implication of our model to the extent that firm-level net
worth falls in recessions. However, it is difficult to estimate the contribution of default risk alone in driving
this result given that the changes in the distribution are slow-moving and highly correlated with other
relevant factors in the time series.



                                                                                                       38
other firms following a monetary policy shock. Second, we built a heterogeneous firm New
Keynesian model with default risk that is quantitatively consistent with these empirical
results. In the model, monetary policy stimulates investment through a combination of
direct and indirect effects. High-risk firms are less responsive to these changes because their
marginal cost of investment finance is steeper than that of low-risk firms. The aggregate
effect of monetary policy is primarily driven by these low-risk firms, which suggests a novel
form of state dependence: monetary policy may be less powerful when default risk in the
economy is higher.
   Our results may be of independent interest to policymakers who are concerned about
the distributional implications of monetary policy across firms. An often-discussed goal of
monetary policy is to provide resources to viable but credit constrained firms. Many poli-
cymakers’ conventional wisdom, built on the financial accelerator mechanism, suggests that
constrained firms will significantly increase their capital investment in response to expan-
sionary monetary policy. Our results imply that, instead, expansionary policy will stimulate
the less risky firms in the economy to invest.



References
Andrews, I., M. Gentzkow, and J. Shapiro (2017): “Measuring the sensitivity of pa-
  rameter estimates to estimation moments,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4),
  1553–1592.
Arellano, C., L. Maliar, S. Maliar, and V. Tsyrennikov (2016): “Envelope Con-
  dition Methods With an Application to Default Risk Models,” Journal of Economic Dy-
  namics and Control, 69, 436–459.
Auclert, A. (2019): “Monetary policy and the redistribution channel,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 109(6), 2333–67.
Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999): “The financial accelerator in
  a quantitative business cycle framework,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, pp. 1341–1393.
Blanco, J. A., and G. Navarro (2017): “The Unemployment Accelerator,” Working
  paper.


                                              39
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. J. Terry
  (2018): “Really uncertain business cycles,” Econometrica, 86(3), 1031–1065.
Buera, F., and S. Karmakar (2018): “Real Effects of Financial Distress: The Role of
  Heterogeneity,” Working paper.
Campbell, J. R., C. L. Evans, J. D. Fisher, and A. Justiniano (2012): “Macroe-
  conomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance,” Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, pp. 1–80.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal rigidities and
  the dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113,
  1–45.
Clausen, A., and C. Strub (2020): “Reverse calculus and nested optimization,” Journal
  of Economic Theory, 187, 105019.
Clementi, G. L., and B. Palazzo (2016): “Entry, exit, firm dynamics, and aggregate
  fluctuations,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(3), 1–41.
          (2019): “Investment and the Cross-Section of Equity Returns,” The Journal of
  Finance, 74(1), 281–321.
Cloyne, J., C. Ferreira, M. Froemel, and P. Surico (2018): “Monetary Policy,
  Corporate Finance and Investment,” National Bureau of Economic Research w25366.
Cook, T., and T. Hahn (1989): “The effect of changes in the federal funds rate target on
  market interest rates in the 1970s.,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 24, 331–351.
Cooper, R. W., and J. C. Haltiwanger (2006): “On the nature of capital adjustment
  costs,” The Review of Economic Studies, 73, 611–633.
Crouzet, N., and N. Mehrotra (2020): “Small and Large Firms Over the Business
  Cycle,” Working paper.
Davis, S. J., R. J. Faberman, J. C. Haltiwanger, and I. Rucker (2010): “Adjusted
  Estimates of Worker Flows and Job Openings in JOLTS,” Labor in the New Economy, 71,
  187.
Davis, S. J., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2006): “Volatility and
  dispersion in business growth rates: Publicly traded versus privately held firms,” NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual, 21, 107–179.


                                           40
Dinlersoz, E., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, H. Hyatt, , and V. Penciakova (2018): “Lever-
  age over the life cycle and implications for firm growth and shock responsiveness,” National
  Bureau of Economic Research w25226.
Eberly, J., S. Rebelo, and N. Vincent (2012): “What Explains the Lagged-Investment
  Dynamics?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59, 370–380.
Eisfeldt, A. L., and A. A. Rampini (2006): “Capital Reallocation and Liquidity,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, 369–399.
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2016): “The Slow Growth of New
  Plants: Learning About Demand?,” Economica, 83, 91–129.
Gavazza, A., S. Mongey, and G. L. Violante (2018): “Aggregate recruiting intensity,”
  American Economic Review, 108(8), 2088–2127.
Gertler, M., and S. Gilchrist (1994): “Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the
  Behavior of Small Manufacturing Firms,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 309–
  340.
Gertler, M., and P. Karadi (2015): “Monetary Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic
  Activity,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 44–76.
Gilchrist, S., and E. Zakrajšek (2012): “Credit spreads and business cycle fluctua-
  tions,” American Economic Review, 102(4), 1692–1720.
Gomes, J. (2001): “Financing Investment,” The American Economic Review, pp. 1263–
  1285.
Gomes, J., U. Jermann, and L. Schmid (2016): “Sticky leverage,” American Economic
  Review, 106(12), 3800–3828.
Gorodnichenko, Y., and M. Weber (2016): “Are sticky prices costly? Evidence from
  the stock market,” The American Economic Review, 106, 165–199.
Gurkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and E. T. Swanson (2005): “Do Actions Speak Louder
  Than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements,”
  International Journal of Central Banking.
Jeenas, P. (2019): “Firm Balance Sheet Liquidity, Monetary Policy Shocks, and Investment
  Dynamics,” Working paper.
Jorda, O. (2005): “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,”


                                              41
  The American Economic Review, 95, 161–182.
Kaplan, G., B. Moll, and G. L. Violante (2018): “Monetary policy according to
  HANK,” American Economic Review, 108(3), 697–743.
Karabarbounis, L., and B. Neiman (2013): “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 61–103.
Khan, A., T. Senga, and J. Thomas (2016): “Default Risk and Aggregate Fluctuations
  in an Economy with Production Heterogeneity,” Working paper.
Khan, A., and J. Thomas (2008): “Idiosyncratic Shocks and the Role of Nonconvexities
  in Plant and Aggregate Investment Dynamics,” Econometrica, 76, 395.
Koby, Y., and C. Wolf (2020): “Investment Stimulus: From Micro Elasticities to Macro
  Counterfactuals,” Working paper.
McKay, A., E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2016): “The power of forward guidance
  revisited,” American Economic Review, 106(10), 3133–58.
McKay, A., and J. F. Wieland (2020): “Lumpy Durable Consumption Demand and the
  Limited Ammunition of Monetary Policy,” Working paper.
Merton, R. C. (1974): “On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest
  rates,” The Journal of Finance, 29, 449–470.
Miranda-Agrippino, S., and G. Ricco (2019): “The transmission of monetary policy
  shocks,” Working paper.
Nakamura, E., and J. Steinsson (2018): “High-frequency identification of monetary
  non-neutrality: The information effect,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3),
  1283–1330.
Reiter, M., T. Sveen, and L. Weinke (2013): “Lumpy investment and the monetary
  transmission mechanism,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(7), 821–834.
Romer, C., and D. Romer (1990): “New Evidence on the Monetary Transmission Mech-
  anism,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 21, 149–214.
Schaefer, S. M., and I. A. Strebulaev (2008): “Structural models of credit risk are
  useful: Evidence from hedge ratios on corporate bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics,
  90(1), 1–19.
Tenreyro, S., and G. Thwaites (2016): “Pushing on a string: US monetary policy is


                                           42
  less powerful in recessions,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(4), 43–74.
Vavra, J. (2013): “Inflation dynamics and time-varying volatility: New evidence and an
  SS interpretation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 215–258.
Whited, T. M. (1992): “Debt, Liquidity Constraints, and Corporate Investment: Evidence
  from Panel Data,” The Journal of Finance, 47, 1425–1460.
Wilmer, Cutler, Pickering, Hale, and D. LLP (2017): “2017 IPO Report,” Technical
  report.
Wong, A. (2019): “Refinancing and The Transmission of Monetary Policy to Consump-
  tion,” working paper.
Zwick, E., and J. Mahon (2017): “Tax policy and heterogeneous investment behavior,”
  American Economic Review, 107(1), 217–48.




                                          43
  Online Appendix for “Financial Heterogeneity and
the Investment Channel of Monetary Policy” by Pablo
Ottonello and Thomas Winberry

A     Empirical Specification
This appendix justifies the choices in our baseline empirical specification (2). Subsection A.1
clarifies the type of permanent heterogeneity in responsiveness for which our specification
controls by using only within-firm variation in financial position. Subsection A.2 shows
that our results are qualitatively robust, but quantitatively weaker, if we do not control for
differences in cyclical sensitivities across firms.


A.1     Controlling for Permanent Heterogeneity in Responsiveness

We discuss how our estimator controls for permanent heterogeneity in responsiveness using
a simple example. Suppose the data generating process is


                               yjt = αj + λt + βj εt + γxjt εt + ejt                        (12)


where yjt is an outcome of interest, εt is an aggregate shock, xjt is a firm characteristic,
βj = bEj [xjt ] is a permanent characteristic that controls the responsiveness of yjt to εt , and
ejt is an exogenous error term. In the main text, the outcome of interest yjt is investment,
the firm characteristic xjt is financial position, and the aggregate shock εt is a monetary
policy shock. The assumption βj = bEj [xjt ] implies that the average value of the firm’s
financial position is proportional to the permanent heterogeneity in responsiveness βj . The
coefficient of interest to be estimated is γ, which measures how changes in the characteristic
xjt affect the response of yjt to the aggregate shock εt .
    We assume that the aggregate shock εt is exogenous and homoskedastic given the entire
sample of xjt , which we denote x. That is, we assume (i) E[εt |x] = 0 and (ii) E[ε2t |x] = σ 2 ,
though we can relax (i) to be conditioned only on the values of x up to date t in the
discussion below. Our interpretation of this condition is that the particular aggregate shock


                                                44
εt accounts for a vanishingly small proportion of the variation in xjt . In our context, this
assumption is consistent with the idea that monetary policy shocks account for a small
fraction of fluctuations.
    Demeaning the data generating process (12) within firm j gives ybjt ≡ yjt − Ej [yjt ] =
(λt − Ej [λt ]) + βj εt + γxjt εt + ejt , which uses the facts that Ej [ejt ] = 0 for all j, Ej [εt ] = 0
for all j, and Ej [xjt εt ] = Ej [xjt Ej [εt |x]] = 0. As usual, one can estimate the time fixed effect
(λt − Ej [λt ]) with time dummies, so we drop this term from the discussion going forward.
Using the fact that βj = bEj [xjt ], we now have


                                      ybjt = bxj εt + γxjt εt + ejt                                 (13)


where xj = Ej [xjt ].
    The typical within-firm fixed effects estimator will be biased due to an omitted variable
problem. It estimates the misspecified model ybjt = gxjt εt + νjt . From (13), the residual νjt
includes bxj εt , which is correlated with xjt εt in the cross-section of firms. Therefore, the
estimator of g will not converge to the coefficient of interest γ. Intuitively, a high value of
xjt in the cross section may influence how the firm responds to the aggregate shock through
the coefficient of interest γ or through the permanent responsiveness bxj .
    Our estimator solves the omitted variable problem by making the regressor orthogonal
to the omitted terms. From (13), we have ybjt = γ(xjt − xj )εt + (γ + b)xj εt + ejt . Our
estimator omits the second term, (γ + b)xj εt , from the regression. However, this procedure
will still yield consistent estimates of γ if E[(xjt − xj )εt × xj εt ] = 0. Our assumption of a
homoskedastic shock ensures that this condition holds. Intuitively, a high value of xjt − xj
will only influence how the firm responds to the aggregate shock through the coefficient of
interest γ because its variation is relative to the permanent differences proxied by xj .
    This simple example makes clear that the standard fixed effects estimator will yield
biased estimates of the coefficient of interest γ if there are permanent differences in how firms
respond to the aggregate shock εt . Table 9 shows that this is the case in our application; it
                                                                           ′
estimates the standard specification ∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + βxjt−1 εm
                                                                      t + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt . These

results are qualitatively consistent with our main results in the sense that firms with lower


                                                   45
                                   Table 9
          Heterogeneous Responses, Not Demeaning Financial Position

                                    (1)        (2)          (3)    (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)
     leverage × ffr shock        -1.00∗∗∗   -0.80∗∗∗                       -0.79∗∗∗   -0.80∗     -0.71
                                  (0.32)     (0.29)                         (0.29)    (0.41)    (0.45)
     1{cr_jt ≥ A}× ffr shock                             1.64                1.36
                                                        (1.36)              (1.39)
     dd × ffr shock                                               0.91∗                0.53       0.71
                                                                  (0.52)              (0.52)     (0.54)
     ffr shock                                                                                  2.08∗∗∗
                                                                                                 (0.59)
     Observations                 219402     219402     219402    151027   219402     151027    119750
     R2                            0.113      0.124      0.120     0.141    0.124      0.142     0.151
     Firm controls                  no         yes        yes       yes      yes        yes       yes
     Time sector FE                 yes        yes        yes       yes      yes        yes       no
     Time clustering                yes        yes        yes       yes      yes        yes       yes

Notes: results from estimating variants of the baseline specification
                                        ′
∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + βxjt−1 εmt + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt , where all variables are defined as in the main text or in
the notes for Table 3. We have standardized leverage ℓjt and distance to default ddjt over the entire sample,
so their units are in standard deviations relative to the mean. Column (7) removes the sector-quarter fixed
                                                                         ′          ′
effect αst and estimates ∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αsq + γεm             m
                                                      t + βxjt−1 εt + Γ1 Zjt−1 + Γ2 Yt−1 + ejt , where Yt is a
vector with four lags of GDP growth, the inflation rate, and the unemployment rate.


leverage or higher distance to default are more responsive to monetary policy. However, these
differences are smaller and less precisely estimated, indicating that permanent heterogeneity
in responsiveness is quantitatively relevant in our sample. Table 9 also shows that firms with
a higher credit rating are more responsive to changes in monetary policy. We did not include
that variable in the main text because the within-firm variation in credit rating is limited.


A.2      Role of Differences in Cyclical Sensitivities Across Firms

Our baseline specification (2) controls for the interaction between the firm’s financial posi-
tion (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ]) and lagged GDP growth in order to control for differences in cyclical
sensitivities across firms. Our motivation for this choice is that the largest shocks in our
sample occur at the beginning of the two recessions, so we want to ensure that our hetero-
geneous responses to monetary policy are not driven by differences in cyclical sensitivities
across firms. Table 10 shows that excluding this control does not significantly affect the
differential responses by distance to default, showing that our main results are robust to this



                                                       46
Table 10
Main Results, Not Controlling for Differences in Cyclical Sensitivities

                                                                 (1)                    (2)        (3)           (4)
                                 leverage × ffr shock           -0.30                              -0.09         -0.07
                                                               (0.24)                             (0.32)        (0.51)
                                 dd × ffr shock                                0.96∗∗             0.91∗∗       1.11∗∗∗
                                                                               (0.38)             (0.35)        (0.41)
                                 ffr shock                                                                     2.14∗∗∗
                                                                                                                (0.61)
                                 Observations                  219402          151027             151027       119750
                                 R2                             0.124           0.141              0.142        0.151
                                 Firm controls                   yes             yes                yes          yes
                                 Time sector FE                  yes             yes                yes          no
                                 Time clustering                 yes             yes                yes          yes

                                                                                   ′
Notes: results from estimating ∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + β(xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                                                             t + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt , where all
variables are defined as in the main text or in the notes for Table 3 except that Zjt−1 does not include the
interaction of lagged GDP growth with demeaned financial position.


        Figure 9: Dynamics, Not Controlling for Differences in Cyclical Sensitivities
                   (a) Leverage                    (b) Distance to Default
            6                                                                  8

            5
                                                                               6
            4

            3
                                                                               4
            2

            1                                                                  2

            0
                                                                               0
            -1

            -2
                                                                               -2
            -3

            -4                                                                 -4
                 0   1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9   10    11   12             0     1   2    3   4   5    6   7    8   9   10   11   12




Notes: dynamics of the interaction coefficient between financial positions and monetary shocks over time.
Reports the coefficient βh over quarters h from
                                                               ′
log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + βh (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                                          t + Γh Zjt−1 + ejt , where all variables are defined as
in the main text or in the notes for Table 3 except that Zjt−1 does not include the interaction of lagged
GDP growth with demeaned financial position.


concern. However, the differential responses by leverage become significantly weaker.
    Figure 9 plots the dynamics of the differential responses from specification (2) without
controlling for differential responses to GDP growth. Not controlling for these differences
makes the long-run differences somewhat smaller and substantially increases the standard
errors, suggesting that differences in cyclical sensitivities confounds inference about the mon-


                                                                          47
                Figure 10: Average Investment Response to Monetary Shock
                               8


                               6


                               4


                               2


                               0


                               -2


                               -4


                               -6


                               -8
                                    0   1   2   3   4   5    6   7   8   9   10   11   12




Notes: results from estimating (14) from the text. Standard errors are two-way clustered by firms and
time. Dashed lines report 90% error bands. We have normalized the sign of the monetary shocks εm  t so
that a positive shock is expansionary corresponds to a decrease in interest rates.


etary shock. In any event, Figure 9 makes clear that our conclusion that long-run dynamics
are imprecisely estimated is not due to controlling for differences in cyclical sensitivities.



B      Additional Empirical Results

B.1     Dynamics of Average Effect of Monetary Policy

We estimate the specification

                                                                  ′           ′
  log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + γh εm                          m
                                  t + βh (Xjt−1 − Ej [Xjt ])εt + Γ1h Zjt−1 + Γ2h Yt−1 + ejt , (14)



where, as before, Yt is a vector with four lags of GDP growth, the inflation rate, and the un-
employment rate and Xjt is a vector of financial positions (leverage and distance to default).
Figure 10 shows that the average response to monetary policy, γh , is hump-shaped and fairly
persistent up to three years after the shock. However, these long-run effects are imprecisely
estimated and not statistically significant three quarters after the shock and later. We have
also found that these long-run effects are somewhat sensitive to the set of aggregate controls
Yt−1 . Therefore, in the main text, we focus on the heterogeneous responses across firms,
which are robustly estimated across a number of specifications.



                                                            48
                                        Table 11
                        Expansionary vs. Contractionary Shocks

                                                   (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)
                     leverage × ffr shock        -0.57∗∗
                                                  (0.27)
                     leverage × pos ffr shock              -0.61∗∗
                                                            (0.28)
                     leverage × neg ffr shock                -0.44
                                                            (0.93)
                     dd × ffr shock                                  1.14∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.41)
                     dd × pos ffr shock                                        1.34∗∗
                                                                               (0.53)
                     dd × neg ffr shock                                         0.41
                                                                               (0.87)
                     Observations                219402    219402    151027    151027
                     R2                           0.124     0.124     0.141     0.141
                     Firm controls                 yes       yes       yes       yes
                     Time sector FE                yes       yes       yes       yes
                     Time clustering               yes       yes       yes       yes

Notes: results from estimating variants of the baseline specification described in the main text and in the
notes for Table 3. Columns (2) and (4) contain separate interactions for expansionary and contractionary
shocks.


B.2     Expansionary vs. Contractionary Shocks

Table 11 separately estimates heterogeneous responses for expansionary and contractionary
shocks. Although the heterogeneous responses by leverage or distance to default are only
significant for expansionary shocks, the differences between the two are at best marginally
significant. This result is largely due to the fact that there are relatively few observations of
contractionary shocks in our sample, generating large standard errors.


B.3     Robustness Checks

Controlling for the information channel of monetary policy                              One concern about
our monetary shocks εm
                     t is that the FOMC announcements on which they are based also

release information about the future path of economic activity (see, for example, Nakamura
and Steinsson (2018)). Table 12 show that our results are not driven by this information
channel of monetary policy. Following Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco (2019), we control for
information using the Greenbook forecast revisions between concurrent FOMC announce-

                                                     49
                                       Table 12
                     Controlling for Greenbook Forecast Revisions
                                   (1)        (2)       (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)
          leverage × ffr shock   -0.69∗∗              -0.88∗∗                    -0.98∗∗∗
                                  (0.27)               (0.33)                     (0.32)
          dd × ffr shock                    1.18∗∗∗                 0.90∗                        0.86∗
                                             (0.41)                 (0.48)                       (0.47)
          Observations           219402     151027     219402       151027        219402         151027
          R2                      0.124      0.141      0.124        0.141         0.124          0.141
          Firm controls            yes        yes        yes          yes           yes            yes
          Forecast rev            GDP        GDP        GDP          GDP           GDP            GDP
          controls                                    Inflation    Inflation     Inflation      Inflation
                                                                               Unemployment   Unemployment


Notes: Results from estimating the baseline specification (2), including as controls in the interaction
between our variable of interest, xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ], and forecast revisions of output growth, inflation, and
unemployment in FOMC announcements.



                                           Table 13
                             Controlling for Greenbook Forecasts
                                   (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)
         leverage × ffr shock    -0.91∗∗∗              -0.62∗                       -0.62
                                  (0.28)               (0.31)                      (0.43)
         dd × ffr shock                     1.22∗∗∗                 1.12∗∗∗                       1.04∗
                                             (0.43)                  (0.39)                       (0.56)
         Observations            219402     151027     219402       151027        219402         151027
         R2                       0.124      0.141      0.124        0.141         0.124          0.141
         Firm controls             yes        yes        yes          yes           yes            yes
         Forecast rev             GDP        GDP        GDP          GDP           GDP            GDP
         controls                                     Inflation    Inflation     Inflation      Inflation
                                                                               Unemployment   Unemployment


Notes: Results from estimating the baseline specification (2), including as controls in the interaction
between our variable of interest, xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ], and forecasts of output growth, inflation, and
unemployment in FOMC announcements.


ments. Our main results are robust to including this control. In addition, Table 13 shows
that our results are also robust to controlling for the level of the forecasts.


Results hold in the post-1994 sample                            Another concern is that our monetary shocks
may become less powerful after the Fed began making formal policy announcements in 1994.
Columns (1)-(3) of Table 14 show that our main results concerning heterogeneous responses
continue to hold in the post-1994 sample. A potential concern about this later sample is that
the Fed announcements contain more information revelation than in the past. Consistent
with that concern, Columns (4)-(6) of Table 14 show that the results become stronger when

                                                              50
                                               Table 14
                                          Post-1994 Estimates

                                                     (1)         (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
           leverage × ffr shock                    -0.71∗∗                -0.28   -0.84∗∗               -0.22
                                                   (0.35)                (0.50)   (0.34)               (0.50)
           dd × ffr shock                                       1.13∗∗   1.01∗∗             1.35∗∗∗   1.24∗∗∗
                                                                (0.44)   (0.44)              (0.45)    (0.46)
           Observations                            174274       118496   118496   174274    118496    118496
           R2                                       0.138        0.154    0.155    0.138     0.154     0.155
           Firm controls                             yes          yes      yes      yes       yes       yes
           Time sector FE                            yes          yes      yes      yes       yes       yes
           Time clustering                           yes          yes      yes      yes       yes       yes
           Controls Greenbook Forecast Revisions     no           no       no       yes       yes       yes

                                                                                               ′
Notes: results from estimating variants of ∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + β(xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εmt + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt ,
where all variables have been defined in the main text and the notes to Table 3. Columns (1)-(3) show the
results of estimating our baseline model using with only data after 1994. Columns (4)-(6) include in the
vector of firm-level controls Zjt−1 the interaction between our variable of interest, xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ], and
forecast revisions of output growth in FOMC announcements.


we control for Greenbook forecast revisions of GDP growth (similarly to above).


Results robust to controlling for lagged investment                                Eberly, Rebelo and Vincent
(2012) show that lagged investment is a powerful predictor of current investment in a bal-
anced panel of large firms in Compustat. Motivated by this finding, Table 15 shows that our
main results continue to hold when we control for lagged investment. In addition, the top
panel of Figure 11 shows that the dynamics of these differential responses are also persistent
to controlling for lagged investment.
    Unlike Eberly, Rebelo and Vincent (2012), the R2 of our regressions does not significantly
increase when we control for lagged investment. The bottom panel of Figure 11 suggests
that the main reason for this difference is that we use quarterly data while Eberly, Rebelo
and Vincent (2012) use annual data. It shows that the R2 of the regression increases as we
take longer-run changes in capital on the left-hand side. In addition, Eberly, Rebelo and
Vincent (2012) use a balanced panel of only large firms, while we use an unbalanced panel
of all firms.




                                                           51
                                              Table 15
                                          Lagged Investment

                                                  (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)
                        leverage × ffr shock      -0.39                  -0.17     -0.07
                                                 (0.27)                 (0.36)    (0.59)
                        ∆ log kjt               0.20∗∗∗      0.15∗∗∗   0.14∗∗∗   0.15∗∗∗
                                                 (0.01)       (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
                        dd × ffr shock                       0.88∗∗    0.80∗∗     0.66∗
                                                              (0.38)    (0.37)    (0.37)
                        Observations            219402       151027    151027    119750
                        R2                       0.159        0.159     0.160     0.169
                        Firm controls             yes          yes       yes       yes
                        Time sector FE            yes          yes       yes       no
                        Time clustering           yes          yes       yes       yes

Notes: results from estimating variants of the baseline specification
                                                                 ′
∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + ρ∆ log kjt + β(xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                                           t + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt , where all variables are defined as
in the main text or in the notes for Table 3. Standard errors are two-way clustered by firms and quarters.
We have normalized the sign of the monetary shock εm     t so that a positive shock is expansionary
(corresponding to a decrease in interest rates). We have standardized within-firm leverage (ℓjt − E[ℓjt ]) and
within-firm distance to default (ddjt − E[ddjt ]) over the entire sample, so their units are in standard
deviations relative to the mean.


C      Comparison to Existing Empirical Literature
In this subsection, we relate our findings to empirical studies documenting heterogeneous
responses across firms with different size, age, and liquidity. Subsection C.1 replicates the
results of Gertler and Gilchrist (1994) regarding firm size in our sample and shows that
including their measure of size does not affect our results. Subsection C.2 replicates the
results of Cloyne et al. (2018) regarding firm age and shows that including their measure of
age also does not affect our results. Subsection C.3 reconciles our results with recent work
by Jeenas (2019).


C.1      Relation to Gertler and Gilchrist (1994) and firm size

Gertler and Gilchrist (1994) showed that small firms’ sales and inventory holdings were more
sensitive to monetary contractions. In this subsection, we replicate their results in our sample
and show that firm size does not affect our main findings. Following Gertler and Gilchrist
(1994), we identify a small firm if their average sales over the past ten years is below the



                                                        52
                      Figure 11: Dynamics Controlling by Lagged Investment
                                         (a) Leverage                                               (b) Distance to Default
                                                             Interaction coefficient
                        6                                                                 10


                                                                                           8
                        4


                                                                                           6
                        2

                                                                                           4
                        0
                                                                                           2

                        -2
                                                                                           0


                        -4
                                                                                           -2


                        -6                                                                 -4
                             0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10   11   12              0       1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10    11    12




                                                                 R2 of the regression
                     0.55                                                                 0.55


                      0.5                                                                  0.5


                     0.45                                                                 0.45


                      0.4                                                                  0.4


                     0.35                                                                 0.35


                      0.3                                                                  0.3


                     0.25                                                                 0.25


                      0.2                                                                  0.2


                     0.15                                                                 0.15
                            0    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10   11   12                  0       1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9    10    11    12




Notes: dynamics of the interaction coefficient between financial positions and monetary shocks over time.
Reports the coefficient βh over quarters h from
                                                                            ′
log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + ρ∆ log kjt + βh (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                                                       t + Γh Zjt−1 + ejt , where all variables are
defined in the main text and notes to Table 3.


30th percentile of the distribution.22 We then estimate our baseline dynamic model (4) using
this measure of size as the financial position xjt .
       Figure 12 replicates the spirit of Gertler and Gilchrist (1994)’s results for investment
in our sample. Panel (a) measures monetary contractions as the Romer and Romer (1990)
dates in our version of Gertler and Gilchrist (1994)’s time period 1972-1989. It shows that
small firms cut investment by more than large firms following a monetary contraction. Panel
(b) shows that these results also hold using our measure of monetary shocks εm
                                                                             t in our time

period 1990-2007, although the estimates are only marginally statistically significant.23
       Figure 13 shows that our main results are unaffected by controlling for Gertler and
  22
       These results are similar if we use five or twenty year averages.
  23
       Our findings here are consistent with the analysis in Crouzet and Mehrotra (2020).




                                                                                     53
           Figure 12: Dynamics of Differential Responses to Monetary Shocks by Size
                                (a) Period 1972–1989                                              (b) Period 1990–2007
                                                                                    15


                   2                                                                10


                                                                                     5


                   0                                                                 0


                                                                                     -5


                   -2                                                               -10


                                                                                    -15


                   -4                                                               -20


                                                                                    -25
                        0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12              0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12




Notes: dynamics of the interaction coefficient between size and monetary shocks. Reports the coefficient βh
                                                                            ′
over quarters h from log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + βh size sjt−1 εm                                s
                                                                       t + Γh Zjt−1 + ejth , where size jt is a
measure of firm size taking the value of one if firm j is “large” in period t and zero otherwise (see main text
for definition) and all other variables defined in the main text or notes to Table 3, except that Zjt−1
additionally includes the variable size sjt−1 . Monetary shocks in panel (a) correspond to the Romer and
Romer (1990) dates.


Gilchrist (1994)’s measure of size using the local projection:


                                                                                     ′
  log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + β1h (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm            s     m
                                                             t + β2h size jt−1 εt + Γh Zjt−1 + ejth .

                                                                                                                                                 (15)

Panel (a) reports results for xjt = ℓjt and panel (b) reports results for xjt = ddjt . In both
cases, the dynamics of the differential response β1h are virtually identical to the main text.24
This occurs because size and our measures of financial position are largely uncorrelated in
our sample. Hence, we view our work as simply focusing on a different feature of the data
than Gertler and Gilchrist (1994).


C.2        Relation to Cloyne et al. (2018) and firm age

Recent work Cloyne et al. (2018) argues that younger firms are more responsive to monetary
policy in both the U.S. and the U.K. In this subsection, we replicate the spirit of their results
in our sample and show that they do not affect our main results. Following Cloyne et al.
(2018), we measure age as time since incorporating, which is available from Datastream.
       Figure 14 replicates the spirit of Cloyne et al. (2018)’s results and show that our main
  24
       This result is robust to measuring size with capital or total assets instead of sales.


                                                                               54
                   Figure 13: Joint Dynamics of Financial Position and Size
                                    (a) Leverage and Size
                                               Leverage                                                            Size
                     6                                                                   15


                     4                                                                   10


                                                                                          5
                     2

                                                                                          0
                     0
                                                                                          -5
                     -2
                                                                                         -10

                     -4
                                                                                         -15

                     -6                                                                  -20


                     -8                                                                  -25
                          0   1   2    3   4    5    6   7   8   9   10   11   12              0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12




                                                     (b) Distance to Default and Size
                                      Distance to Default                                                          Size
                     10                                                                  25


                                                                                         20
                      8
                                                                                         15


                      6                                                                  10


                                                                                          5
                      4
                                                                                          0


                      2                                                                   -5


                                                                                         -10
                      0
                                                                                         -15


                     -2                                                                  -20
                          0   1   2    3   4     5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12              0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12




Notes: dynamics of the interaction coefficient between financial position monetary shocks and between size
and monetary shocks. Reports the coefficients β1h and β2h over quarters h from

                                                                                             ′
  log kjt+h − log kjt         = αjh + αsth + β1h (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm            s     m
                                                                     t + β2h size jt−1 εt + Γh Zjt−1 + ejt ,

where here size sjt is a measure of firm size taking the value of one if firm j is “large” in period t and zero
otherwise (see main text for definition) and all other variables defined in the main text or notes to Table 3,
except that Zjt−1 additionally includes the variable size sjt−1 . Panel (a) runs our baseline specification with
leverage xjt = ℓjt . Panel (b) runs our preferred specification with distance to default xjt = ddjt .


findings are robust to controlling for age. Following Cloyne et al. (2018), we classify firms as
“young” (whose age since incorporation is less than fifteen years), “middle aged” (between
fifteen and fifty years), and “older” (more than fifty years). Panel (a) shows that, conditional
on the interaction between leverage and the monetary shock, middle-aged and old firms are
less responsive to monetary shocks as in Cloyne et al. (2018).25 However, panel (b) shows
that the differences by age largely disappear once we control for the interaction between
distance to default and the monetary shock. In both cases, the interaction with financial
position is similar to our results in the main text. We view these findings as reflecting the
  25
    These differences are not statistically significant for most horizons in our specification and sample. A
potentially important difference between our specifications is that Cloyne et al. (2018) measure monetary
policy shocks with a VAR approach and use the high-frequency shocks as an instrumental variable.


                                                                                    55
                              Figure 14: Joint Dynamics of Financial Position and Age
                                               (a) Leverage and Age
                              Leverage                                             Middle-aged Firms                                                    Older Firms
         6                                                           10                                                           15


         4                                                                                                                        10
                                                                      5

         2                                                                                                                         5


                                                                      0
         0                                                                                                                         0


         -2                                                                                                                        -5
                                                                      -5


         -4                                                                                                                       -10

                                                                     -10
         -6                                                                                                                       -15


         -8                                                          -15                                                          -20
              0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12         0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12         0   1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12




                                                                (b) Distance to Default and Age
                      Distance to Default                                          Middle-aged Firms                                                    Older Firms
         10                                                          10                                                           20



          8                                                                                                                       15
                                                                      5


          6                                                                                                                       10
                                                                      0

          4                                                                                                                        5

                                                                      -5
          2                                                                                                                        0


                                                                     -10
          0                                                                                                                        -5



         -2                                                          -15                                                          -10
              0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12         0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12         0   1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12




Notes: dynamics of the interaction coefficient between financial positions and monetary shocks and
between age and monetary shocks. Reports the coefficients β1h and β 2h over quarters h from
                                                                 ′               ′
log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + β1h (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm                m
                                                           t + β 2h age jt εt + Γh Zjt−1 + ejt , where
                                  ′
age jt ≡ [middleage jt oldage jt ] is a vector with two dummy variables measuring firm age (see main text for
definition), and all other variables defined in the main text or notes to Table 3, except that Zjt−1
additionally includes the vector age jt . Dashed lines report 90% error bands. Panel (a) runs our baseline
specification with leverage xjt = ℓjt . Panel (b) runs our preferred specification with distance to default
xjt = ddjt .


fact that we analyze a different dimension of the data than Cloyne et al. (2018).


C.3      Relation to Jeenas (2019) and firm liquidity

In this subsection, we relate our findings to recent work by Jeenas (2019) along two dimen-
sions. First, we show that the differences between our estimated dynamics are accounted for
by permanent heterogeneity in responsiveness across firms. Second, we show that our results
are not driven by differences in liquidity across firms.


Dynamics                  We begin by replicating Jeenas (2019)’s results in our sample. For reference,
Panel (a) of Figure 15 plots the dynamics of the interaction of within-firm leverage and the
monetary shock (ℓjt−1 − Ej [ℓjt ])εm
                                   t from the local projection

                                                                                     ′
                      log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + βh (ℓjt−1 − Ej [ℓjt ])εm
                                                                                t + Γh Zjt−1 + ejth ,                                                                                           (16)

                                                                                               56
which simply extends Figure 1 from the main text out to twenty quarters. Jeenas (2019)’s
specification differs from ours in two key ways. First, Jeenas (2019) drops observations in the
top 1% of the leverage distribution while we winsorize the top 0.5%.26 Second, Jeenas (2019)
computes the interaction between the monetary shock and the firm’s average leverage over
the past four quarters, ℓbjt−1 , rather than the within-firm variation in the stock of leverage in
the past quarter, ℓjt − Ej [ℓjt ]. Panel (d) applies these two operations and recovers the spirit
of Jeenas (2019)’s result: high-leverage firms become substantially more responsive to the
shock after approximately four quarters. Quantitatively, this point estimate implies that four
years after a one percentage point expansionary shock, a firm with one standard deviation
more leverage than the average firm increases its capital stock by over ten percentage points
more than the average firm.
       The remaining panels of Figure 15 decompose the effect of these two differences between
our specifications on the estimated dynamics. Panel (b) shows that Jeenas (2019)’s more
aggressive trimming of high-leverage observations has an insignificant effect on the estimated
dynamics. In this panel, we estimate our baseline specification (16) after dropping obser-
vations in the top 1% of the leverage distribution and find that high-leverage firms are not
statistically significantly more responsive to monetary policy.
       Panel (c) shows that sorting firms by the average of their past four quarters of leverage
ℓbjt−1 accounts for the difference between our results. In this panel, we re-estimate our dy-
namic specification (16) after dropping the top 1% of leverage observations and replacing
the within-firm variation in last quarter’s stock of leverage ℓjt − Ej [ℓjt ] with Jeenas (2019)’s
moving average ℓbjt−1 . The moving average eliminates high-frequency variation in leverage
within a firm, implying that the estimated dynamics are more strongly driven by perma-
nent heterogeneity across firms. Consistent with this idea, Panel (d) shows that using only
within-firm variation in averaged leverage ℓbjt−1 − Ej [ℓbjt ] renders the long-horizon dynamics
smaller and insignificant, largely consistent with our baseline specification. We prefer our
specification because it maps more directly into our economic model in which heterogeneity
in leverage is driven by ex-post realizations of idiosyncratic shocks and lifecycle dynamics
  26
   We winsorize the top 0.5% rather than drop the top 1% because the most highly indebted firms are the
most likely to have substantial default risk, which is our object of interest.



                                                  57
               Figure 15: Comparison of Our Dynamic Results to Jeenas (2019)
                                       (a) Baseline Model                                          (b) Model (a) + Trimming top 1 percent
                               (Winsorizing 0.5 percent)
             25                                                                                    25


             20                                                                                    20


             15                                                                                    15


             10                                                                                    10


              5                                                                                     5


              0                                                                                     0


              -5                                                                                    -5


             -10                                                                                   -10
                   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20              0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20




            (c) Model (b) using 1-year Average Leverage                                       (d) Model (c) + Demeaning Leverage within Firm
             25                                                                                    25


             20                                                                                    20


             15                                                                                    15


             10                                                                                    10


              5                                                                                     5


              0                                                                                     0


              -5                                                                                    -5


             -10                                                                                   -10
                   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20              0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20




Notes: dynamics of the interaction coefficient between leverage and monetary shocks over time. Reports
the coefficient βh over quarters h from
                                                               ′
log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + βh (ℓjt−1 − Ej [ℓjt ])εm
                                                          t + Γh Zjt−1 + ejt , where all variables are defined in
the main text or the notes to Table 3. Panel (b) drops the top 1% of the observations in the leverage
variable used in the particular forecasting horizons. Panel (c) applies this operation and replaces demeaned
leverage ℓjt−1 − Ej [ℓjt ] with the firm’s average leverage over the last four quarters, ℓbjt−1 . Panel (d)
estimates this specification using only within-firm variation in averaged leverage ℓbjt−1 − E[ℓbjt ].


across firms. We focus our analysis of the model on the heterogeneous responses upon im-
pact, which are robustly estimated in both our specification and Jeenas (2019) and survive
the litany of robustness checks in this Online Appendix and the Supplemental Material.27


Heterogeneous Responses Not Driven by Liquidity Jeenas (2019) argues that the
  27
    An additional difference between our specification and Jeenas (2019)’s is that we control for differences
in cyclical sensitivities while Jeenas (2019) does not. We include these controls because we have found
that there are significant differences in long-run cyclical sensitivities and that GDP growth is correlated with
monetary shocks over these horizons in our sample. Online Appendix A.2 shows that excluding these controls
does not affect the point estimates in our specification but does increase the standard errors. We have also
found that excluding these controls does not strongly affect the point estimates or standard errors in Jeenas
(2019)’s baseline specification with averaged leverage ℓbjt . Excluding these controls slightly increases the
responsiveness of firms with high demeaned average leverage ℓbjt − Ej [ℓbjt ], but the difference from Panel (d)
in Figure 15 is small and not statistically significant.


                                                                                              58
dynamics of heterogeneous responses by leverage documented above are driven by differences
in liquidity across firms. Figure 16 shows that our results are not driven by liquidity once we
use within-firm variation as in our main specification (2). We estimate the local projection


    log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + β1h (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm                           m
                                                               t + β2h (yjt−1 − Ej [yjt ])εt   (17)

                       + Γ′h Zjt−1 + ejth ,


where yjt − Ej [yjt ] is the within-firm variation in liquidity. Panel (a) shows that the point
estimate of the leverage dynamics are similar to those presented in the main text, although
the standard errors are wider given the correlation between leverage and liquidity. Panel (b)
shows that the dynamics of distance to default are strongly and significantly positive, as in
the main text. In that case, the dynamics of liquidity are always statistically insignificant,
suggesting that default risk is the primary source of heterogeneous responses across firms
when using within-firm variation.



D     Analysis of Calibrated Model
In this appendix, we analyze firms’ decision rules in our calibrated steady state and show
that the financial heterogeneity in our model is broadly comparable to that in the data.


D.1    Identification of Fitted Parameters

Figure 17 reports information to help assess the sources of identification in our calibration
exercise. The top panel reports the local elasticities of targeted moments with respect to the
parameters chosen in our calibration, computed at the estimated parameters. The patterns
that emerge are intuitive. For example, increasing the volatility of productivity shocks σ
increases the dispersion of investment rates across firms but decreases default rates and
leverage ratios (because it makes right-tail positive outcomes more likely). In contrast,
increasing the volatility of capital quality shocks makes left-tail negative outcomes more
likely and therefore increases default rates (consistent with our discussion in Footnote 6).
Increasing the operating cost ξ or decreasing lenders’ recovery rates α tightens the financial


                                                 59
                Figure 16: Joint Dynamics of Financial Position and Liquidity
                                 (a) Leverage and Liquidity
                                                      Leverage                                                                              Liquidity
                     10                                                                                   10

                      8

                      6                                                                                    5

                      4

                      2                                                                                    0

                      0

                     -2                                                                                    -5

                     -4

                     -6                                                                                   -10

                     -8

                    -10                                                                                   -15
                          0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20              0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20




                                                          (b) Distance to Default and Liquidity
                                          Distance to Default                                                                               Liquidity
                     15                                                                                   10




                                                                                                           5
                     10



                                                                                                           0

                     5

                                                                                                           -5



                     0
                                                                                                          -10




                     -5                                                                                   -15
                          0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20              0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20




Notes: the coefficients β1h and β2h over quarters h from
                                                                                             ′
log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + β1h (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εmt + β2h (yjt−1 − Ej [yjt ])εt + Γh Zjt−1 + ejt , where
                                                                                        m

yjt − Ej [yjt ] is the within-firm variation in liquidity and all other variables are defined in the main text or
the notes to Table 3, except that Zjt−1 additionally includes the variable yjt − Ej [yjt ]. We have also
standardized demeaned liquidity yjt − Ej [yjt ] over the entire sample.


constraints and leads to higher default rates among firms. Finally, increasing the initial size
of new firms k0 makes default less likely.
    The bottom panel of Figure 17 plots the inverse of the mapping in the top panel, i.e., it
plots the local elasticities of estimated parameters with respect to moments as in Andrews,
Gentzkow and Shapiro (2017). This inverse mapping clarifies how variation in targeted
moments would influence estimated parameter values, taking into account the joint depen-
dencies across moments in the data. An important limitation of this exercise is that the
relevant size of the variation in the moments is not clear; nevertheless, we believe it contains
additional useful information. For example, it shows that the dispersion of investment rates
across firms is a particularly informative moment for all parameters, especially those gov-
erning the lifecycle of young firms. This result may be surprising in light of the top panel,
which shows that the dispersion of productivity shocks is the only parameter that strongly

                                                                                                     60
                                           Figure 17: Sources of Identification
                                                Elasticity of moments w.r.t. parameters
                                                                                                   3.00
                        σ( ki )   1.13          0.03       -0.02         0.13       0.00   -0.18
              E[default rate]     -2.41         1.27       -0.23         0.06       9.95   4.53    2.00

                 Frac(b > 0)      -22.18        9.19       -2.61         0.38      -2.16   -1.09   1.00
            E[gross leverage]     -1.13        -0.01       -0.02         0.02       0.00   0.65
                                                                                                   0.00
                       N1 /N      -5.99         1.79       -0.49         -0.13     -0.67   0.28
                    N1−10 /N      -1.39         0.32       -0.02         -0.06     -0.02   1.44    -1.00

                      M1 /M       -5.22         1.93       -0.55         0.09      -0.48   -0.01   -2.00
                      M2 /M       -2.35         0.35       -0.09         0.03      -0.13   0.97
                                                                                                   -3.00




                                                                         m




                                                                                    α
                                   σ




                                                 ξ




                                                            k0




                                                                                             ω
                                                                                           σ
                                                Elasticity of parameters w.r.t. moments
                                                                                                   5.00
                        σ( ki )   0.42          0.17       -2.52         4.20      -0.24   0.51
              E[default rate]     -0.01         0.04        0.13         0.05       0.10   -0.01
                 Frac(b > 0)      0.11         -0.51       -3.19         -1.17     -0.03   0.12
            E[gross leverage]     0.54         -7.97       -33.96        -6.34     -0.26   1.49
                                                                                                   0.00
                       N1 /N      0.07         -0.32       -1.88         -0.77     -0.02   0.08
                    N1−10 /N      0.45          0.54       -2.46         -3.24     -0.37   0.82
                      M1 /M       -0.51         2.39       13.12         5.15       0.11   -0.61
                      M2 /M       -0.81         3.90       22.26         8.49       0.18   -0.93
                                                                                                   -5.00



                                                                         m




                                                                                    α
                                   σ




                                                 ξ




                                                            k0




                                                                                             ω
                                                                                           σ
Notes: top panel computes the local elasticities of moments (rows) with respect to parameters (columns) at
the estimated parameter values. Bottom panel computes the local elasticities of estimated parameters
(columns) to moments (rows) computed as in Andrews, Gentzkow and Shapiro (2017).


influences the dispersion of investment rates; it is nonetheless an influential moment because
changing the productivity process changes other moments, and therefore other parameter
estimates, as well.


D.2     Firm Dynamics

Firms’ Decision Rules Figure 18 plots the investment, borrowing, and dividend payment
decisions of firms. Firms with net worth n below the default threshold nt (z) do not operate.
Once firms clear this default threshold, they lever up to increase their capital to its optimal
scale kt∗ (z). Once capital is at its optimal level kt∗ (z), firms use additional net worth to pay
down their debt until they reach the unconstrained threshold nt (z). Only unconstrained
firms pay positive dividends.
    The curvature in the policy functions over the region with low net worth n reflects the
role of financial frictions in firms’ decisions. Without frictions, all non-defaulting firms would
borrow the amount necessary to reach the optimal scale of capital kt∗ (z). However, firms with
low net worth n would need to borrow a substantial amount in order to do so, increasing

                                                                    61
                             Figure 18: Steady State Decision Rules




Notes: Left panel plots decision rules and stationary distribution of firms conditional on idiosyncratic
productivity one standard deviation below the mean. Right panel plots the same objects conditional on
productivity one standard deviation above the mean. The left y-axis measures the decision rules (capital
accumulation, borrowing, and dividend payments) as a function of net worth n. The right y-axis measures
the stationary distribution of firms (dashed purple line).


their risk of default and therefore borrowing costs. Anticipating these higher borrowing
costs, firms with low net worth n accumulate capital below its optimal scale.
       The right axis of Figure 18 plots the stationary distribution of firms. 51.8% of firms
pay a risk premium, i.e., are “risky constrained.” These firms are in the region with curved
policy functions described above. 47.5% of firms are constrained but do not currently pay
a risk premium, i.e., are “risk-free constrained.” These firms have achieved their optimal
scale of capital kt∗ (z) and have linear borrowing policies. The remaining 0.6% of firms are
unconstrained.
       Figure 18 makes clear that there are two key sources of financial heterogeneity in the
model. First, reading the graphs from left to right captures heterogeneity due to lifecycle
dynamics; young firms accumulate debt in order to reach their optimal level of capital kt∗ (z)
and then pay down that debt over time. Second, moving from the left to the right panel
captures heterogeneity due to idiosyncratic productivity shocks; a positive shock increases
the optimal scale of capital kt∗ (z), again leading firms to first accumulate and then decumulate
debt.28,29
  28
     A third source of financial heterogeneity is the capital quality shocks, which simply generate variation
in firms’ net worth n.
  29
     Buera and Karmakar (2018) study how the aggregate effect of an interest rate shock depends on these
two sources of heterogeneity in a simple two-period model.




                                                     62
                                                     Figure 19: Lifecycle Dynamics in Model
                                                            Capital                                           Debt                                                   Leverage
                                               4                                                3                                                         1

                                                                                               2.5                                              0.8
                                               3
                                                                                                2




                                                                                                                                  Leverage
                                                                                                                                                0.6




                                     Capital




                                                                                  Debt
                                               2                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                0.4
                                                                                                1
                                               1
                                                                                               0.5                                              0.2

                                               0                                                0                                                         0
                                                     10      20   30    40   50                      10      20   30    40   50                               10      20   30    40   50
                                                          Age in quarters                                 Age in quarters                                          Age in quarters
                                                   Average Productivity                               Employment                                               Credit Spread
                                     1.05                                                      0.8                                                        8

                                               1
                                                                                               0.6                                                        6




                                                                                                                                        Annualized p.p.
                                                                                  Employment
                      Productivity




                                     0.95
                                                                                               0.4                                                        4
                                        0.9

                                                                                               0.2                                                        2
                                     0.85

                                        0.8                                                     0                                                         0
                                                     10      20   30    40   50                      10      20   30    40   50                               10      20   30    40   50
                                                          Age in quarters                                 Age in quarters                                          Age in quarters



Notes: Average capital, debt, leverage, productivity, employment, and credit spread conditional on age in
steady state.


Lifecycle Dynamics                                   Figure 19 plots the dynamics of key variables over the firm lifecy-
cle. New entrants begin with a low initial capital stock k0 and, on average, a low draw of
idiosyncratic productivity z. As described above, young firms take on new debt in order to
finance investment, which increases their default risk and credit spreads. Over time, as firms
accumulate capital and productivity reverts to its mean, they reach their optimal capital
stock kt∗ (z) and begin paying down their debt.


D.3     Cross-Sectional Distribution of Investment and Leverage

Table 16 shows that our model is broadly consistent with key features of the distributions of
investment and leverage not targeted in the calibration. The top panel analyzes the distri-
bution of investment rates in the annual Census data reported by Cooper and Haltiwanger
(2006). We present the corresponding statistics in our model for a selected sample – condi-
tioning on firms that survive at least twenty years to mirror the selection into the LRD – and
in the full sample. Although we have calibrated the selected sample to match the dispersion
of investment rates, the mean and autocorrelation of investment rates in the selected sample
are also reasonable. The mean investment rate in the full sample is higher than the selected
sample because the full sample includes young, growing firms.


                                                                                                           63
                                           Table 16
                            Investment and Leverage Heterogeneity
         Moment             Description                                Data   Model      Model
                                                                              (selected) (full)
         Investment
           [ ]      heterogeneity (annual LRD)
         E ( ki )     Mean investment rate                             12.2% 13.9%         28.4%
              i
         σ (k     )   SD investment rate (calibrated)                  33.7% 36.7%         48.3%
         ρ ki , ki −1     Autocorr investment rate      0.06   -0.14     -0.14
         Joint
          (        investment
                      )       and leverage heterogeneity (quarterly Compustat)
             b b
         ρ    ,           Autocorr leverage ratio          0.94  0.96                      0.96
          ( ik bk)−1
         ρ k, k           Corr. of leverage and investment -0.08 -0.08                     -0.01
         Average Indebtedness of Firms (quarterly Compustat)
         E[ k+max{−b,0}
              max{b,0}
                        ] Mean gross leverage              0.27  0.34                      0.49
         E[ k+max{−b,0} ] Mean net leverage
                  b
                                                           -0.04 0.13                      0.32
         Frac(b > 0)      Fraction with positive debt      0.85  0.59                      0.70

Notes: Statistics about the cross-sectional distribution of investment rates and leverage ratios in steady
state. Data for investment heterogeneity are drawn from Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006). Model (selected)
for investment heterogeneity corresponds to firms alive for longer than twenty years in a panel simulation,
time aggregated to the annual frequency. Model (full) corresponds to the full sample of firms in a panel
simulation, time aggregated to the annual frequency. Data for joint investment and leverage heterogeneity
and the average indebtedness of firms drawn from quarterly Compustat data. Model (selected) for these
panels corresponds to firms alive for longer than seven years in a panel simulation. Model (full)
corresponds to the full sample of firms in a panel simulation.


Compustat Firms in the Model and the Data                            We account for the sample selection
into Compustat by conditioning on firms that have survived for at least seven years. Ac-
cording to Wilmer et al. (2017), the median time to IPO has ranged from roughly six to
eight years over the last decade.30 The bottom panels of Table 16 shows that the model-
implied distribution of investment rates and leverage ratios in Compustat is aligned with the
data. Leverage is highly autocorrelated and weakly correlated with investment in both the
model and the data. The model roughly captures both the mean gross and net leverage in
Compustat, as well as the fraction of firms with positive debt.
       Table 17 compares public and private firms in our model to the data along three key
dimensions. First, public firms are substantially larger than private firms in our model;
however, our model comes nowhere close to the size gap observed in the data. An important
reason for this discrepancy is that, in the data, many firms are born small and never grow;
  30
       Our results are robust to sensitivity analysis around this cutoff.


                                                        64
                                       Table 17
                    Public vs. private firms in the model and data
                                                                 Data      Model
                                 E[n|public]
                                 E[n|private]
                                                                 62        1.68
                                 E[age|public]
                                 E[age|private]
                                                                 2.18      6.60
                                       n −n
                                 σ( 21 njt +njt−1 |public)
                                          jt   jt−1
                                         njt −njt−1              0.65      0.62
                                 σ( 12   njt +njt−1
                                                    |private)



Notes: comparison of public and private firms. “Public” firms in the model are those who reach seven years
                                                       E[n|public]
old (the median time to IPO in Wilmer et al. (2017)). E[n|private] computes the average size of firms
                                                                                            E[age|public]
measured by employment; data comes from Dinlersoz et al. (2018) Table 3.                    E[age|private]   computes the
                                                                               l −l
                                                                        σ( 12 ljt +ljt−1 |public)
average age; data comes from Dinlersoz et al. (2018) Table 3.                 l
                                                                                jt
                                                                                   −l
                                                                                      jt−1
                                                                                                     computes the dispersion
                                                                        σ( 21 ljt +ljt−1 |private)
                                                                                jt   jt−1
of growth rates; data comes from Davis et al. (2006) Figure 2.5.


therefore, there is a large mass of permanently small firms which is outside of our model.31
Second, public firms are older than private firms in both our model and the data; the gap is
larger in our model since we select firms based solely on age. Finally, the dispersion of growth
rates is smaller among public firms in both the model and data. In our model, private firms’
growth rates are more disperse since they are more strongly affected by financial frictions.




  31
    Gavazza, Mongey and Violante (2018) use permanent heterogeneity in returns to scale to match this
group of permanently small firms. We have solved a related version of our model in which there are two
types of firms: one with low returns to scale, which reach their optimal size relatively quickly, and another
with the returns to scale of our baseline model. This model generates a skewed size distribution, as in the
data, but by construction does not directly affect the behavior of the large “Compustat” firms in our model.
In addition, these small firms make up a small share of aggregate investment and are therefore unlikely to
have a substantial influence on aggregate dynamics.


                                                            65
  Supplemental Materials for “Financial Heterogeneity
and the Investment Channel of Monetary Policy” by
Pablo Ottonello and Thomas Winberry

A      Data Construction
This subsection describes the firm-level variables used in the empirical analysis of the paper,
based on quarterly Compustat data. The definition of the variables and sample selection
follow standard practices in the literature (see, for example, Whited, 1992; Gomes, 2001;
Eisfeldt and Rampini, 2006; Clementi and Palazzo, 2019).


Variables

1. Investment: defined as ∆ log(kjt+1 ), where kjt+1 denotes the capital stock of firm j at
    the end of period t. For each firm, we set the first value of kjt+1 to be the level of
    gross plant, property, and equipment (ppegtq, item 118) in the first period in which this
    variable is reported in Compustat. From this period onwards, we compute the evolution
    of kjt+1 using the changes of net plant, property, and equipment (ppentq, item 42), which
    is a measure net investment with significantly more observations than ppegtq (net of
    depreciation). If a firm has a missing observation of ppentq located between two periods
    with non-missing observations we estimate its value using a linear interpolation with the
    values of ppentq right before and after the missing observation; if two or more consecutive
    observations are missing we do not do any imputation. We only consider investment spells
    with 40 quarters or more in order to precisely estimate fixed effects.

2. Leverage: defined as the ratio of total debt (sum of dlcq and dlttq, items 45 and 71) to
    total assets (atq, item 44).

3. Net leverage: defined as the ratio of total debt minus net current assets (actq, item 40,
    minus lctq, item 49) to total assets.

4. Distance to default: Following Merton (1974) and Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012), we
                                   log(V /D)+(µV −0.5σV
                                                      2 )
    define this variable as dd ≡             σV
                                                          ,   where V denotes the total value of the

                                                   66
    firm, µV the annual expected return on V , σV the annual volatility of the firm’s value,
    and D firm’s debt.32 To estimate the firm’s value V , we follow an iterative procedure,
    based on Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012) and Blanco and Navarro (2017):

         i. Set an initial value for the firm value equal to the sum of firm debt and equity,
           V = E + D, where E is measured as the firm’s stock price times the number of shares
           (data source: CRSP).

        ii. Estimate the mean and variance of return on firm value over a 250-day moving win-
           dow. The return on firm value is measured as the daily log return on assets, ∆ log V .

        iii. Obtain a new estimate of V for every day of the 250-day moving window from the
           Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing framework E = V Φ(δ1 ) − e−rT DΦ(δ2 ), where
                                 2 )T
                log(V /D)+(r+0.5σV                          √
           δ1 ≡         σ 2
                            √
                              T
                                      , and δ 2 ≡ δ 1 − σ V   T , where r is the daily one-year constant
                         V

           maturity Treasury-yield (data source: Federal Reserve Board of Governors H.15 Se-
           lected Interest Rates release).

        iv. Iterate on steps [ii.] and [iii.] until convergence.

 5. Real sales growth: measured as log-differences in sales (saleq, item 2) deflated using the
    BLS implicit price deflator.

 6. Size: measured as the log of total real assets, deflated using the BLS implicit price deflator.

 7. Liquidity: defined as the ratio of cash and short-term investments (cheq, item 36) to total
    assets.

 8. Cash flow: measured as EBIT divided by capital stock.

 9. Dividend payer: defined as a dummy variable taking a value of one in firm-quarter obser-
    vations in which the firm paid dividends to preferred stock of the company (constructed
    using dvpq, item 24).

10. Sectoral dummies. We consider the following sectors: (i) agriculture, forestry, and fishing:
    sic < 999; (ii) mining: sic ∈ [1000, 1499]; (iii) construction: sic ∈ [1500, 1799]; (iv)
   32
      We measure the face value of debt D as the sum of the firm’s short-term debt (dlcq, item 45) and one-
 half of long-term debt (dlttq, item 71), following Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012) and a common practice by
 credit rating agencies (Moody’s/KMV).

                                                    67
   manufacturing: sic ∈ [2000, 3999]; (v) transportation, communications, electric, gas,
   and sanitary services: sic ∈ [4000, 4999]; (vi) wholesale trade: sic ∈ [5000, 5199]; (vii)
   retail trade sic ∈ [5200, 5999]; (viii) services: sic ∈ [7000, 8999].


Sample Selection         Our empirical analysis excludes (in order of operation):

1. Firms in finance, insurance, and real estate sectors (sic ∈ [6000, 6799]), utilities (sic ∈
   [4900, 4999]), nonoperating establishments (sic = 9995), and industrial conglomerates
   (sic = 9997).

2. Firms not incorporated in the United States.

3. Firm-quarter observations that satisfy one of the following conditions, aimed at excluding
   extreme observations:

        i. Negative capital or assets

       ii. Acquisitions (constructed based on aqcy, item 94) larger than 5% of assets.

       iii. Investment rate is in the top and bottom 0.5% of the distribution.

       iv. Investment spell is shorter than 40 quarters.

       v. Net current assets as a share of total assets higher than 10 or below -10.

       vi. Leverage higher than 10 or negative.

   vii. Quarterly real sales growth above 1 or below -1.

  viii. Negative sales or liquidity

Because our empirical analysis relates firms’ investment in a period with its financial positions
in the previous period, we exclude not only firm-quarter observations satisfying the exclusion
criteria above but also those in their subsequent quarter. We start the sample in 1983q3,
when the data on acquisitions (variable aqcy) becomes available.33 After applying these
sample selection operations, we winsorize observations of leverage and distance to default at
the top and bottom 0.5% of the distribution.
  33
    For the empirical analysis in Appendix C.1, which measures differential responses to monetary shocks
by size for the 1972-1989, we do not apply the restriction above based on acquisitions because the variable
aqcy is not available.

                                                    68
                   Figure 20: Aggregate Investment: NIPA vs. Compustat
                    4                                                             1.5


                                                                                  1
                    2


                                                                                  0.5
                    0

                                                                                  0
                    -2
                                                                                  -0.5

                    -4
                                                                                  -1


                    -6
                                                                                  -1.5


                    -8                                                            -2
                    1990         1995          2000         2005         2010


Notes: comparison of aggregate NIPA investment to aggregated Compustat investment. NIPA investment
measured as log nonresidential fixed investment and aggregated Compustat investment measured as
average ∆ log kjt across firms. Figure reports the cyclical component (in percentage points) using an HP
filter with smoothing parameter λ = 1600.


    Figure 20 plots the cyclical component the average firm-level investment from our Com-
pustat data to nonresidential fixed investment from NIPA. Both series exhibit similar busi-
ness cycle patterns, with a correlation of 53%. Our aggregated Compustat time series also
behaves similarly to NIPA investment in response to an identified monetary shock estimated
using the external-instruments VAR model in Gertler and Karadi (2015) (results are available
upon request).



B     Additional Empirical Results
Other Controls for Cyclical Sensitivity While our baseline specification controls for
aggregate conditions using GDP growth, Table 18 shows that the results are robust to using
either inflation or the unemployment rate instead.


Results driven by effect of monetary shocks on short rates                       Table 19 shows that
the differential responses across firms are primarily driven by how monetary policy affects
the overall level of interest rates rather than long rates in particular. Following Gurkaynak,


                                                      69
                                     Table 18
                Controlling for Differences in Cyclical Sensitivities
                                        (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)      (6)
                                           ∗∗                         ∗
              leverage × ffr shock    -0.57                   -0.53                  -0.30
                                       (0.27)                 (0.27)                (0.24)
              dd × ffr shock                     1.14∗∗∗                  1.17∗∗∗            0.97∗∗
                                                  (0.41)                   (0.40)            (0.38)
              leverage × dlog gdp     -0.12∗∗                 -0.13∗∗
                                       (0.05)                  (0.05)
              dd × dlog gdp                       0.09                     0.07
                                                 (0.12)                   (0.12)
              leverage × dlog cpi                              -0.12
                                                              (0.09)
              dd × dlog cpi                                                -0.13
                                                                          (0.15)
              leverage × ur                                                          0.00
                                                                                    (0.00)
              dd × ur                                                                         -0.00
                                                                                             (0.00)
              Observations            219402     151027       219402      151027    219402   151027
              R2                       0.124      0.141        0.124       0.141     0.124    0.141
              Firm controls             yes        yes          yes         yes       yes      yes


Notes: results from estimating variants of the baseline specification
                                                     ′          ′
∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + βy (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                                t + Γ1 Zjt−1 + Γ2 (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])Yt−1 + ejt , where Yt−1 is a
vector of aggregate variables containing combinations of GDP growth (dlog gdp), the inflation rate (dlog
cpi), and the unemployment rate (ur) and all other variables are defined in the main text or the notes to
Table 3. Columns (1) and (2) include only GDP growth in Yt−1 (as our baseline specification), columns (3)
and (4) include GDP growth and the inflation rate, while columns (5) and (6) include the unemployment
rate and the inflation rate.


Sack and Swanson (2005), we decompose monetary policy announcements into a “target”
component that affects the level of the yield curve and a “path” component that affects the
slope of the yield curve. The table shows that only the interactions of financial position with
the target component are statistically significant.


Alternative Time Aggregation                    Table 20 shows that our baseline results hold when
we time-aggregate the high-frequency shocks by taking the simple sum within the quarter,
rather than the weighted sum in the main text.


Results not driven by other firm-level covariates Table 21 shows that our main
results are not driven by differences in firms’ sales growth, realized future sales growth, size,

                                                         70
                                              Table 19
                                   Target vs. Path Decomposition

                                                      (1)       (2)         (3)      (4)
                                                         ∗∗
                         leverage × ffr shock       -0.57
                                                     (0.27)
                         leverage × target shock               -0.84∗
                                                               (0.43)
                         leverage × path shock                  -0.65
                                                               (1.19)
                         dd × ffr shock                                   1.14∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.41)
                         dd × target shock                                          1.46∗
                                                                                    (0.73)
                         dd × path shock                                             0.19
                                                                                    (1.83)
                         Observations               219402    214032      151027    147588
                         R2                          0.124     0.125       0.141     0.142
                         Firm controls                yes       yes         yes       yes
                         Time sector FE               yes       yes         yes       yes
                         Time clustering              yes       yes         yes       yes


Notes: results from estimating variants of the baseline specification
                                                     ′
∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + βy (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                                t + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt , where all variables are defined in the main
text or the notes to Table 3. Columns (2) and (4) run separate interactions of financial position xjt with
the target and path component of interest rates, as defined in Campbell et al. (2012).


or liquidity. It expands the baseline specification using within-firm variation as:34

                                                                                ′
             ∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + βy (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm             m
                                                             t + βz zjt−1 εt + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt ,



where zjt−1 is lagged sales growth, realized future sales growth in one year, lagged size,
or lagged liquidity. In each case, the coefficients on leverage ℓjt−1 and distance to default
ddjt−1 remain stable. Hence, firm-level shocks or characteristics that are correlated with
these additional variables do not drive the heterogeneous responses by default risk that we
document in the main text.


Other indices of financial constraints less powerful                          We have interpreted our mea-
sures of financial position as primarily proxying for default risk across firms. Consistent with
this interpretation of the data, Table 22 shows that other measures of financial position that
  34
       The results for the baseline specification (2) are very similar.


                                                         71
                                                Table 20
                                      Alternative Time Aggregation
                                                            (1)         (2)       (3)           (4)
                                                               ∗∗∗                      ∗∗
                       leverage × ffr shock (sum)         -0.61                 -0.53          -0.53
                                                           (0.18)                (0.23)       (0.40)
                       dd × ffr shock (sum)                           0.88∗∗∗    0.68∗∗       0.80∗∗
                                                                       (0.28)    (0.29)       (0.33)
                       ffr shock (sum)                                                        0.95∗∗
                                                                                              (0.47)
                       Observations                       222174      153113    153113        121399
                       R2                                  0.123       0.140     0.141         0.149
                       Firm controls                        yes         yes       yes           yes
                       Time sector FE                       yes         yes       yes           no
                       Time clustering                      yes         yes       yes           yes


Notes: results from estimating variants of the baseline specification
                                                   ′
∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + β(xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                              t + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt , where all variables are defined in the main
text or the notes to Table 3. We time-aggregate the monetary shock by simply summing the
high-frequency shocks that occur in a given quarter. Column (4) removes the sector-quarter fixed effect αst
                                                                          ′           ′
and estimates ∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αsq + γεm  t + β(xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εt + Γ1 Zjt−1 + Γ2 Yt−1 + ejt , where Yt is a
                                                                     m

vector with four lags of GDP growth, the inflation rate, and the unemployment rate.




                                         Table 21
                       Interaction With Other Firm-Level Covariates
                                         (1)      (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)          (6)       (7)       (8)
    leverage × ffr shock              -0.58∗∗               -0.59∗∗             -0.57∗∗                -0.62∗∗
                                       (0.27)               (0.29)              (0.27)                 (0.26)
    dd × ffr shock                              1.14∗∗∗               1.18∗∗∗                1.17∗∗∗             1.18∗∗∗
                                                 (0.41)                (0.42)                 (0.41)              (0.41)
    sales growth × ffr shock            -0.18     0.04
                                       (0.24)    (0.26)
    future sales growth × ffr shock                          -0.34     -0.62
                                                            (0.42)    (0.54)
    size × ffr shock                                                             0.39         0.65
                                                                                (0.29)       (0.40)
    liquidity × ffr shock                                                                               -0.25     -0.33
                                                                                                       (0.29)    (0.35)
    Observations                      219402    151027      208624    144731    219402       151027    219278    150947
    R2                                 0.124     0.141       0.128     0.144     0.124        0.141     0.126     0.142
    Firm controls                       yes       yes         yes       yes       yes          yes       yes       yes
    Time sector FE                      yes       yes         yes       yes       yes          yes       yes       yes
    Time clustering                     yes       yes         yes       yes       yes          yes       yes       yes


Notes: results from estimating variants of the baseline specification
                                                                   ′
∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + βy (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm             m
                                                t + βz zjt−1 εt + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt , where zjt−1 is the firm’s lagged
sales growth, future sales growth, size, or liquidity, and all other variables are defined in the main text or
the notes to Table 3, except that Zjt−1 additionally includes the variable zjt−1 .




                                                             72
                                    Table 22
              Interaction With Other Measures of Financial Positions
                                     (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)
     leverage × ffr shock          -0.57∗∗             -0.57∗∗             -0.57∗∗              -0.62∗∗
                                   (0.27)              (0.27)              (0.27)                (0.26)
     dd × ffr shock                          1.17∗∗∗             1.12∗∗∗             1.14∗∗∗              1.18∗∗∗
                                              (0.41)              (0.40)              (0.41)               (0.41)
     size × ffr shock               0.39       0.65
                                   (0.29)     (0.40)
     cash flows × ffr shock                             0.02      -0.33
                                                       (0.43)    (0.60)
     1{dividends > 0}× ffr shock                                            0.33      0.24
                                                                           (0.59)    (0.64)
     liquidity × ffr shock                                                                        -0.25    -0.33
                                                                                                 (0.29)   (0.35)
     Observations                  219402    151027    217900    149949    219182    150902      219278   150947
     R2                             0.124     0.141     0.130     0.145     0.125     0.141       0.126    0.142
     Firm controls                   yes       yes       yes       yes       yes       yes         yes      yes
     Time sector FE                  yes       yes       yes       yes       yes       yes         yes      yes
     Time clustering                 yes       yes       yes       yes       yes       yes         yes      yes



Notes: results from estimating variants of the baseline specification
                                                                   ′
∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + βy (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm             m
                                                t + βz zjt−1 εt + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt , where zjt−1 is the firm’s lagged
size, cash flows, dividend payments, and liquid assets, and all other variables are defined in the main text
or the notes to Table 3, except that Zjt−1 additionally includes the variable zjt−1 .


are less closely associated with default risk – size, cash flows, dividend payments, and avail-
able liquid assets – do not generate statistically significant differential responses to monetary
policy. However, the point estimates do indicate that larger firms, dividend-paying firms,
and firms with less liquid assets are more responsive to monetary shocks.


Results stronger when instrument financial position with past financial position
One concern about our measures of financial position xjt is that they contain measurement
error. Table 23 corrects for this measurement error by instrumenting financial position xjt
with the financial position in the previous year xjt−4 . The heterogeneous responses are
stronger in this specification, consistent with measurement error generating attenuation bias
in our baseline specification in the main text.


Heterogeneous responses for different measures of leverage                                     Table 24 decomposes
leverage into various types of debt and shows that our results hold for each of these types of




                                                         73
                                     Table 23
           Instrumenting Financial Position with Past Financial Position
                                             (1)        (2)         (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)
                                                   ∗          ∗        ∗∗
          leverage × ffr shock              -0.61      -0.68      -1.17
                                            (0.34)     (0.37)      (0.45)
          dd × ffr shock                                                    1.18∗∗   1.30∗∗    1.05
                                                                            (0.52)   (0.57)   (0.80)
          Observations                     219402      216913     212948    147498   143925   138084
          R2                                0.020       0.019      0.018     0.024    0.023    0.017
          Firm controls, Time-Sector FE      yes         yes        yes       yes      yes      yes
          Instrument                       1q lag      2q lag     4q lag    1q lag   2q lag   4q lag


Notes: IV results from estimating the baseline specification
                                                     ′
∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + βy (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm
                                                t + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt , where all variables are defined in the main
text or the notes to Table 3. Within-firm financial position xjt − Ej [xjt ] is instrumented with the past
quarter, past two quarters or past four quarters financial position.


debt.35 In addition, the table shows that our results hold when use leverage net of current
assets.



C        Comparison to Firm Volatility Literature
In this subsection, we explore the empirical link between firm-level volatility and the response
to monetary policy. Our motivation is a growing strand of literature that has argued that
firm-level volatility is an important determinant of how those firms respond to shocks (see,
e.g., Vavra (2013) or Bloom et al. (2018)). Indeed, one can view volatility as a proxy
for default risk, since all else equal firms with more volatile cash flows will default more
frequently. We measure volatility voljt as the standard deviation of the firm’s year-on-year
sales growth over the past twenty quarters.36
       Panel (a) of Figure 21 shows that firms with more volatile sales growth are less responsive
  35
     This decomposition sheds light on the role of the “debt overhang” hypothesis in driving our results.
Under this hypothesis, equity holders of highly leveraged firms capture less of the return on investment; since
equity holders make the investment decision, they will choose to invest less following the monetary policy
shock. However, because investment is long lived, this hypothesis would predict much stronger differences
by long-term debt. We find that this is not the case; if anything, the differences across firms are stronger for
debt due in less than one year.
  36
     Many papers measure volatility using the dispersion in firm- or establishment-level TFP rather than
sales growth. We cannot construct firm-level TFP because our dataset does not contain observations of
employment.


                                                       74
                                              Table 24
                                      Decomposition of Leverage

                                        (1)        (2)         (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)
                                           ∗∗
      leverage × ffr shock            -0.57
                                       (0.27)
      net leverage × ffr shock                   -0.56∗
                                                 (0.29)
      ST debt × ffr shock                                    -0.33                -0.39
                                                            (0.29)               (0.29)
      LT debt × ffr shock                                              -0.16      -0.30
                                                                      (0.24)     (0.24)
      other liabilities × ffr shock                                                         -0.16
                                                                                           (0.26)
      liabilities × ffr shock                                                                         -0.56∗
                                                                                                      (0.28)
      Observations                    219402     219402    219402     219402    219402     219393    219393
      R2                               0.124      0.125     0.124      0.121     0.125      0.124     0.126
      Firm controls                     yes        yes       yes        yes       yes        yes       yes
      Time sector FE                    yes        yes       yes        yes       yes        yes       yes
      Time clustering                   yes        yes       yes        yes       yes        yes       yes


Notes: results from estimating variants of the baseline specification
                                                       ′
∆ log kjt+1 = αj + αst + β(xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm  t + Γ Zjt−1 + ejt , where all variables are defined in the main
text or the notes to Table 3. “Leverage” refers to leverage constructed as in the main text. “Net leverage”
is leverage net of current assets. “Short term debt” is current debt (coming due in less than one year)
divided by total assets. “Long term debt” is total debt minus current debt divided by total assets. “Other
liabilities” is other liabilities divided by total assets. “Liabilities” is total debt plus other liabilities divided
by total assets. Standard errors are two-way clustered by firms and quarters.


to monetary policy. Quantitatively, the estimates imply that a firm with one standard
deviation higher volatility has an approximately 0.5 units lower semi-elasticity of investment
with respect to monetary policy. Panel (b) shows that these differential responses are larger
if we measure volatility over the past forty quarters rather than the past twenty.
    However, Panel (a) of Figure 22 shows that these heterogeneous responses by volatility
become insignificant once we control for heterogeneity in distance to default. We therefore
conclude that the differences by volatility are in fact driven by differences in default risk,
consistent with our model. Panel (b) shows that controlling for leverage has a smaller effect
on the heterogeneous responses by volatility.




                                                          75
     Figure 21: Dynamics of Differential Responses to Monetary Shocks by Volatility
                                     (a) 5-year window                                               (b) 10-year window
                 3                                                                      4



                 2                                                                      2



                 1                                                                      0



                 0                                                                      -2



                -1                                                                      -4



                -2                                                                      -6



                -3                                                                      -8
                     0   1       2     3   4   5    6   7   8   9   10   11   12             0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12




Notes: dynamics of the interaction coefficient between firm’s sales volatility and monetary shocks and
between size and monetary shocks. Reports the coefficients βh over quarters h from
                                                      ′
log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + βh voljt−1 εmt + Γ Zjt−1 + ejth , where voljt is the standard deviation of the
firm’s year-on-year sales growth over the past five or ten years, and all other variables are defined in the
main text or the notes to Table 3, except that Zjt−1 additionally includes the variable voljt−1 . We have
standardized volatility voljt , so their units are in standard deviations relative to the mean.


D      Equilibrium Definition
Distribution of Firms                              We need to derive the evolution of the distribution of firms in
order to precisely define an equilibrium. The distribution of firms in production is composed
of incumbents who do not default and new entrants who do not default. Mathematically,
this distribution µ̂t (z, n) is given by
                     ∫
                             (                                                              )
     µ̂t (z, n) =                πd χ1 (nt (z, ω, k, b)) + (1 − πd )χ2t (z, nt (z, ω, k, b)) dµt (z, ω, k, b)                                       (18)
                         ∫
                                  (                                                                  )
               + µt                   πd χ1 (nt (z, ω, k0 , 0)) + (1 − πd )χ2t (z, nt (z, ω, k0 , 0)) g(ω)dωdµent (z),


where nt (z, ω, k, b) = maxl pt z(ωk)θ lν − wt l + qt (1 − δ)ωk − b − ξ is the implied net worth n
of a firm with state (z, ω, k, b) and g(ω) is the p.d.f. of capital quality shocks.




                                                                                   76
                    Figure 22: Joint Dynamics of Financial Position and Volatility
                                (a) Distance to Default and Volatility
                                Distance to Default                                                            Volatility
           10                                                                       1.5



            8                                                                         1



            6                                                                       0.5



            4                                                                         0



            2                                                                       -0.5



            0                                                                        -1



           -2                                                                       -1.5
                0   1   2   3      4    5   6     7   8     9   10   11   12               0   1   2   3   4     5   6      7   8   9   10   11   12



                                                          (b) Leverage and Volatility
                                       Leverage                                                                Volatility
            6                                                                        3


            4
                                                                                     2


            2
                                                                                     1

            0
                                                                                     0
           -2

                                                                                    -1
           -4


                                                                                    -2
           -6


           -8                                                                       -3
                0   1   2   3      4    5   6     7   8     9   10   11   12             0     1   2   3   4    5    6      7   8   9   10   11   12




Notes: dynamics of the interaction coefficient between financial positions and monetary shocks and
between volatility and monetary shocks. Reports the coefficients β1h and β2h over quarters h from
                                                                                 ′
log kjt+h − log kjt = αjh + αsth + β1h (xjt−1 − Ej [xjt ])εm                m
                                                           t + β2h voljt−1 εt + Γh Zjt−1 + ejt , where voljt is the
standard deviation of the firm’s year-on-year sales growth over the past five or ten years and all other
variables are defined in the main text or the notes to Table 3, except that Zjt−1 additionally includes the
variable voljt−1 . Panel (a) runs our baseline specification with leverage xjt = ℓjt . Panel (b) runs our
preferred specification with distance to default xjt = ddjt .




                                                                               77
       The evolution of the distribution of firms µt (z, ω, k, b) is given by
                                 ∫
              ′   ′   ′   ′
       µt+1 (z , ω , k , b ) =       (1 − πd )χ2t (z, nt (z, ω, k, b))1{kt′ (z, nt (z, ω, k, b)) = k ′ }          (19)
                                  b′ (z, nt (z, ω, k, b))
                              × 1{ t                      = b′ }p(ε|eρ log z+ε = z ′ )g(ω ′ )dεdµt (z, ω, k, b)
                                           Πt+1
                                  ∫
                              + µt (1 − πd )χ2t (z, nt (z, ω, k0 , 0))1{kt′ (z, nt (z, ω, k0 , 0)) = k ′ }
                                     b′t (z, nt (z, ω, k0 , 0))
                              × 1{                              = b′ }p(ε|eρ log z+ε = z ′ )g(ω ′ )dεdµent (z),
                                                Πt+1

where p(ε|eρ log z+ε = z ′ ) denotes the density of draws ε such that eρ log z+ε = z ′ .


Equilibrium Definition                  An equilibrium of this model is a set of vt (z, n), kt′ (z, n),
b′t (z, n), nt (z, n), Qt (z, k ′ , b′ ), Πt , Yt , qt , µt (z, ω, k, b), µ̂t (z, n), Λt+1 , wt , Ct , and It such
that

  (i) Production firms optimization: vt (z, n) solves the Bellman equation (5) with associated
         decision rules kt′ (z, n), b′t (z, n), and nt (z, n).

  (ii) Financial intermediaries price default risk according to (6).

 (iii) New Keynesian block: Πt , pt , and qt satisfy (7) and (8).

 (iv) The distribution of firms in production µ̂t (z, n) satisfies (18) and the distribution
         µt (z, ω, k, b) evolves according to (19).

                                                                                                     C −σ
                                                                            −σ . The wage
  (v) Household block: the stochastic discount factor is given by Λt+1 = β Ct+1
                                                                                                      t

         must satisfy wt = ΨCt . The stochastic discount factor and nominal interest rate are
                                                            [          ]
                                                                  Rnom
         linked through the Euler equation for bonds, 1 = Et Λt+1 Πtt+1 .
                                                                             ( )
 (vi) Market clearing: aggregate investment is implicitly defined by Kt+1 = Φ KItt Kt +(1−
                                                  ∫
      δ)E[ω]Kt −(1−(1−δ)E[ω])k0 µt , where Kt = kdµt (z, ω, k, b). Aggregate consumption
         is defined by Ct = Yt − It − ξ.37
  37
    We normalize the mass of firms in production to 1, so ξ is the total resources lost from the fixed operating
costs.




                                                            78
E      Proof of Proposition 1
We prove Proposition 1 in steady state; extending the proof to include transition dynamics
is straightforward. To clarify the economic mechanisms, we work with a simple version of
the model that abstracts from capital-quality shocks (σω = 0), has zero recovery value of
debt (α = 0), and has no exogenous exit shocks (πd = 0). The proof in the full model follows
the same steps with more complicated notation.


Default Threshold            As discussed in the main text, firms only default when they have no
feasible choice which satisfies the non-negativity constraint on dividends, i.e., there is no
(k ′ , b′ ) such that n − k ′ + Q(z, k ′ , b′ )b′ ≥ 0. Define the default threshold n(z) = mink′ ,b′ k ′ −
Q(z, k ′ , b′ )b′ . Note that the largest feasible dividend payment of a firm is n − n(z). If
n ≥ n(z), then arg mink′ ,b′ k ′ − Q(z, k ′ , b′ )b′ is a feasible choice and the firm will not default.
On the other hand, if n < n(z), then d ≤ 0 for all (k ′ , b′ ), violating feasibility.
     With this notation in hand, the Bellman equation of a continuing firm in this simple case
is


v(z, n) = max
           ′ ′
               n − k ′ + Q(z, k ′ , b′ )b′ + βE [v(z ′ , n̂(z ′ , k ′ , b′ ))1{n′ > n(z ′ )}|z, k ′ , b′ ] s.t. d ≥ 0,
             k ,b
                                                                                                                 (20)
where n(z ′ ) is the default threshold.
     Although the continuation value is kinked at the default point, it is never optimal for a
firm to choose this point (see Clausen and Strub (2020) and the discussion in Arellano et al.
(2016)). Hence, the first order conditions are necessary at the optimum.


Unconstrained Firms              Define the unconstrained capital accumulation rule k ∗ (z) as


                           k ∗ (z) = argmax −k ′ + βE [ι(z ′ , k ′ ) + (1 − δ)k ′ |z] ,
                                         k′


where ι(z, k) = maxl zk θ lν − wl. After some algebra, one can show that the expression in the
main text solves this maximization problem (extending the expression to the full model).
     We will now fully characterize the decision rules for firms that can afford the uncon-


                                                         79
strained capital accumulation rule and have zero probability of default in all future states.
We first claim that such a firm is indifferent over any choice of debt b′ which leaves the firm
unconstrained. To show this, note that since the firm has no default risk it borrows at the
risk-free rate   1
                 β
                   .   In this case, the first order condition for borrowing b′ is β = β, which is
obviously true for any value of b′ .
       Following Khan, Senga and Thomas (2016), we resolve this indeterminacy by defining the
maximum borrowing policy b∗ (z) as the maximal borrowing b′ the firm can do while having
zero probability of default in all future states.38 To derive the maximum borrowing policy
b∗ (z), first note that if the firm if the firm invests k ∗ (z) and borrows b∗ (z) in the current
period, its dividends in the next period are


                       ι(z ′ , k ∗ (z)) + (1 − δ)k ∗ (z) − b∗ (z) − ξ − k ∗ (z ′ ) + βb∗ (z ′ ),


for a given realization of z ′ . The requirement that the firm has zero probability of default in
all future states then implies that


                       b∗ (z) = min
                                 ′
                                    ι(z ′ , k ∗ (z)) + (1 − δ)k ∗ (z) − k ∗ (z ′ ) + βb∗ (z ′ ).
                                  z



Hence, b∗ (z) is the largest amount of borrowing the firm can do and be guaranteed to satisfy
the non-negativity constraint on dividends.39
       By construction, if a firm can follow the unconstrained capital accumulation policy k ∗ (z)
and the maximum borrowing policy b∗ (z) while satisfying the non-negativity constraint on
dividends in the current period, it will also satisfy the non-negativity constraint in all future
periods. Moreover, following k ∗ (z) is indeed optimal for such firms because it solves the
associated first-order condition of these firms. Hence, a firm is unconstrained and follows
these decision rules if and only if d = n − k ∗ (z) + βb∗ (z) > 0, i.e.,


                                          n > n(z) ≡ k ∗ (z) − βb∗ (z).
  38
     Khan, Senga and Thomas (2016) refer to this object as the “minimum savings policy.”
  39
     To derive this expression, first re-arrange the non-negativity constraint on dividends conditional on a
realization of the future shocks as an inequality with b′ on the left-hand side. This results in a set of
inequalities for each possible realization of the future shocks. The min operator ensures that all of these
inequalities are satisfied.


                                                          80
Constrained Firms                Consider again the constrained Bellman equation (20). We will show
that firms with n ∈ [n(z), n(z)] pay zero dividends. Invert the default threshold n(z) so that
the firm defaults if z ′ < z(k ′ , b′ ). The Bellman equation (20) can then be written as
                                                                   ∫   z
                             ′             ′       ′           ′
  v(z, n) = max
             ′ ′
                 n − k + Q(z, k , b )b + β                                          v(z ′ , n̂(z ′ , k ′ , b′ ))gz (z ′ |z)dz ′ s.t. d ≥ 0, (21)
                 k ,b                                              z(k′ ,b′ )


where z is the upper bound of the support of z.
    Letting λ(z, n) be the Lagrange multiplier on the d ≥ 0 constraint, the first order condi-
tion for b′ is


        (1 + λ(z, n))(Q(z, k ′ , b′ ) + Q3 (z, k ′ , b′ )b′ ) =
            [∫ z                                                                                       ]
                                 ′      ′ ′          ′        ′ 0 ′ ′          ′ ′       ∂z(k ′ , b′ )
          β              (1 + λ(z , n̂(k , b )))gz (z |z)dz + v (k , b )gz (z(k , b )|z)                 ,
              z(k′ ,b′ )                                                                   ∂b′

where Q3 (z, k ′ , b′ ) is the derivative of the debt price schedule with respect to b′ . The left hand
side of this expression measures the marginal benefit of borrowing. The marginal resources
the firm receives by borrowing is the debt price, adjusting for the fact that the marginal
cost of borrowing changes on existing debt. The firm values those marginal resources using
the Lagrange multiplier. The right hand side of this expression measures the discounted
marginal cost of borrowing. In states of the world in which the firm does not default, it must
give up one unit of resources, which it values using the next period’s Lagrange multiplier.
In addition, marginal borrowing implies that the firm defaults in additional future states.
                                                            ∫z
    Note that the debt price schedule is Q(z, k ′ , b′ ) = β z(k′ ,b′ ) gz (z ′ |z)dz ′ , which implies that
                                                   ′       ′
Q3 (z, k ′ , b′ ) = −βgz (z(k ′ , b′ )|z) ∂z(k
                                            ∂b′
                                               ,b )
                                                    . Plugging this into the first order condition gives

                        [∫                                                       ]
                             z
                                       ′                   ′       ∂z(k ′ , b′ )
                                                                           ′    ′
    β(1 + λ(z, n))                  gz (z |z)dz − gz (z(k , b )|z)                 =
                         z(k′ ,b′ )                                  ∂b′
            [∫                                                                                            ]
                 z
                                  ′   ′        ′       ′           ′            ′           ∂z(k ′ , b′ )
                                                                                              ′   ′         ′     ′
        β               (1 + λ(z , n̂(z , k , b )))gz (z |z)dz + v (k , b )gz (z(k , b )|z)
                                                                                         0
                                                                                                            .                              (22)
             z(k′ ,b′ )                                                                       ∂b′

    We will now show that constrained firms set d = 0. We do so by contradiction: suppose
that a constrained firm sets d > 0, implying that λ(z, n) = 0. First consider a firm that has
                                                                                                                ∂z(k′ ,b′ )
zero probability of default in the next period, i.e., z(k ′ , b′ ) = z and                                        ∂b′
                                                                                                                              = 0. In this case,


                                                                           81
                                                                        Figure 23: Effect of Net Worth Transfer
                                                                                   Average Marginal Propensity to Invest
                                                               14                                                                                    0.09


                                                               12                                                                                    0.08


                                                                                                                                                     0.07
                                                               10




                               Marginal Propensity to Invest
                                                                                                                                                     0.06
                                                               8




                                                                                                                                                            Mass of firms
                                                                                                                                                     0.05
                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                     0.04

                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                     0.03

                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                     0.02

                                                               0                                                                                     0.01


                                                               -2                                                                                    0
                                                                    0    0.5   1       1.5            2      2.5      3   3.5     4        4.5   5
                                                                                                          Net worth




Notes: solid blue line plots the “marginal propensity to invest” out of a positive net worth transfer, i.e.,
k(z,n+∆)−k(z,n)
       ∆        as a function of net worth n. We average over idiosyncratic productivity shocks z using the
ergodic distribution. Dashed purple line plots the stationary distribution of firms.


the first order condition (22) can be simplified to
                                                                                       ∫         z
                                                                               0=                    λ(z ′ , k ′ , b′ )gz (z ′ |z)dz ′ .
                                                                                             z


Since the firm is constrained, λ(z ′ , k ′ , b′ ) > 0 for some positive mass of realizations of z ′ ,
leading to a contradiction.
    Now consider a firm that has some positive probability of default, implying that z(k ′ , b′ ) >
        ∂z(k′ ,b′ )
z and     ∂b′
                      > 0. In this case, the first order condition (22) can be rearranged to

                      ∫   z
                                                                                                             ∂z(k ′ , b′ )
            0=                                          λ(z ′ , k ′ , b′ )gz (z ′ |z)dz ′ +                                gz (z(k ′ , b′ )|z)(b′ + v(z ′ , k ′ , b′ )),
                      z(k′ ,b′ )                                                                               ∂b′

where v(z ′ , k ′ , b′ ) = v(z ′ , n′ ) for the n′ implied by (z ′ , k ′ , b′ ). By construction, risky con-
strained firms engage in strictly positive borrowing b′ > 0. This implies that the right hand
side is strictly greater than zero, leading to a contradiction.




                                                                                                               82
                   Figure 24: Relationship between leverage and net worth
                                    2                                                                0.09


                                                                                                     0.08
                                  1.5

                                                                                                     0.07

                                    1
                                                                                                     0.06




                                                                                                            Mass of firms
                      k′
                      b′
                       Leverage
                                  0.5                                                                0.05


                                                                                                     0.04
                                    0

                                                                                                     0.03

                                  -0.5
                                                                                                     0.02


                                   -1                                                                0.01
                                         0.5   1       1.5   2     2.5       3   3.5   4   4.5   5
                                                                 Net worth



                                                   ′
Notes: firms’ optimal leverage choice kb ′(z,n)
                                          (z,n) as a function of net worth in steady state. We average over
idiosyncratic productivity z using its ergodic distribution.


F     Additional Analysis of Calibrated Model
Figure 23 plots the response of firm-level investment to an exogenous increase in net worth
                                                                                                                            k(z,n+∆)−k(z,n)
n. We measure the response using the “marginal propensity to invest”                                                              ∆
                                                                                                                                            ,   which
computes the fraction of the net worth transfer ∆ used for investment. Consistent with
the discussion above, firms with low net worth exhibit a positive response because they are
below their optimal scale k ∗ (z); in fact, firms with very low net worth invest more than
one-for-one because higher net worth decreases their default probabilities, allowing them to
borrow more externally. The marginal propensity to invest then falls to zero once the firm
reaches its optimal scale k ∗ (z).
    Figure 24 shows that there is a strong a monotonic relationship between firms’ lever-
age and net worth in our model. Given that firms only default when net worth is below
the threshold n(z), this figure implies that there is a monotonically increasing relationship
between leverage and default risk in our model.




                                                                     83
