NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REAL KEYNESIAN MODELS AND STICKY PRICES
Paul Beaudry
Franck Portier
Working Paper 24223
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24223

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018

The authors thank participants in seminars at University of Edinburgh, Einaudi Institute for
Economics and Finance, University College London and Toulouse School of Economics for
comments on early version of this paper. Paul Beaudry thanks the Canadian Social Science and
Humanities Research Council for supporting this research. Franck Portier acknowledges financial
support by the ADEMU project, “A Dynamic Economic and Monetary Union,” funded by the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 Program under grant agreement No 649396. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24223.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Paul Beaudry and Franck Portier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Real Keynesian Models and Sticky Prices
Paul Beaudry and Franck Portier
NBER Working Paper No. 24223
January 2018
JEL No. E24,E3,E32
ABSTRACT
In this paper we present a generalized sticky price model which allows, depending on the
parameterization, for demand shocks to maintain strong expansionary effects even in the presence
of perfectly flexible prices. The model is constructed to incorporate the standard three-equation
New Keynesian model as a special case. We refer to the parameterizations where demand shocks
have expansionary effects regardless of the degree of price stickiness as Real Keynesian
parameterizations. We use the model to show how the effects of monetary policy–for the same
degree of price stickiness–differ depending whether the model parameters are within the Real
Keynesian subset or not. In particular, we show that in the Real Keynesian subset, the effect of a
monetary policy that tries to counter demand shocks creates the opposite tradeoff between
inflation and output variability than under more traditional parameterizations. Moreover, we show
that under the Real Keynesian parameterization neo-Fisherian effects emerge even though the
equilibrium remains unique. We then estimate our extended sticky price model on U.S. data to
see whether estimated parameters tend to fall within the Real Keynesian subset or whether they
are more in line with the parameterization generally assumed in the New Keynesian literature. In
passage, we use the model to justify a new SVAR procedure that offers a simple presentation of
the data features which help identify the key parameters of the model. The main finding from our
multiple estimations, and many robustness checks is that the data point to model parameters that
fall within the Real Keynesian subset as opposed to a New Keynesian subset. We discuss both
how a Real Keynesian parametrization offers an explanation to puzzles associated with joint
behavior of inflation and employment during the zero lower bound period and during the Great
Moderation period, how it potentially changes the challenge faced by monetary policy if
authorities want to achieve price stability and favor employment stability.

Paul Beaudry
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
6000 Iona Drive
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
CANADA
and University of British Columbia
and also NBER
paulbe@interchange.ubc.ca
Franck Portier
Department of Economics
University College London
30 Gordon Street
WC1H 0AX London
United Kingdom
United Kingdom
and CEPR
f.portier@ucl.ac.uk

Introduction
Monetary policy is often presented as an e↵ective tool, and sometimes even an optimal tool,
to counter the e↵ects of demand shocks on the economy without bearing a cost in terms of
increased inflation variability. The main reasoning behind such a view is linked to a property
of many commonly used macroeconomic models; a view according to which the e↵ects of
demand shocks are mainly transmitted to the real economy through the presence of nominal
sticky prices. When the degree of price stickiness tends to zero, the expansionary e↵ects of
demand shocks on the economy also tend to disappear. Hence, if monetary authorities can
reproduce the flexible price outcome, which generally involves stabilizing inflation, it implies
that economic activity will become more stable. In this sense, a monetary policy that can
implement the economy’s flexible price equilibrium can often counter the expanionary e↵ects
of demand shocks and maintain inflation stability.1
The starting point of this paper is to show how two simple modifications of commonly
used sticky nominal price models – when included simultaneously– expand the mechanism by
which demand shocks a↵ect the economic activity and, as a result, alter the challenges faced
by monetary policy in terms of favoring inflation and employment stability.2 In particular,
by changing the specification of borrowing costs faced by households and firms, we extend
the canonical three-equation New Keynesian model along two dimensions. In particular,
our modifications allow for both a discounted Euler Equation formulation

3

and for a cost

channel to monetary policy.4
With these two simple extensions, we show that the model’s parameter space inherits an
interesting dichotomy. In one region, as the frequency of price adjustment goes to infinity,
1

Let us emphasize here that we are focusing on the positive e↵ects of monetary policy not the normative
e↵ects. It is possible that a monetary policy that both stabilizes inflation and insulates the economy against
demand shocks may not be an optimal policy.
2
This paper was initially motivated by the following question. We know that the e↵ects of demand
shocks can be transmitted to the real economy through mechanisms associated with sticky nominal prices
or through other real mechanism. The question is then: if one believes that sticky prices are a feature of
modern economies, is it important for our understanding of the positive e↵ects of monetary policy to know
whether the e↵ects of demand shocks are only transmitted through sticky prices or whether they also work
through other real mechanisms? The answer provided in the paper points to the second alternative.
3
See for example Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson [2012], Gabaix [2016], McKay, Nakamura, and
Steinsson [2016a], [2016b] and Farhi and Werning [2017].
4
See for example Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans [2005], Ravenna and Walsh [2006] and Chowdhury,
Ho↵mann, and Schabert [2006]

1

the expansionary e↵ects of demand shocks on economic activity disappear (and possibly
reverse to become contractionary), while in the other region they survive regardless of the
degree of nominal price rigidities. The former parametrization includes the standard New
Keynesian model as a special case, while we refer to the later parameterizations as a Real
Keynesian parameterization since the expansionary e↵ects of positive demand shocks do
not rely solely on sticky nominal prices. We then examine the positive e↵ects of monetary
policy in our extended environment. For any given degree of price stickiness, we show
that the qualitative e↵ects of monetary policy change depending on whether one is a Real
Keynesian parameterization or not. In the more standard parameterization (which includes
the canonical New Keynesian configuration), a monetary authority faced with demand shocks
can aim to stabilize inflation and this will also help stabilize economic activity. However,
under a Real Keynesian parametrization, the situation is more challenging. If monetary
authorities aim at stabilizing inflation it will lead to an increased e↵ect of demand shocks
on activity. Moreover we show that under a Real Keynesian parameterization Neo-Fisherian
e↵ects emerge in that persistent increases in interest rates are likely to raise inflation instead
of lowering it (see Cochrane [2013] for a discussion. of Neo-Fisherian e↵ects) even though
such a monetary contraction leads to a decrease in output. It is worth noting that in our
environment, Neo-Fisherian e↵ects emerge even if the economy admits a unique stationary
solution.
Our framework suggests that knowing whether the economy is in a Real Keynesian configuration or not is important for understanding the implications of di↵erent monetary policies.5 Hence, the second part of the paper is devoted to empirically exploring whether the
post-war U.S. data points towards parameters that are more in line with a standard New
Keynesian model or if instead they are more supportive of a Real Keynesian configuration.
In particular, we begin by estimating our extended sticky price model on di↵erent samples
of post-war data, for example, the pre-Volker disinflation period, the post-Volker disinflation
period and the more recent Zero Lower Bound (ZLB) period. In all the case we explore,
the estimates repeatedly point towards a Real Keynesian configuration. We then aim to
5

Here we are again making a statement about the positive e↵ects of monetary policy not the normative
e↵ects.

2

isolate the data patterns which contribute to this result. To do this, we present a new
Structural Vector Autoregression (SVAR) approach that highlights the impulse responses
that a structural model needs to explain. There are two features of the data isolated using
our SVAR approach that favor a Real Keynesian interpretation. First, our SVAR procedure
isolates monetary shocks that are much more persistent than generally found. We observe
that the identified monetary contractions are associated with a recessions, but they also lead
to increased inflation at all horizons. Second, we find that demand shocks have less e↵ect
on inflation during the ZLB period than in previous periods. As we shall show, both these
patterns are hard to explain in the conventional setup but are fully consistent with a Real
Keynesian configuration.
Given that our estimates of the e↵ects of monetary shocks play an important role in
distinguishing between a Real Keynesian configuration and a more standard New Keynesian
configuration, we spend considerable e↵ort clarifying why our results di↵er from other segments of the SVAR literature which find that monetary contractions are generally very short
lived and usually lead to a fall in inflation. One potentially important element we isolate
to explain the di↵erence is the treatment of the Volker dis-inflation period. The issue being
whether the pre- and post-Volker disinflation periods should be treated as one integrated
monetary regime with the disinflation period itself being interpreted as a shock; or if instead
it is best to treat these samples separately as di↵erent monetary regimes and interpret the
Volker dis-inflation period as a change in regime. While our preferred specifications are not
very sensitive to such a distinction, the only alternative specifications we find that support
the more conventional story6 relies on treating the Volker disinflation as a shock instead as
a change in regime; which we believe is highly questionable. We also discuss why it is essential to isolate the e↵ects of persistent monetary shocks if one wants to distinguish between
the two di↵erent types of parameter configurations we focus upon. In particular, we clarify
why isolating the e↵ects of very temporary monetary shocks – as for example is found in
the literature exploiting Federal Reserve announcement windows7 – is not very helpful for
answering the question we explore.
6
7

We refer here to monetary shocks that lead to both a decrease in economic activity and in inflation.
See for example Rigobon and Sack [2004], Nakamura and Steinsson [2013] and Gertler and Karadi [2015].

3

In the final section of the paper we discuss how thinking of the economy as being in a
Real Keynesian configuration o↵ers new insights on recent monetary periods. For example,
we highlight that the framework o↵ers an explanation to why inflation has been so stable
during the ZLB period. We also discuss how such a configuration accounts for the Great
Moderation period. In particular, this framework does not support the notion that the
reduction in inflation during the 1983-2007 period was due mainly to an e↵ective stabilization
by monetary authorities of real activity. Instead, it points to a change in the speed of price
adjustment, likely due to a lower target inflation rate, as the main reason for the observed
more stable inflation. In fact, we show that real activity – as measured by changes in the
variability of employment rates or unemployment rates – essentially did not change over
the period even as inflation became much more stable. Overall, we argue that – even in
an economy without cost-push shocks– viewing monetary policy as being conducted in an
economy characterized by a Real Keynesian configuration suggests that monetary policy can
be used e↵ectively to stabilize inflation, but that it can’t simultaneously be used to insulate
the economy from demand shocks. Other tools are needed if one wants to pursue both goals.
The remaining sections of the paper are structured as follow. In Section 1 we present
our extension of a standard three-equation sticky nominal price model which includes the
benchmark New Keynesian model as a special case. We show how the parameter space
of this extended model can be dichotomized in a region where the expansionary e↵ects of
demand disturbances vanish (or become negative) as price stickiness goes to zero and one
region where this is not the case. It is here that we introduce the notion of a Real Keynesian
parametrization. In Section 2 we first derive an irrelevance result in showing that the e↵ects
of demand and cost-push shocks are qualitatively identical whether the economy is within
the Real Keynesian or non-Real Keynesian parameterization. The more surprising result
is that despite this irrelevance result, we find that the tradeo↵s associated with monetary
policy depend on the whether one is or not in a Real Keynesian configuration. In Section
4 we explore the model empirically to see whether the data is more favorable to a Real
Keynesian configuration or not. In passage, we present a new SVAR methodology that
highlights a set of data features which needs to be explained. In Section 5 we discuss the
relationship between our findings and other findings in the literature with respect to the
4

e↵ects of monetary shocks. In Section 6 we use the Real Keynesian structure to highlight
how it o↵ers an alternative framework for understanding recent monetary episodes as well
as to discuss some of its implication for policy choices.

1

Extending the Canonical Sticky Price Model

The goal of this section is to extend the canonical three-equation New Keynesian model, as
presented in Galı́ [2015] and Woodford [2004]. First we want to allow for a formulation of the
log-linearized household’s Euler equation in which the coefficient on expected consumption
can be smaller than one. Various micro-foundations for this so-called “discounted Euler
equation” have been proposed by Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson [2012], Gabaix [2016],
McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson [2016a], [2016b] and Farhi and Werning [2017], as a way
to address the “forward guidance puzzle” discovered by Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson
[2012]. Second, we want to allow for a cost channel to monetary policy, by having the interest
rate entering in the definition of the marginal cost of production. Such a cost channel has
been also extensively studied in the literature. It was mentioned by Farmer [1984], then
modeled by Blinder [1987], Fuerst [1992], Christiano and Eichenbaum [1992], Barth and
Ramey [2002]) and discussed in the framework of the New Keynesian model by Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Evans [2005], Ravenna and Walsh [2006] and Chowdhury, Ho↵mann, and
Schabert [2006].
Although each of these extensions has been analyzed extensively, the implication of allowing them to appear simultaneously has not – to our knowledge– been explored. In the
model below, we provide a framework which allows both modifications to arise in a simple
manner. It is clear that there are many alternative ways of getting these elements into a
model, and the precise way they are motivated could be very important for normative analysis. However, since we will be focusing on the positive implications of our model, the precise
micro-foundations that give rise to these extensions are not very crucial for our purposes.

1.1

Firms

Firms behave similarly to that in the benchmark New Keynesian setup (see Galı́’s [2015]
textbook). Since the elements are very well known, we only outline the main steps here
5

and leave details to Appendix A. There is a final good sector with constant returns to
scale that uses a continuum of intermediate goods as inputs. Each of intermediate goods
is a produced by a monopolist which has access to a CRS technology that uses a basic
input. The intermediate good sector faces nominal rigidities which take the form of Calvo
adjustment. The monopolistic firms take the cost of the basic input and the aggregate price
index as given. When focusing on the log-linearized behavior around the steady state, we
get inflation being determined as
⇡t = Et [⇡t+1 ] +  mct + µt ,

(1)

where mct is the real marginal cost, and variables are expressed as log deviations from
the zero-inflation steady state. The parameter  captures the e↵ects of price adjustment,
with  going to infinity as price adjustment is allowed to become arbitrarily more frequent.
Cost-push shocks µ are assumed to enter the model through shocks to the markup. The
determination of the marginal cost for the intermediate good producers is determined by
the price of the basic input. The basic input is produced by a set of competitive firms that
employ labor and final good in fixed proportions to produce. These firms must borrow to
buy the final good they use in production at the beginning of the period. This gives rise to
a (real) marginal cost for intermediate firms of the form (again in log deviations from steady
state)

⇣

mct = a1 wt

pt

⌘

⇣

✓ t + a2 i t

⌘

Et [⇡t+1 ] ,

where ✓t is a productivity index, pt is the price of the final good, it is the nominal interest
rate and ⇡t is the rate of inflation. For now, we will assume that productivity is constant as
to focus on demand shocks and set ✓t to zero.

1.2

Households

There is a measure one of identical households indexed by i. Each of them chooses a consumpP
t
tion stream and labor supply to maximize discounted utility E0 1
⇣t 1 (U (Cit ) ⌫(Lit )),
t=0

where ⇣ is a discount shifter. Changes in ⇣ will act as demand shocks. There are two modifications we make relative to standard formulation. First, we require that households borrow
the amount DM = Pt Cit in the morning of each period to finance their consumption pur6

chases and only receive their labor income in the afternoon, when they can also decide to
borrow or lend DitA for intertemporal smoothing. Second, we assume that each household
faces an upward sloping supply of funds schedule when borrowing, that is, the cost of borrowing may increase as an individual wants to borrow more. These two assumptions will give
rise to Euler equation of a more general form. Indeed, a household will face the following
decision problem
max

1
X
t=0

t

⇥
⇣t 1 E0 U (Cit )

⌫(Lit )

⇤

A
A
H
s.t. Dit+1
+ Wt Lit + ⌦it = (1 + iH
it 1 )Dit + (1 + iit 1 )Pt Cit ,
◆◆
✓
✓
Dit+1
H
1 + iit = (1 + it ) 1 + ⇢
,
Pt
M
A
where iH
it is the interest rate faced by the household, it is the policy rate, Dit = Dit + Dit

is amount of real debt outstanding held by the agent at the beginning of a period (which
in equilibrium will be Cit ) and ⌦it are the profits received from the firms. ⇢0 (·) > 0 will
capture the default premium perceived by the agent. In Appendix A, we present a model
with asymmetric information (some agents can commit to repay their debt, some cannot)
where the pooling equilibrium is characterized by such a perceived default premium even
though there is no default in equilibrium.
The first order conditions (evaluated at the symmetric equilibrium in which Dit = Pt Cit
8i) associated with this problem are:

⇣t
Pt
0
U (Ct ) =
,
Et U 0 (Ct+1 )(1 + it ) 1 + ⇢(Ct ) + Ct ⇢0 (Ct )
⇣t 1
Pt+1
⌫ 0 (lt )
Wt
=
.
0
U (Ct )
Pt
Accordingly, this gives rise to an Euler equation in linearized form which can be written as
(omitting constant terms)
`t = ↵` Et [`t+1 ]

↵r (it

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + dt ,
⇣
⌘
using the fact that in equilibrium ct = `t and where dt = log ⇣t⇣t 1 is a discount factor shock.

We show in Appendix A that 0 < ↵` < 1. This “discount factor” in the Euler Equation is

created by the asymmetry of information on the debt market. Because of this asymmetry,
agents face an interest rate that is increasing in the amount of debt they issue.
7

The (log linear) labor supply equation for the household is standard. Evaluated at
equilibrium Dt = 0 and ct = `t ), it is given by
`t = a3 (wt

1.3

pt ).

Resulting Linearized Equilibrium Conditions

The equilibrium conditions determining employment Lt and inflation ⇧t are given by the
following two equations (omitting constant terms), where we have used the fact that Ct =
Yt = Lt and where `t = log Lt and ⇡t = log ⇧t :
`t = ↵` Et [`t+1 ]
⇡t = Et [⇡t+1 ] + 

↵r (it
` `t

+

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + dt ,
r (it

(EE)

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + µt ,

(PC)

where “EE” stands for Euler Equation and “PC” for Phillips Curve. To close the model we
need to specify the conduct of monetary policy, which we will return to later. We refer to
this model as the “extended model”. Note that the above two equations embed the standard
New Keynesian model as a special case, when ↵` = 1 and

r

= 0. For ease of exposition, we

will assume that dt and µt follow AR(1) processes with auto-regressive coefficients ⇢d and
⇢µ .

1.4

Deriving a Real Keynesian Condition for Parameters

The object of this section is to contrast how the above model behaves as the economy
converges to one without nominal rigidities. As we will prove, the model behavior will
depend on on whether

r (1

↵` ) is large or small relative to

` ↵r .

Full flexibility of prices

corresponds to the case in which the parameter  tends to infinity. First result concerns the
New Keneysian model.
Proposition 1. In the New Keynesian model (i.e., when ↵` = 1 and

r

= 0), the e↵ects of

demand shocks on employment go to zero as prices become fully flexible.8
This is a well known result, as discussed recently in Cochrane [2013]. Note that it holds
for any value of ↵` (i.e., for un-discounted or discounted Euler equations, as long as
We now explore the case in which we allow for the cost channel (i.e.,
8

r

6= 0).

This proof of this result as well as all the following ones are gathered in Appendix B.

8

r

= 0).

Proposition 2. In the extended model, when prices become fully flexible, demand shocks
always maintain a positive e↵ect on employment if and only if
(1

↵` )

r

>

` ↵r .

(RK)

We will refer to this condition as the RK (for “Real Keynesian”) condition, as we define
a Real Keynesian model as follows.
Definition 1. A Real Keynesian model is defined as a parameterization in which demand
shocks maintain a positive e↵ect on employment even when prices are flexible.
It is interesting to note that the Real Keynesian condition will not hold if either the
Euler equation is not discounted (i.e., ↵` = 1) or there is no cost channel (i.e.,

r

= 0). The

combination of the two extra features that we have added to the canonical model are needed
for Real Keynesian properties to emerge. The RK condition is indeed a condition on the
relative size of the marginal cost elasticities to the wage and the real interest rate, as it can
be seen by rewriting the Real Keynesian condition as
r)

r
`

>

↵r
.
1 ↵`

Both these forces (

`

and

may be small near the steady state but their ratio could be either big or small.
In the next section, we return to the case in which prices are sticky ( is finite and fixed),

and study the implications of being in a Real Keynesian configuration for the e↵ect of shocks
and for stabilization trade-o↵s.

2

Implications of Being in a Real Keynesian Model
When Prices are Sticky

We pursue three objectives in this section. First, we look at di↵erences in the response of
the economy to shocks (demand and cost-push) in the New Keynesian and Real Keynesian
configurations. . Second, we look at monetary policies that aim at stabilizing the economy
in response to demand shocks, and derive the potential trade-o↵s between employment and
inflation stabilization in New Keynesian and Real Keynesian models. Note that we restrict
ur attention here to the positive e↵ect of monetary policy rules, and do not address any
normative questions. Third, we study the behavior of the economy for a fixed nominal
interest rate (e.g., at the Zero Lower Bound) in the New Keynesian and Real Keynesian
9

configurations. Before we start, we discuss of the class of monetary policy rules that we
consider.

2.1

Monetary Policy Rules

With sticky prices, allocation properties are greatly dependent on the specific nominal interest rule one considers. The main characteristic we want the policy rule to have is for it
ensures determinacy of inflation in the sense that the model inherits a unique stationary
equilibrium outcome. One possibility is to choose a policy rule of the form it =
However, the difficulty with such a policy rule is that the values of

⇡

and

`

⇡ ⇡t

+

` `t .

that ensure

determinacy change as we move between a New Keynesian and Real Keynesian parameterization. For ease of presentation, it is much simpler to work with a rule of the form
it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +
figurations

10

` `t

with

`

> 0,

9

as this guarantees determinacy under all parameter con-

and, within this rule, it remains easy to talk about policies that are more or

less aggressive towards stabilizing employment through the choice of

`.

In Appendix E,

we discuss how there is no great loss of generality in moving from a policy rule of the type
it = Et [⇧t+1 ] +

` `t

to one of the form it =

⇡ ⇡t

+

` `t ,

as long as we focus on policies that

induce determinacy.

2.2

Responses to Shocks

Now we derive the qualitative properties of the economy responses to shocks in the New
Keynesian and Real Keynesian parametrization. From now on, we assume that the shocks
are autoregressive processes of order 1. Proposition 3 looks at the e↵ects of demand shocks.
Proposition 3. Assuming monetary policy is given by it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +

` `t

with

`

> 0,

then a positive demand shock increases employment, inflation and interest rates (real and
nominal) under both RK and non-RK parameterizations.
Proposition 3 indicates that the qualitative e↵ects of demand shocks, for a finite  and a
large class of monetary policies, will be similar regardless of whether the economy is within
9

if

Note that this policy will not guarantee finite inflation when  goes to infinity (i.e., full price flexibility)
6= 0. This is not a problem here as we keep  finite
See Proposition B.1 in Appendix B.

2
10

10

a New Keynesian or Real Keynesian parametrization. Hence knowing that demand shocks
tend to increase employment, inflation and interest rate will tell us nothing about the relevant
parameterizations.
Proposition 4 gives the same irrelevance result for cost-push shocks, so the response to
cost-push shocks is not discriminating the Real Keynesian parametrization from the New
Keynesian one.
Proposition 4. Assuming monetary policy is given by it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +

` `t

with

`

> 0, then

a positive cost-push shock increases inflation and the nominal interest rate, while leaving
employment and the real interest rate unchanged under both RK and non-RK parameterizations.

2.3

Policy Trade-o↵ with Demand Shocks

When only demand shocks hit the economy, what happens as we change

`,

that is, how

does the variance of inflation and employment change as we adopt a policy that is more or
less aggressive in terms of reacting to the demand shock?11 The surprising result is that
the existence of a trade-o↵ between inflation and output variability depends on whether
under quasi flexible prices demand shocks have positive e↵ects or not (i.e., whether the Real
Keynesian condition holds or not).
2
⇡

To see this, let us derive the relationship between inflation variance
variance

2
`

as we change

given by :
2
⇡

=

✓

1
↵r

`

for a given variance of the demand shocks

◆2 ✓


1

◆2 ✓

r

↵`

d

+ [ r (1

⇢d ↵` )

` ↵r ]

`

and employment

2
d.

◆2

This relation is

.

(2)

We therefore have the proposition:
Proposition 5. Assuming that monetary policy rule is given by it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +
`

> 0, then a more aggressive policy (larger

`)

` `t

with

always leads to a higher variance of inflation

and a lower variance of employment if and only if the economy is in a Real Keynesian
configuration.
11

In Appendix C, we study this trade-o↵ with cost-push shocks.

11

In a New Keynesian parametrization (

r

= 0 and ↵l = 1), monetary policy will never

face a trade-o↵: if it is aggressive at stabilizing employment or inflation, it manages to also
stabilize the other variable. In contrast, under a Real Keynesian parametrization, there
is always a tradeo↵. If monetary policy tries to aggressively stabilize either inflation of
employment, it destabilizes the other.
To understand how this result arises it is helpful to look at the issue graphically. For
presentation purposes we can assume that demand shocks as i.i.d.. First we can look in the
(rt , `t ) plane (where rt = it

Et [⇡t+1 ]) and plot the Euler equation and the policy rule in this
`.

space, with the slope of the latter governed by

This is what is shown on the top graph of

panel (a) in Figures 1, 2 and 3. Expected variables are zero because of the i.i.d. assumption
for the shock. In this plane, the nature of the Phillips curve and the parametrization (Real
Keynesian of not) does not matter. On this graph, the grey zone around the Euler equation
line corresponds to all the possible locations of the Euler equation, as implied by the demand
shocks dt . Where the parametrization matters (New or Real Keynesian) is for the Phillips
Curve in the (⇡t , `t ) plane. In the New Keynesian case, as depicted on Figure 1, this Phillips
curve is invariant with respect to policy. In the extended model (Figures 2 and 3), we can
define a pseudo Phillips curve as the Phillips curve in which we have substituted the nominal
interest rate by its expression in the policy rule. This pseudo Phillips curve is given by (3),
and is not invariant to the policy parameter

`:

⇡t = Et [⇡t+1 ] + (

`

+

r ` )`t .

(3)

[Figure 1 about here.]
[Figure 2 about here.]
[Figure 3 about here.]
What is the e↵ect of a change in policy? Consider increasing

`.

As shown on top of panel

(b) in Figures 1 to 3, this will mitigate the e↵ects of demand shocks on activity. In the New
Keynesian case, this is always good in terms of stabilizing both activity and inflation as the
Phillips curve does not change, as shown on the bottom of panel (b) However, in the more
12

general case, as we render policy more aggressive (greater

` ),

curve, as seen in Figure 2 and 3 on bottom of panel (b). If

r

we also steepen the Phillips

is very small (as in Figure 2),

this will still lead to a stabilization of both activity and inflation. However, as
relative to

` ↵r

r

gets big

(as in Figure 3), things will eventually switch. Eventually there will appear a

negative tradeo↵ between employment and inflation variances. When does the switch arise?
Exactly for the same condition under which demand shocks have positive e↵ect on activity
under flexible prices. If the parameterization is Real Keynesian, then monetary policy faces
an unpleasant trade-o↵ where insulating employment variability to demand shocks comes at
the cost of increasing inflation variability.

2.4

Implications of the Real Keynesian Parametrization for the
Economy at Zero Lower Bound

The previous result of an unpleasant trade-o↵ between employment and inflation stability
in the Real Keynesian configuration could be seen as a theoretical curiosity, that would be
difficult to test empirically. To illustrate how the implications of a change in policy can be
very di↵erent depending whether the economy is in a Real Keynesian parametrization or in
a New Keynesian one, it happens that looking at the ZLB period is quite instructive. Let
us contrast how the economy would behave if we change policy from an activist policy of
the form i = Et [⇡t+1 ] +

` `t

with

`

> 0 to a policy of fixed interest rates it = 0.

12

To

ease the exposition, we assume that there are only demand shocks. It is well known that
with a New Keynesian parametrization, the equilibrium for the economy becomes indeterminate under fixed interest rate rule, so it is difficult to predict exactly how inflation may
change. Proposition 6 shows that equilibrium properties are di↵erent in a Real Keynesian
parametrization.
Proposition 6. Assuming that the economy is in a Real Keynesian parameterization and
there are only demand shocks, then moving from the policy i = Et [⇡t+1 ] +

` `t

with

`

> 0 to

the policy it = 0, the equilibrium remains determinate with the variance of employment
increasing but the variance of inflation

2
⇡

2
`

decreasing.

12

it represents here deviation form the steady state, so that this fixed nominal interest rate regime needs
not to be strictly the Zero Lower Bound, but should be interpreted as any policy that maintains the nominal
interest rate fixed.

13

Interestingly, this proposition can be interpreted as suggesting that hitting the zero lower
bound under an RK parametrization could result in an increase the variance of employment
but a decrease in the variance of inflation. It it is helpful to contrast this result with the
case where the economy exhibits a discounted Euler equation (0 < ↵` < 1) but no cost
channel (

r

= 0). Such a parametrization has been extensively studied in the “forward guid-

ance puzzle” literature (Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson [2012], Gabaix [2016], McKay,
Nakamura, and Steinsson [2016a] and Farhi and Werning [2017]). The nice feature of this
parametrization is that the equilibrium can remain determinate under an interest rate peg.
Accordingly, in this case we can unambiguously compute the variances of employment and
inflation. As stated in Proposition 7, in such a case, switching to an interest peg is accompanied with an increase in both the variance of employment and inflation.
Proposition 7. Consider an economy with ↵` < 1 and

r

maintain determinacy as policy moves from i = Et [⇡t+1 ] +
of both employment

3
3.1

2
`

and inflation

2
⇡

= 0. If ↵` is sufficient small to
` `t

to it = 0, then the variance

will increase.

Structural Estimation
The Estimated Equations

Now that we have highlighted the di↵erences of a model in the Real Keynesian parametrization compared to a New Keynesian one, the goal of this section is to look at data through the
lens of our simple extended sticky price model, where we don’t a priori take any stance on
whether parameters are in Real Keynesian subset or not. Our objective is to see whether a
Real Keynesian parameterization may o↵er a better fit of the data than more standard New
Keynesian parameterizations. The initial model we want to estimate includes the following
two equations
`t = ↵` Et [`t+1 ]
⇡t =

↵r (it

Et [⇡t+1 ] + 

` `t

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + dt ,
+

r (it

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + µt ,

where dt and µt are assumed to be independent AR(1) processes. Two issues immediately
arise. First we need to specify a class of monetary policies. We begin by disregarding the
14

ZLB period, and choose the class of policies rules
it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +

d dt

+

µ µt

+ ⌫t .

(Policy)

This class of policy rules is attractive as it minimizes difficulties associated with indeterminacy while simultaneously being very flexible as it allows monetary policy to react to the
state space of the system. In appendix E, we show that for any monetary rule that reacts to
current endogenous variables and that guarantees determinacy of equilibrium, equilibrium
allocations can be replicated with a our class of policy rules. Note that in this policy rule,
⌫t will represent monetary shocks, that we also assume to be AR(1).
A second issue that arises is whether we should think of cost-push shocks (µt ) as only
a↵ecting the Phillips curve or whether they should potentially also directly a↵ect households
demand. While the framework presented in the previous section implies that cost-push
shocks should only a↵ect the Phillips curve, it is not difficult to think of extensions in which
cost shocks may also have a direct impact on demand. For example, in a richer model with
incomplete markets, such shocks may favor precautionary savings which would lead then to
enter the household’s Euler equation. Even though we will not derive such a case formally
here, we choose to allow in our estimation that µt shocks enter both the Phillips Curve and
the Euler Equation, and we will let the data decide if such a mechanism may be at play.13
Accordingly, the model on which we base our estimations is given by the following three
equation system
`t = ↵` Et [`t+1 ]

↵r (it

⇡t = Et [⇡t+1 ] + 

` `t

it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + ↵µ µt + dt ,
+

r (it

d dt

+

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + µt ,
µ µt

+ ⌫t .

(EE)
(PC)
(Policy)

This is a quite simple linear system of three equations in three unknowns, `, ⇡ and i. As such,
this system has low dimension and is entirely forward looking, and is unlikely to capture well
the rich dynamics of the economy. We will therefore later explore extensions which allow for
endogenous dynamics and more shocks. An attractive feature of starting from such a simple
13

This extension allows for the following possibility. A cost-push shock µt could create inflation, without
much change in i, thereby decreasing the real interest rate while simultaneously leading to a fall in employment. If µt is not allowed to directly a↵ect the Euler Equations, such a pattern could not arise.

15

model is that all the mechanisms at play can be understood easily. The drawback is that it
may be an over-simplification. We believe that it is a useful starting point as it allows us
to ask whether the simple narrative of a striped down New Keynesian model o↵ers a better
interpretation of the data than what could be o↵ered by a Real Keynesian parametrization–
which is a parameterization not generally considered in the literature.

3.2

Estimation, Identification and Sample Period

We will begin by estimating the above model by maximum likelihood on post-war U.S.
data excluding the ZLB period. However, as written the model is slightly under-identified.
14

First, it will not be able to separately identify ,

estimates of 

`

`

and

r.

Instead we can only get

and  r . Without loss of generality, we therefore normalize  = 1 when

estimating over one sample period. Later, when we estimate over di↵erent samples, we will
be able to estimate changes in  over time if we assume that

`

and

r

do not vary. After this

normalization, the model still has two parameters more than what can be identified from the
data. As commonly done in the empirical macroeconomic literature, we do not estimate
and ↵r . For

we set it to .99, which is in line with large parts of the literature. Our results

are not sensitive to changing

around this level. As for ↵r (which is largely determined by

the inverse of the agents risk aversion parameter), there is considerable debate regarding its
value. In our baseline estimation, we set this value to .33, which is at the average or at the
high end of the range of most micro-level estimates. Because there is controversy over the
value of such parameter, we explore the sensitivity of our results with allowing ↵r to vary
between .1 and 1.
Our initial data sample is for quarterly U.S. data over the period 1953Q3-2007Q1 . We
stop the sample before Great Recession period where the interest rate was constrained by
the ZLB for much of the time. We will later include that period, but then estimate only the
Euler equation and the Phillips curve for ZLB period. Our measure of interest rates is the
Federal Funds rate.15 For inflation, we use either the GDP deflator or the CPI growth rate.
For the employment rate, as we want a series that is as close to stationary as possible, we use
14

We are able to solve analytically the model and report in appendix G the explicit mapping between
reduced form parameters and structural parameters.
15
See Appendix D for data definition and sources.

16

either the negative of the unemployment rate or the linearly detrended employment rate.16 .
As a robustness check, we will also estimate the model on a smaller sample that focuses on
the Post Volker dis-inflation period, 1983Q4-2007Q1 . This period has the advantage that
it may be less subject to the possibility of indeterminacy, as discussed in Clarida, Galı́, and
Gertler [2000].
In the text, we only present results obtained with (minus) unemployment as a measure
of employment, the GDP deflator growth as a measure of inflation, and with ↵r = .33, which
we refer to as the baseline estimation. In Appendix H, we present results from estimating
eight variants of the model (two di↵erent periods, two measures of inflation , two measures
of employment); each with five di↵erent values of ↵r (.1, .3, .5, .75, 1). This makes for forty
estimations.

3.3

Results

Table 1 presents the baseline estimation of our forward looking sticky price model. In this
estimation none of the free parameters is constrained in terms of sign or size. The first aspect
to note from the table is that the signs of the estimates are the expected ones. Monetary
policy is observed to increase interest rates in response to demand shocks (
decrease it in response to cost-push shocks (

µ

d

> 0) and to

< 0). The “discount factor” in the Euler

equation ↵` is estimated to be .65, which is between 0 and 1. This estimate may appear
low, but it is unclear to us how it should be compared with the literature. It should also
be noted that this value is quite sensitive to the choice of ↵r . If ↵r is set to .1 instead, the
estimate of ↵` becomes over .8. Let us immediately note that results are surprisingly robust
across our 40 variations (see Appendix H for more details).
[Table 1 about here.]
The key element we want to explore from this table is whether the estimated parameter
configurations suggest that the data are in the New Keynesian or the Real Keynesian parameters configuration (or in between). Recall that the model in the the Real Keynesian region
if the condition (1

↵` )

r

` ↵r

< 0 holds. We actually find that this condition is met

16

This linear trend is a simple way of removing some of the e↵ects on the employment rate that are due
to increased female participation over our period.

17

for all cases we explored that gave interpretable results. To give a sense of our uncertainty
regarding this inference, in Figure 4 we plot the distribution of the quantity (1

↵` )

r

` ↵r

as implied by the parameter given in Table 1, given sample uncertainty. As can be seen in
the figure, most of the implied distribution (79%) is in the Real Keynesian configuration.
[Figure 4 about here.]
Estimation Using Pooled Sub-Periods :

The results presented in Table 1 are impli-

citly imposing that the period from 1954 to 2007 is treated as one with constant monetary
policy (i.e., no change in

d

and

µ)

and no change in the processes of shocks. However, it

is generally agreed that the conduct of monetary policy changed quite drastically over the
time span when Paul Volcker was the Chairman of the Federal Reserve. For this reason, it
may be more reasonable to estimate our model allowing for di↵erent monetary policies over
di↵erent periods. In such a case, we could estimate each period separately, which allows all
parameters to vary across periods, or we could pool the samples allowing some parameters
to change over periods and some to stay the same. In this subsection, we explore results
from such a pooling exercise. Here our idea is to estimate the model over three sub-periods,
allowing for the monetary policy to change over periods and for the exogenous shock process
to change. We also allow the degree of price rigidity  to change between the pre-Volcker
dis-inflation period, the post-Volcker dis-inflation and the ZLB period. Other parameters
are assumed fixed. Such an exercice gives us new estimates of parameters for which we can
check the Real Keynesian condition. This is attractive as the estimates will incorporate
information obtained by the change in monetary regimes. In particular, using such change
in monetary policy regime should help us evaluate the Real Keynesian condition as we know
that changes in policy will have di↵erent e↵ects depending on whether we are in an Real
Keynesian or New Keynesian parameters subset.
We now perform a pooling estimation over three sub-periods; the pre-Volcker dis-inflation
period 1954Q3-1979Q1; the post-Volcker dis-inflation period 1983Q4-2007Q1 and the zero
lower bound period 2009Q1-2016Q3.17 For the two first sub-periods, we continue to assume
17

Results from pooling just the first two sub-periods or the two last sub-periods give similar results in
terms of finding support for a Real Keynesian parametrization. Moreover, results are not very sensitive with

18

that monetary policy is of the form it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +

d dt +

µ µt + ⌫ t ,

where

d

and

µ

allowed

to vary between periods, while over the ZLB period, the monetary regime period is taken
to be a fixed interest rate rule.18 In this last regime, because of the fixed interest rate rule,
indeterminacy of equilibrium could arise. However, in contrast to a standard New Keynesian
parameterization, this will not always happen in our extended model. In particular, if one
is in a Real Keynesian configuration, we have shown previously that the equilibrium stays
determinate under a fixed interest rule. Hence, we proceed to estimate the model as if the
equilibrium is determinate even in the fixed interest rate regime, and then we verify whether
the implied parameters are consistent with determinacy.
Table 2 provides results from estimating our model by pooling the three sub-samples,
allowing for monetary policy and exogenous processes to changes across regimes. Interestingly, our estimate of ↵` is increased in this case to .83 even when ↵r is set at .33. A few
other interesting elements shall be stressed. First, we estimate that monetary policy reacted
more to demand shocks in the post-1983 period versus the pre-1979 period, which is in line
with the standard narratives over the period. Also, we see that the degree of price rigidities
 decreased substantially from the first sub-period to the two last ones, which is consistent
with many estimates of the Phillips curve over the period. One issue that arises is that the
parameter estimate for

`

is found to be negative, although very small in absolute value and

not significantly di↵erent from zero. There are two way to interpret this. One possibility
is that

`

should be treated as being essentially zero, in which case the Real Keynesian

condition (1

↵` )

r

>

` ↵r

will be satisfied. The other possibility is to accept that

`

is

indeed negative (a possibility discussed in Appendix F), in which case the Real Keynesian
condition becomes (1

↵` )

r

> | ` |↵r , which is again satisfied. Therefore, regardless of the

above choice, parameters are in the Real Keynesian zone for the three sub-periods. Finally,
given the estimated parameters, determinacy of equilibrium is maintained even in the fixed
interest rate regime.
[Table 2 about here.]
respect to changing the exact start and end dates of each of these periods. The estimation procedure is a
two-step estimation that will be explained in the next section.
18
In each case we are assuming that agents behave as if the regime will stay constant forever.

19

[Table 3 about here.]
We can also use the parameters in Table 2 to interpret aspects of the Great Moderation
as well as aspect of the ZLB period. For example, the estimates suggest that the Great
Moderation period was mainly a nominal phenomena, with the fall in inflation volatility
being due primarily to a fall in  (i.e., an increase in price stickiness). Although not often
discussed, the actual change in the variance of employment between periods was extremely
minor, as shown in Table 3. This suggests that inflation stability did not come mainly as a
result of a more activity stabilizing monetary policy. Instead, what we observed over during
the Great Moderation was mainly demand driven non-inflationary business cycles.19 With
respect to the ZLB sub-period, the estimates in Table 2 suggest that inflation should have
become more stable in the ZLB period in comparison to the preceding period, as monetary
policy was no longer able to react to demand shocks. Recall that in a Real Keynesian
regime, a less agressive monetary policy in terms of a lower

d

should lead to lower inflation

variability, which is indeed what we observe. Interestingly, in a Real Keynesian parameter
configuration, seeing determinate and stable inflation during a ZLB period is not only easy
to explain, it is actually what is predicted by the model.

3.4

Allowing for Habit Persistence

The model we have studied so far has no internal dynamics. We now assume that utility
shows habit persistence in consumption, so that preferences can be written u(ct

hct 1 )

v(`t ). As is common in the literature, we assume that the habit term is external to the household. Under this assumption, the model allocations are the solution of the three following
equations for all t > 0:
`t = ↵` Et [`t+1 ] + ↵` 1 `t
⇡t = Et [⇡t+1 ] + 

↵r (it

1

` `t

+

it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +

`

`

1

1

`t

`t

1

1

+

19

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + ↵µ µt + dt ,
+

r (it

d dt

+

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + µt ,
µ µt

+ ⌫t .

(EE’)
(PC’)
(Policy’)

The parameters estimate suggest that if monetary authorities keep the real interest rate close to constant,
then demand shock will drive employment fluctuations with inflation being stable.

20

In this new set of equations, we see that the Euler equation inherits a lagged term in `t 1 ,
the Phillips Curve also inherits such a term as labor supply– and therefore wages– is a↵ected
by the habit term. Finally, we extend the monetary policy rule to also allow monetary
authorities to react to the term `t

which is inline we our previous assumption that we

1

want to allow monetary authorities to react to the state space of the system (see Appendix
E). In this extended model, the condition under which the economy is in a Real Keynesian
configuration is given by
(1

↵`

↵` 1 )

r

> | ` |↵r .

(RK’)

Table 4 shows estimated parameters, which have again expected signs and magnitudes. Once
again, the Real Keynesian condition (RK’) is satisfied.
[Table 4 about here.]

4

How to Interpret the Results: a SVAR Approach

Results in Tables 1, 2 and 4 suggest that the economy may be best characterized as corresponding to a Real Keynesian configuration (which recall is a configuration not usually
even allowed for in most estimations of sticky price models). As we have noted, this result is
robust to many changes in terms of data and sample periods. However, a common problem
with structural estimation is that the results often seem as coming from a black-box, with
little indication of what data features are driving the results. Our goal now is to make our
estimation results more transparent and especially we will aim to clarify the following two
claims.
Claim 1. When looking within a sample period, our Real Keynesian results are driven largely
by implied e↵ects of monetary shocks.
Claim 2. When pooling periods, our Real Keynesian results are further helped by changed
behavior of inflation in response to demand shocks in the pre- versus post-ZLB period.
We will support these two claims by exploiting evidence from an identification property
of the VAR representation for the class of model we are considering, and which most often
holds for DSGE models that are estimated by Maximum Likelihood or Bayesian methods.
21

Indeed, one can obtain structural impulse responses for the structural shocks of this classe
of models simply by exploiting the assumption that shocks are independent processes. As
the SVAR approach we want to use has many potential applications, we start by discussing
it in some general terms before going to our precise application.

4.1

Using Shocks Independence to Derive a Structural VAR Representation

The first goal of this section is to highlight how certain assumptions implied by a large
class of structural model can be exploited to derive SVAR representation of the data and
therefore the associated structural impulse responses. In particular, we want to discuss how
structural impulse response can be obtained before imposing any cross-equations restrictions
and can be often obtained by simply exploiting the assumption that the driving forces are
independent processes.
To set ideas,20 suppose we have a structural model that has a solution of the form:
Xt = AXt

1

+ B⇥t ,

(4)

⇥t = R⇥t

1

+ "t ,

(5)

where Xt and ⇥t are stationary processes. For example, Xt could be the vector {⇡t , it , `t } as
in our case, and the elements of " would then be the innovations in demand, cost-push and
monetary policy. The first common restrictions that such a structural model imposes are that
R be diagonal and that the variance-co-variance matrix of " be diagonal and normalized to
identity. In other words many structural models assume that the driving forces of the model
are independent processes. A second type of restrictions such a model often imposes is that
certain elements of A may be zero. For example, in our purely forward model, the matrix A
is assumed to be zero. In our habit persistence model, only the third column of A is non zero.
Finally, a structural model also generally imposes that the elements in A and B are a function
of both a set of underlying structural parameters and of the elements in R. These restrictions
are generally referred to as cross equation restrictions. The imposition of cross equation
20

See Appendix I for a detailed exposition.

22

restrictions is often the most contentious part of a structural model.21 The idea behind the
SVAR literature is to try to derive structural impulses response implied by a theoretical
framework without imposing (or being precise about) all of a model implications, which may
in particular apply to controversial ones such as implied by cross equation restrictions. This
is the avenue we want to pursue here.
To our knowledge, what has been rarely recognize (or at least little discussed in the
SVAR literature), is that if one thinks that data is generated by a structural model which
takes the form given by Equations (4) and (5) where ⇥t is composed of a set of independent
processes, then this is generally enough to identify the models impulse structural responses.22
In Appendix I we discuss this in more detail. Obviously, imposing all the models implications will generally give more efficient estimates of the structural impulse responses if the
implications are true, but simply exploiting the diagonal structure of R is generally sufficient. More generally, the structural response implied by a structural model of the form (4)
and (5) can most often be obtained by exploiting the zero restrictions implied by the model
on the matrices R and A, without needing to impose cross equation restrictions. This is
what we will exploit to highlight the data features that are are driving our findings of a
Real Keynesian configuration. One challenge with this approach is that once the structural
impulse responses are estimated, one will still need to use judgement to give them the right
labels. This may or may not be difficult depending on the setting. For example, in our case,
a demand shock should lead to an increase in activity, interest rates and inflation. If there
is only one shock among the identified structural impulse responses that has such property
then it can naturally be labeled the demand shock. If there is no shock among the identified
ones that have that property, it implies that something is at odds with the model. Finally,
if more than one shock has the same qualitative features, then this method does not allow
us to distinguish them.
More generally, when one is thinking within the framework of a model of the type given by
(4) and (5), one can use the following two-step approach to estimate the model parameters.
First, one can estimate (by Maximum Likelihood for example) the matrices A, R and B,
21

It is worth noting the rather uncommon restriction in a structural model is that it imposes zeros in the
matrix B. However, many SVAR approaches exploit restrictions on B.
22
This assumes that Xt has at least two elements.

23

using only the zero restrictions implied by the model. Then given the estimates of these
matrices, one can recover structural parameters using a minimum distance estimator to best
match the estimated matrices A, R and B. If the model is just identified, there is no loss
of efficiency in using such a two step procedure of the model. Even if the model is overidentified, one may still want to proceed using such a two-step procedure since, by allowing
one to see structural impulse responses before imposing the cross-equation restrictions, one
can get a good sense of what properties of the data are being used to identify parameters.23

4.2

First SVAR Results with the Baseline Model

We start by estimating by Maximum Likelihood the following model, in which ⇥ is a latent
variable:

1
0
⇡t
⇡t
@ it A = A @ it
`t
`t
| {z }
0

0

1

Xt

0

1
1
1

1

1
⇥1t
A + B @ ⇥2t A,
⇥3t
| {z }

10

⇢1 0 0
⇥1t
⇥1t
@ ⇥2t A = @ 0 ⇢2 0 A @ ⇥2t
0 0 ⇢3
⇥3t
⇥3t
{z
}
|
R

0

⇥t

1
1
1

1

0

1
"1t
A + @ "2t A .
"3t
| {z }
"t

In Figure 5 we report the structural impulse responses implied by our initial simple model
when we estimate it over the longer sample 1954Q3-2007Q1. These impulse responses are
obtained by the estimation of matrices B and R. As we inspect the data through the lens
of the fully forward model, matrix A is constrained to be zero in the estimation. For the
same reason, the matrix R is assumed to be diagonal (and that the shocks are uncorrelated).
No cross equation restrictions are being imposed at this stage. In Figure 6, we show the
impulse responses to the three structural shocks as obtained from the Maximum Likelihood
estimation of the model presented in the previous section, where all the theoretical crossrestrictions are imposed. Because the model parameters were just identified, the impulse
responses are the same to those obtained using our SVAR strategy. In other words, Figures
5 and 6 are identical. This needs not to be exactly the case if the model were over-identified,
as is the case when we estimate it over the three sub-samples.
23

In the estimation of Table 2, we used such a two step procedure.

24

[Figure 5 about here.]
[Figure 6 about here.]
In Figure 7 we derive the structural impulse responses the same way for each of our
sample treated separately; pre-Volcker dis-inflation, post-Volcker dis-inflation and ZLB. For
the ZLB we only estimate a bivariate process as the nominal interest rate i is essentially
fixed. Later we will document the robustness of the results with respect to allowing more
shocks and for allowing endogenous dynamics.
[Figure 7 about here.]
The first aspect to note from Figures 5 and 7 is the similarities between the impulse
response patterns across periods. In all case, the impulse response to "1 appears to unambiguously be picking up e↵ects of a demand shocks as all three variables respond positively
to this shock, and the other columns do not have this property. The more controversial aspect
is the naming of the monetary shock and the cost-push shock. As it can be seen on Figure
6, the model implies that a monetary shock that increases interest rates should lead to a
fall in output, while the model does not put any constraints on the e↵ects of the markup
shocks. Given this, the only coherent interpretation is that the impulse responses to "2
correspond to the e↵ects of the cost-push shock while the response to "3 corresponds to the
e↵ects of the monetary shock. The controversial aspect with this labeling is that the implied
monetary shocks are (i) very persistent and (ii) lead to a rise in inflation. Once view in
such a way, it becomes much clearer why the estimates of structural parameters presented
in the previous section tended to favor parameters in the Real Keynesian subset, in order to
produce the impulse responses to ("d , "µ , "⌫ ) of Figure 6 that fit the responses to ("1 , "2 , "3 )
of Figure 5. In particular, an increase in inflation following a monetary shock "⌫ is a pattern
that cannot be explained by a New Keynesian parameterization. However, it is precisely the
pattern expected in a Real Keynesian configuration. An additional reason to believe that
"3 is picking up a monetary shock is that, during the lower bound period, when there are
no more monetary shocks to identify, the impulse response that disappears is that which we
associated with a monetary shock, as shown in Figure 7.
25

What other feature of these impulse response also tend to favor a Real Keynesian interpretation? If we look at the impulse response to demand shocks ("1 ) across regimes, we can
see that the response of inflation to a demand shock in the ZLB period has less (normalized)
impact on inflation than in the previous adjoining period. If we were in a standard New
Keynesian setup, the response of inflation to a demand shock that has the same e↵ect on
activity should lead to the same e↵ect on inflation regardless of the monetary regime. In
contrast, this is not the case in a Real Keynesian parameterization. The impact on inflation
of a demand shock should be less, given that the inflationary pressure of a rise in interest
rates is absent.24
The impulse responses in Figures 5 and 7 allow for a clear understanding of why our
estimation favor a Real Keynesian parametrization. However, given the simplicity of the
model three questions arise. Firstly, are these results robust to allowing the model to have
endogenous propagation? Secondly, are these results robust to allowing the model to have
more shocks? Thirdly, how do we reconcile the monetary shock impulse responses we identify
with what is found more generally in the literature? We now address each of these questions
in turn.

4.3

Adding Habit Persistence to Obtain More Endogenous Dynamics

Our baseline model has a fully forward structure which implies that it does not involve
any endogenous dynamics. We have chosen it as our baseline because it builds o↵ the
standard three-equation New Keynesian model and focuses on two core extensions that we
were needing, namely discounted Euler equation and cost channel. However, it may be
that in pursuit of simplicity we have biased our exploration by omitting other important
mechanisms. We could at this point write a much more complicated model with several
sources of accumulation and adjustment costs and take it to the data. This is not how we
choose to proceed because the range of such models is almost infinite. Instead, we choose to
proceed by small steps to understand what results appear robust and which may be more
fragile. To this end, we begin by exploring the very simple extension of our baseline model
24

This e↵ect should be sufficiently less so that the variance of inflation is reduced if the shock process for
demand has not changed, as we have shown in proposition 6

26

in which we include habit formation in agents’ utility, as we have done in Subsection 3.4.
In this framework, the matrix A in the SVAR representation has now on non-zero column
(the third one). Figure 8 reports the structural impulse response associated with applying
this SVAR methodology to our long sample 1954Q3-2007Q1, while Figure 9 presents the
structural impulse response functions for our three sub-samples.
[Figure 8 about here.]
[Figure 9 about here.]
There are three elements we want to emphasize on these figures. First, with the exception
of adding a small amount of richer dynamics, the impulse response in Figure 8 and 9 are
qualitatively very similar to those from Figures 5 and 7 and they support the same labelling
of shocks. Second, we again see that the identified monetary shock ("3 ) leads to an increase
in inflation, which is not a possible outcome with a New Keynesian parametrization, while
it is consistent with a Real Keynesian parametrization. Finally, we see that the inflation
barely responds to a demand shock in the ZLB sub-period, which is again consistent with a
Real Keynesian interpretation. These observations suggest that the forward model, although
extremely simple, may be providing a good summary account of the data.

4.4

Allowing for Richer Internal Dynamics

Allowing for habit persistence in consumption was an easy way of introducing internal dynamics into our baseline model. This extension allowed us to explore the robustness of our
initial results to the addition of this simple internal propagation mechanism. We could continue to o↵er explicit generalization of our baseline model along these lines and verify whether
estimation suggests Real Keynesian type parameterization. However, at this point it should
become clear that the main issue of whether the data likely favor a Real Keynesian parameterization or an New Keynesian parameterization depends primarily on the robustness of the
properties of the structural impulse responses implied by models with independent driving
processes. If it is true that, from SVAR results that exploit the independence of the driving
forces, we continue to find monetary contraction lead to increased inflation, and that the
ZLB period is associated with demand shocks that have less e↵ect on inflation, this places
27

into question typical New Keynesian parameterizations and favor an interpretation in the
direction of our Real Keynesian parametrization. Accordingly, in this section we present a
set of estimate of structural impulse responses which uses our SVAR strategy. In particular,
we want to think of the data as being driven by a model of the form given by Equations (4)
and (5), which we repeat here.25
Xt = AXt

1

+ B⇥t ,

⇥t = R⇥t

1

+ "t .

where R is always assumed to be a diagonal matrix, while the matrix A may or may not
contain some zero restrictions. To begin with, we maintain Xt to be the vector {it , ⇡t , `t }.
Later, we will allow Xt to be of higher dimension to allow for more shocks and further
internal propagation.
In Figures 8 and 9, we reported structural impulse response for the case where the matrix
A in (4) was only allowed to have non zero elements in its third column (the column associated
with `t 1 ). In Figures 10, we allow for more flexibility in the matrix A. Figure 10 is based
on using our longer sample 1954Q3-2007Q1. In the first panel of Figure 10 , we allow for the
A matrix to have non zero elements in both the columns associated with `t

1

and with the

column associated with ⇡t 1 . Such an extension could be derived by introducing elements
developed in the “Hybrid New Phillips curve” literature where inflation determination is not
fully forward looking but may also include a backward looking element, as introduced by
Galı́ and Gertler [1999] and discussed in Rudd and Whelan [2005] and Galı́, Gertler, and
Lopez-Salido [2005]. In the second panel of the figure, we report impulse responses when
we do not place any constraints on the matrix A. Such a formulation could be justified by
combining a Hybrid New Phillips Curve specification, habit persistence and sluggish nominal
interest rates rule. As we noted above, we are not being explicit about the details of the
model that would justify such a specification as we instead want to focus on properties of
the implied structural impulse responses that are consistent with a class of such models.
25

We also explored robustness of to the reduced form of the model to be
Xt
⇥t

=

AXt

1

=

R⇥t

1 + "t .

+ B1 ⇥ t + B2 ⇥ t

28

1,

[Figure 10 about here.]
When looking at results presented in Figure 10, we see that the additional flexibility in
A changes little the properties of the structural impulse responses relative to Figure 8. The
exception is that the response of inflation to demand is slightly negative on impact in such
extensions. The key element for us is that the response to the identified monetary shock ("3 )
is not much changed with the shock still leading to increased inflation.

4.5

Allowing for More shocks

In our baseline model we are only allowing for three shocks. However, if there are other
important shocks driving the system, our reported structural impulse response could be
severely biased. To explore this possibility, we examine here the robustness of the structural
impulse responses to allowing for more shocks. In particular, we report results when we
allow for an explicit oil price shock or a technology shock, as both these are prominent in
the literature.26
To explore the potential bias due to the omission of oil prices, we extend our SVAR specification to include the real price of oil as the fourth variable. We report results for both our
long sample 1954Q1-2007Q1 as well as the Post-Volcker dis-inflation period 1983Q1-2007Q1.
Moreover, we report results corresponding to a fully forward version of the model (A = 0)
as well as the case with habit persistence (the column of A associated with `t

1

is non-zero).

The results are presented in Figures 11 and 12. Figure 11 reports that the impulse responses
of oil prices to the four shocks. As can be seen in this figure, the shock labelled "4 is the
main shock that a↵ects oil prices. In fact, in the long sample, it is the shock that explains
almost all the variance of the oil price. Accordingly we label this shock the oil price shock.
The other shocks maintain their same ordering with "1 being the demand shock, "2 being
the markup shock and "3 being the monetary shock. In the post-Volcker sample, we see that
the demand shock has also had a tendency to increase the price of oil.
[Figure 11 about here.]
26

We have also explore the possibility of shocks to the natural rate of employment. Results are consistent
with the one of the three-shock model.

29

Figure 12 reports the response of ⇡, i and ` to each of the four shocks. From these
figures, in both the full sample and the post-1983 sample, we see that the responses we have
been associating to demand, markup and monetary policy are essentially unchanged with
the addition of the oil price in the system. In Figures 13 and 14, we do a similar exercise by
adding the growth in GDP in our system and interpreting the fourth shock as a TFP shock.
Again, we find that the addition of such a shock changes very little the responses we find for
the other shocks.
[Figure 12 about here.]
[Figure 13 about here.]
[Figure 14 about here.]

4.6

Does Our SVAR Methodology Ever Produce a Deflationary
E↵ect of a Monetary Contraction ?

In all the results we have shown up to now using our SVAR methodology (which is solely
based on imposing zero restrictions on R and possibly A in the reduced form representation
of the model solution), we have found that the inferred e↵ect of a monetary contraction
is to cause a fall in employment while simultaneously increasing inflation. This result is
obviously at odds with segments the SVAR literature which find that monetary contraction,
at least eventually, leads to gradual falls in inflation, as illustrated for example in Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans [1999] and [2005]. Does our methodology sometimes deliver
the more conventional response, and if so under what conditions does it arise? While we
certainly cannot claim to have covered all possibilities, we have found our methodology to
only occasionally deliver such a response, and this has arises only in cases we consider quite
fragile. To see this, consider extended the reduced form representation to
Xt = A1 Xt
⇥t = R⇥t

1
1

+ A2 Xt

+ ✏t .

2

+ B⇥t ,

(6)
(7)

In this specification, we are allowing further complexity in the internal propagation by introducing the term A2 Xt 2 . To set a baseline for case with the extended dynamics, we begin
30

by reporting the structural impulse responses for our three-equation specification when we
allow for habit to take on a richer dimension, that is, we have instantaneous utility of consumption written as U (Ct

h1 C t

1

h2 Ct 2 ). In this case, only the third columns in A1

and A2 are not zero. In Figure 15 we report the implied structural impulse responses for
this case for both our longer sample and our post-Volcker dis-inflation sample. What can be
seen from these figures is again the robustness of our previous results regarding the e↵ect of
our identified monetary shocks. The very short run behavior of inflation in the post-Volcker
sample following a demand shock becomes a bit erratic but besides this, results are qualitatively very similar to result based on the fully forward representation or representations
with one lag of X. We also report on Figure 15 the responses when we allow the matrix A
to be unrestricted, a configuration that we label “Habit persistence, gradual adjustment of i
and Hybrid New Phillips curve”. For our post-Volcker sample, results are once more robust
(except for creating some very short term erratic behavior). In contrast, for the full sample,
we see that the e↵ect of an identified monetary shock is now very di↵erent from before along
two dimensions: the increase in the interest rate following a monetary shock is now very
temporary (it was very persistent before), and now we see such monetary contraction being
associated with a gradual drop in inflation (after a short increase near impact). Interestingly
this response is very similar to the type of responses reported in monetary VARs as Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans [2005]. The problem we see with this response is that it is not
robust to a change in sample.27 In particular, as shown, it is not apparent in the post-Volcker
sample.28 . In order to get this more traditional result, we need to firmly believe that it is best
to treat the whole period as representing one monetary regime, as it is only in this case that
it arises. For us, this seems problematic. It is quite clear there was a change in regime over
the 1979-1983 period, so for meaningful structural impulse response functions, preference
should be given to results that are robust to excluding a period of regime change. What we
believe is happening in this segment of the monetary VAR literature is that with the greater
flexibility when allowing for more lagged e↵ects of it , the dominant monetary shocks isolated
this way using the longer sample is the ones associated with the period around 1979-1983.
27

It should be noticed that the results also relies heavily on allowing the interest rate to enter with more
than one lag.
28
We have checked that it is not apparent in the pre-Volcker sample.

31

While this may be great for for understanding the e↵ect of monetary policy rule change, we
believe that it may be quite uninformative about the e↵ect of a monetary shock to a stable
rule.
[Figure 15 about here.]

4.7

Summary of Structural Estimation and SVAR results

Using a simple SVAR methodology, which mainly exploits the independence of the exogenous driving forces, we have repeatedly identified monetary shocks that are is very persistent,
with the property that a contraction leads simultaneously to decreased employment and increased inflation. Moreover, we have found that the e↵ects of demand shocks on inflation
decreases under the ZLB. Both these results are easy to rationalize with a Real Keynesian
parametrization but difficult to explain with a New Keynesian parameterization. This explains why, when we estimate model parameters structurally, we find that they favor a Real
Keynesian configuration over a New Keynesian configuration. In fact, we believe that if one
accepts our SVAR results, then accepting Real Keynesian as the plausible parametrization
is almost immediate. This is why the robustness of the SVAR results is key to knowing
whether a Real Keynesian or a New Keynesian parametrization may be preferred.
After searching in many directions, we have found our SVAR patterns results to be robust
with one notable exception which arises when the VAR exploits primarily variations induced
in the period 1979-1983 to identify monetary shocks. As it is general accepted that there was
change in monetary policy over the period 1979-83, therefore the 1979-83 period is unlikely to
be a good candidate for identifying the e↵ects of monetary shock, as monetary shock should
represent random departures within a stable regime. A period like 1979-1983 is likely better
for thinking about how one may implement a reform, how it becomes credible and how the
economy adapts to a change in regime; it is not a period that tell us how the economy reacts
to a monetary shock within a stable regime.

32

5

The Identified Monetary shocks

The SVAR approach based on shock restrictions we exploited to identify shocks, and in
particular monetary shocks, may be viewed as being quite coarse. It may be thought that
one can gain much more insight by using identification techniques that focus in a more
precisely way on monetary shocks. For example, it may be thought that using identification
strategies that exploit observed changes in policy rates around FOMC meetings provide
better information. Such more precisely identified shocks may not represent very important
monetary shocks in terms of variance decompositions, but since they are better identified,
they could be more informative about whether we may be in a Real Keynesian or an New
Keynesian parameterization.
In this section we want to briefly discuss why the findings from more precise – for example
event study based– identification schemes, while useful for many questions, are in practice
quite un-informative for the question we pose in this paper. In order to clarify this issue, let us
focus on the case of our model where there are internal dynamics as induced by the presence
of habit.29 The aspect we want to highlight is the di↵erent information content of impulse
responses associated with more persistent versus more temporary monetary shocks.30 The
issue here involves only the response of inflation. For employment, the implied qualitative
response does not depend on whether the economy is in a RK parameterization or not, nor
does it depend on the persistent of shocks: a monetary tightening is always predicted in our
setup to lead to a fall in employment. For inflation the potential responses are more subtle.
Suppose for example we observe the response to a rather temporary monetary contraction
which eventually leads to a fall in inflation. Given that this is the type of pattern often found
in the literature, it would be helpful if it were informative for us. However, such a pattern is
consistent with either a Real Keynesian or a non-Real Keynesian parameterization as long
as there is no significant fall in inflation precisely on impact. Either parameterizations is
consistent with an initial period where inflation either stays close to zero or an initial period
29

We choose to focus on this case as the case with no internal dynamics is very special since it implies
that impact e↵ects and longer run e↵ects are the same.
30
As already explained, a monetary shock is interpreted as a shock ⌫t in a policy rule of the form it =
Et [⇡t+1 ]+ d dt + µ µt + ⌫ ⌫t , which is a monetary rule that guarantees determinacy for all parameterizations.
The shock process for ⌫t is assumed to be an AR(1) process with auto-covariance ⇢⌫ . Hence when talking
about a more or less persistent shock, we are referring to cases where ⇢⌫ is higher or lower.

33

where inflation actually rises (the so called price puzzle) for a short while. For this reason,
such responses to temporary monetary shocks – even if they are well identified– are not
helpful for the question at hand as they don’t allows us to discriminate between the two
parameterizations. In contrast, the response to persistent monetary shocks can be more
informative. In fact, we have the following proposition:
Proposition 8. Under a Real Keynesian parameterization,31 if a monetary shock becomes
sufficiently persistent, then inflation will not fall at any horizon. In contrast, in a nonReal Keynesian parameterization, following a sufficiently persistent monetary contraction
inflation will always eventually fall at some horizon.
This result indicates that a non-Real Keynesian parameterization is potentially consistent
with a initial period of the price puzzle, but if the monetary shock is sufficiently persistent,
then inflation should always eventually decrease.32 . In contrast, if we can observe a monetary
contraction which is sufficiently persistent and is not associated with a decrease in inflation,
this would refute a non-Real Keynesian parameterization in favor of a Real Keynesian parameterization. Recall that this is precisely the type of pattern which we found using our
SVAR technique based on exploiting shock restrictions: we recuperated from the data very
persistent monetary shocks with no evidence of an eventual fall in inflation. This pattern is
only consistent with the Real Keynesian parameterization.

6

Some Extensions and Narratives

6.1

Endogenous Price Rigidity 

Up to now we have taken the measure of price rigidity  as exoegnously fixed. However, it
may be reasonable to think of  as potentially being endogenous with its value depending
positively on the variability of inflation and on the steady state inflation level. For example,
it is interesting to briefly consider the case where  takes the form of a function (
which would be increasing in both arguments.
31

33

¯)
⇡, ⇡

If this were the case, then for a given

We are focusing here on the case where the model contains internal dynamics as induced by habit.
In fact, it can be further shown that in a non-Real Keynesian parameterization, then length of the price
puzzle is decreasing in the persistent of monetary shocks, while it is increasing in the Real Keynesian case.
33
Such a function (·) could be for example derived in a rational inattention setup. See Sims [2010] for a
detailed exposition.
32

34

policy rule, it is easy to verify that higher steady state inflation gives rise to more variable
inflation, regardless of the parameterization. However, the feedback and amplification from
a choice of policy rule to the variability of inflation will depend on the parameterization.
In the strict New Keynesian case (

r

= 0, ↵` = 1), or more generally when

r

<

` ↵r ,

when  is endogenous, choosing a more aggressive monetary policy in terms of employment
stability will likely lead a virtuous cycle in terms of inflation stability. To be more precise,
more stabilization in terms of higher

`

– in a policy rule of the form it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +

` `t

–

directly stabilizes inflation, which can lead to lower  and even more stabilization. This is
the beauty of aggressive monetary policy in a New Keynesian parametrization, that makes
monetary policy such a e↵ective tool to stabilize demand shocks.
In Real Keynesian case, the e↵ect of employment stabilization is likely to creats a vicious
cycles in terms of its e↵ect on inflation. In this case, if monetary policy aims at stabilizing
employment, this increases inflation variability, which increases  which in turn increases
inflation variability further. Hence, in an Real Keynesian parametrization, monetary policy
is much less attractive to use to stabilize employment. It may actually be the case that with
an endogenous , it becomes impossible to find a

`

that fully stabilizes the employment

even when there are only demand shocks.34

6.2

Interpreting the Great Moderation

One of the strengths of the standard New Keynesian model is that it provides a compelling
narrative to the Great Moderation period. According to this narrative, by adopting a more
anti-inflationary stance in the post-Volker period, the economy benefited from both greater
inflation stability and greater employment stability as a reduction in inflation variability is
predicted to go hand-in-hand with greater employment stability if demand shocks are the
dominant driving force. This contrasts with the implication of a Real Keynesian parameterization which suggests that such a tradeo↵ is reversed, since it predicts that greater inflation
stability should be associated with less employment stability. As we already mentioned it,
34

Note that if monetary policy hasn’t been very aggressive in the past ( ` low), and has aimed at low
inflation, then  would tend to be low even in a Real Keynesian regime. In such a situation, a surprise
reaction to a demand shock could have a huge stabilizing role, even if a systematic policy may not stabilize.
This is similar in narrative to that found in Lucas [1972], but the mechanism is quite di↵erent.

35

it is important to recognize that variance of employment (or unemployment) did not actually decline during the pre versus post Volker period, as shown in Table 3. The greater
moderation period was in fact mainly associated with a fall in inflation volatility, with quasi
constant employment volatility.
How could a Real Keynesian perspective explain the Great Moderation? Given our
estimates, we interpret that the main change induced in the post-Volcker period to be a fall
in . If one is ready to think of  as potentially endogenous, a fall in  is a natural outcome
when a policy is targeted towards inducing a lower average inflation rate. The reduction
in  by itself is able to explain why we observed more stable inflation in the Post Volker
period, without this implying that the variability of employment needs to increase. Hence,
if one only had this policy change in our sample, it would be difficult to di↵erentiate the
two possibilities when one takes into account the change in . However, the presence of
the later lower bound period turns out to be helpful in this respect, as we discuss in the
following sub-section. Under the Real Keynesian interpretation, one should observe lower
inflation variability and higher output variability when monetary policy is more constrained,
as implied by the lower bound, while such a pattern is hard to explain with an New Keynesian
parameterization.

6.3

Zero Lower bound

The zero lower bound period has been characterized by three features: important changes
in employment, a low variance in inflation and inflation only slightly below target. As
previously noted, the Real Keynesian configuration gives a simple explanation of these joint
features if the ZLB is interpreted as an induced fixed interest rate period. First, in such
a configuration, inflation stays determinate. Moreover, in such a case, the e↵ect of a fixed
interest rate is to stabilize inflation, since interest rate changes are no longer contributing to
inflation variability. Hitting the zero lower bound also implies greater changes in employment
as the employment stabilizing role of monetary is unopperative.
To get a greater sense of how a zero lower bound a↵ects inflation and employment in
a Real Keynesien configuration, it is useful to consider once again the case of the fully
forward model with only i.i.d. demand shocks, so that all expected variables are zero. In
36

this configuration, the policy rule is then given by
n
rt = it = max 0,

o
`
` t ,

while the Euler equation and the Phillips curve are given by the two following equations:
`t =

↵ r rt + d t ,

⇡t = ( ` `t +

r rt ).

In the top row of Figure 16, we plot the Euler equation and the policy rule in the (rt , `t )
plane space. The light gray Euler equation corresponds to the initial situation, and the
dark gray one to a situation with a negative demand shock. The New Keynesian (panel
(a)) and Real Keynesian (panel (b)) are no di↵erent in that space. But implications for
inflation are quite di↵erent, as shown in the bottom row of Figure 16. The main aspects
we want to highlight is that a large demand shock in the Real Keynesian configuration will
lead inflation to be slightly below its long run target, but well above the level that would
have been predicted using pre-lower bound observations given the size of the shock. In the
Real Keynesian configuration, the Phillips curve flattens out precisely when the economy is
at the ZLB, which happens with adverse demand shocks. For the same drop in `, a negative
demand shock causes a smaller drop in ⇡ in the Real Keynesian configuration (right column),
as compared to the New Keynesian configuration) if the ZLB binds.
[Figure 16 about here.]

6.4

Non-Linear Model

It is beyond the scope of this paper to examine a non-linear version of our sticky price
model. However, it is worth noting that a Real Keynesian configuration could be a local
phenomena, applicable only near the steady state. For example,

`

may be very close to

zero (or equal to zero) when one is near the steady state of the system, which leads the Real
Keynesian condition to be satisfied. When the economy deviates far from the steady state, it
may be that

`

increases causing the parametrization to switch from Real Keynesian to New

Keynesian. For example, it could be that

`

is a function of `t , in which case the Phillips

curve is best seen as a non-linear function. If
37

`

were to be represented as a quadratic

function of `t –as to represent that the e↵ect of market tightness on wages may be more
operative when far from the steady state– then the Phillips curve could take a form like:
⇡t = Et [⇡t+1 ] + ( ` `3t +

r (i

Et [⇡t+1 ])).

Now suppose that monetary policy was of the form it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +

d dt ,

and for complete

simplicity, assume that the demand shock dt is an iid process and the only shock in the
economy. In such a case, inflation will be given by:
⇡t = 
In this case, whether increasing

` (1

`

↵r

d)

3 3
dt

+

r d dt

.

stabilizes or destabilizes inflation depends on the

distribution of shocks. If the distribution has a large variance, then activist policy (in
terms of higher

`)

may help stabilize inflation while if the shocks are not too large, it could

destabilize inflation. Alternatively, in such a framework, one may want to choose a monetary
policy that reacts very di↵erently to small versus large shocks.

7

Conclusion

This paper has explored an extended sticky price model which allows for the canonical
three-equation New Keynesian model as a special case, but more importantly allows for a
parametrization where the expansionary e↵ects of demand shocks do not disappear as nominal rigidities vanish. We referred to the later as Real Keynesian parameterizations. We
began by documenting why the e↵ect of monetary policy could be very di↵erent depending
on whether the economy is best characterized by a Real Keynesian parametrization or not.
In particular, we emphasized how a monetary policy aimed at stabilizing employment faces
a much less attractive tradeo↵ under a Real Keynesian parameterization than under parameterizations usually assumed in the New Keynesian literature. Moreover, as an example, we
discussed how a Real Keynesian parametrization may help explain why inflation can be very
stable at the ZLB period while employment remains very variable. Given these di↵erences, a
large part of the paper is devoted to showing that post-war US data on employment, inflation
and interest rates may be more easily explained by a Real Keynesian parametrization than
with a more conventional parametrization. If this is true, it suggests a need to rethink the
38

role of monetary policy in economic stabilization since stabilizing inflation and countering
demand shocks may be more conflictual in terms of policy than usually recognized. The Real
Keynesian parameterization suggests that two tools are required to approach such goals.

39

References
Barth, M. J., and V. A. Ramey (2002): “The Cost Channel of Monetary Transmission,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, Volume 16, NBER Chapters, pp. 199–256.
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Blinder, A. S. (1987): “Credit Rationing and E↵ective Supply Failures,” Economic Journal, 97(386), 327–352.
Chowdhury, I., M. Hoffmann, and A. Schabert (2006): “Inflation dynamics and the
cost channel of monetary transmission,” European Economic Review, 50(4), 995–1016.
Christiano, L. J., and M. Eichenbaum (1992): “Liquidity E↵ects and the Monetary
Transmission Mechanism,” American Economic Review, 82(2), 346–353.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (1999): “Monetary policy shocks:
What have we learned and to what end?,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B.
Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1 of Handbook of Macroeconomics, chap. 2, pp. 65–148.
Elsevier.
(2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic E↵ects of a Shock to Monetary
Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 1–45.
Clarida, R., J. Galı́, and M. Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
115(1), 147–180.
Cochrane, J. H. (2013): “The New-Keynesian Liquidity Trap,” NBER Working Papers
19476, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Del Negro, M., M. Giannoni, and C. Patterson (2012): “The forward guidance
puzzle,” Sta↵ Reports 574, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Farhi, E., and I. Werning (2017): “Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality, and Incomplete Markets,” NBER Working Papers 23281, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
Farmer, R. E. A. (1984): “A New Theory of Aggregate Supply,” American Economic
Review, 74(5), 920–930.
40

Fuerst, T. S. (1992): “Liquidity, loanable funds, and real activity,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 29(1), 3–24.
Gabaix, X. (2016): “A Behavioral New Keynesian Model,” NBER Working Papers 22954,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Galı́, J. (2015): Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle. An Introduction to
the New Keynesian Framework and Its Applications. Princeton University Press, 2 edn.
Galı́, J., and M. Gertler (1999): “Inflation dynamics: A structural econometric analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 44(2), 195–222.
Galı́, J., M. Gertler, and D. Lopez-Salido (2005): “Robustness of the estimates
of the hybrid New Keynesian Phillips curve,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(6),
1107–1118.
Gertler, M., and P. Karadi (2015): “Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and
Economic Activity,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1), 44–76.
Lucas, R. J. (1972): “Expectations and the neutrality of money,” Journal of Economic
Theory, 4(2), 103–124.
McKay, A., E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2016a): “The Discounted Euler Equation: A Note,” NBER Working Papers 22129, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
(2016b): “The Power of Forward Guidance Revisited,” American Economic Review,
106(10), 3133–3158.
Nakamura, E., and J. Steinsson (2013): “High Frequency Identification of Monetary
Non-Neutrality: The Information E↵ect,” NBER Working Papers 19260, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Inc.
Ravenna, F., and C. E. Walsh (2006): “Optimal monetary policy with the cost channel,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(2), 199–216.
Rigobon, R., and B. Sack (2004): “The impact of monetary policy on asset prices,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(8), 1553–1575.

41

Rudd, J., and K. Whelan (2005): “New tests of the new-Keynesian Phillips curve,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(6), 1167–1181.
Sims, C. A. (1980): “Macroeconomics and Reality,” Econometrica, 48(1), 1–48.
(2010): “Rational Inattention and Monetary Economics,” in Handbook of Monetary
Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman, and M. Woodford, vol. 3 of Handbook of Monetary
Economics, chap. 4, pp. 155–181. Elsevier.
Woodford, M. (2004): Interest and Prices Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
Princeton University Press.

42

Appendix
A

Micro-Foundations for a Real Keynesian Model

The two extensions that we add to the standard New Keynesian model are that (i) the real interest
rate enters in the marginal cost of firms and (ii) the household Euler equation is discounted. We
provide below the micro-foundations for both extensions

A.1

Firms and the derivation of the augmented New Phillips
curve

The introduction of the real interest rate in the marginal cost of firms is not new (Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Evans [2005], Ravenna and Walsh [2006]). The twist we introduce here allow for
arbitrary elasticities of the marginal cost with respect to respectively the real wage and the real
interest rate. Let’s do the derivation of the marginal cost, that can be done looking at the static
optimal choice of inputs.

A.1.1

Production

Each monopolist produces a di↵erentiated good using basic input as the only factor of production,
and according to a one to one technology. The marginal cost of production will therefore be the
price of that basic input. It is assumed that the basic input is produced by a representative firm
that behaves competitively. The representative firm produces basic input Qt with labor Lt and the
final good Mt according to the following Leontief technology
Qt = min(a⇥t Lt , bMt ).
As in the main text, we assume that ⇥t is constant and normalized to one. The optimal production
plan implies Qt = aLt = bMt , so that the optimal input demands are Lt = Qat and Mt = Qbt .
Denote by C(Qt ) = Wt Lt + t Mt the total cost of production, where the exact expression of t will
be derived later. Using the optimal input demands, we obtain
◆
✓
Wt
t
C(Qt ) =
+
Qt ,
a
b
so that marginal cost is

Wt
t
+ .
a
b
Log-linearizing the above expression gives the following expression of the real marginal cost, where
the variables are now in logs and where constant have been omitted:
!
!
C 0 (Qt ) =

mct =

A.1.2

W
a

W
a

+

Derivation of the cost

(wt

pt ) +

b

b

W
a

+

(

t

pt ).

b

t

The unit price of the final good that enters the production of basic input is Pt . We assume that in
B at the risk-free
the morning of each period, the basic input representative firm must borrow Dt+1

43

nominal interest rate it to pay for the input Mt . In the afternoon, it produces, sells its production,
pays wages, repays the debt contracted the previous period DtB and distributes all the profits ⌦B
t
as dividends. Those profits will be zero in equilibrium. The period t budget constraint of the firm
is therefore:
B
Dt+1
+ Pet Qt = Wt Lt + (1 + it 1 )DtB + Pt Mt ,
B = P M . Period t profit writes
with Dt+1
t t

e
⌦B
t = Pt Qt

Wt L t

(1 + it

1 )Pt 1 Mt 1 ,

where Pet the price of the basic input. Assuming that the firm maximises the expected discounted
sum of profits real profits ⌦B
t /Pt with discount factor , and using Qt = aLt = bMt , we obtain the
first order condition

◆
✓
1 + it
Wt
e
Pt .
+ Et
Pt =
Pt
b
1 + ⇡t+1
Therefore, the real marginal cost of the basic input firm will be given by

1 + it
Wt
.
+ Et
M Ct =
Pt
b
1 + ⇡t+1

The price of the basic input Pet is equal to the nominal marginal cost of the basic input firm, and is
also the marginal cost of the intermediate input firm, which is the relevant one for pricing decisions.
In logs, the real marginal cost will write (omitting constants):
!
!
1W
a P

mct =

A.1.3

Pricing

|

1W
a P

(wt
1+i
+ b 1+⇡
{z
}

1+i
b 1+⇡

pt ) +

|

b`

1W
a P

1+i
+ b 1+⇡
{z
}

(it

Et [⇡t+1 ]) .

r

As in the standard New Keynesian model, intermediate firms play a Calvo lottery to draw price
setting opportunities. Except for the use of the basic input, the modelling is very standard. The
optimal household labor supply, that we will derive later, will give us
Wt
⌫ 0 (Lt )
=
,
U 0 (Ct )
Pt
which write in logs, using Ct = aLt and omitting constants
◆
✓ 00
L⌫ (L) CU 00 (C)
`t .
w t pt =
⌫ 0 (L)
U 0 (C)
As Ct = Yt = aLt , the marginal cost does not depend on the scale of production and is the same
for all the intermediate input firms. It is written as
◆
✓ 00
L⌫ (L) CU 00 (C)
`t + r (it Et [⇡t+1 ]) .
mct = e`
⌫ 0 (L)
U 0 (C)
{z
}
|
`

The rest of the model is standard, and we obtain the New Phillips curve
⇡t = Et [⇡t+1 ] +  mct + µt .

44

Once using the expression of the real marginal cost, we have
✓
◆
⇡t = Et [⇡t+1 ] +  ` `t + r (it Et [⇡t+1 ]) + µt .
This give us equation (PC) in the main text.

A.2

Households and the derivation of the discounted Euler equation

The derivation of the discounted Euler equation relies on two set of assumptions. First, because
of asymmetry of information and lack of commitment, individual households will face an upward
sloping supply of funds when borrowing. To maintain tractability, we will consider a equilibrium
in which agents never default, so that the income and wealth distribution will have a unique mass
point. For exposition simplicity, we will derive the main features of the equilibrium in a two-period
model, and explain why the extension to an infinite horizon is trivial. Second, we will assume a
particular timing of income and expenditure flows. Those two assumptions will allow us to derive
a discounted Euler equation.

A.2.1

A simple two-period model with asymmetric information and lack of
commitment

It is a deterministic mode with two periods. There are two types of households and a zero profit risk
neutral representative bank that has access to an unlimited supply of funds at cost R. Households
receive no endowment in the first period, and ! in the second period. The consumption good is
the numéraire.
Some households (superscript c) have access to commitment and always repay their debt, while
the other type (superscript nc) cannot commit to repay. Type is not observable. Because of this,
risk neutral banks will want to charge a risk premium on their loans. More specifically, they propose
to the households a schedule R(d) that is increasing in the level of debt d.
Preferences over consumption are given by u(c1 ) + u(c2 ). Households also bear an additively
separable utility cost of defaulting (d) which is an increasing and convex function of the amount
of defaulted debt.
When households borrow (and they will always do under regularity conditions on preferences
u), they will consume (c1 , c2 ) and their debt is d = c1 . Committed type households maximise their
utility under the budget constraint c2 = ! R(c1 )c1 . and the optimal choice for c1 satisfies
⇣
⌘
(A.1)
u0 (cc1 ) = R(cc1 ) + R0 (cc1 )cc1 u0 (! R(cc1 )).
The non-committed type household optimally decide whether they will default (superscript d) or
not (superscript nd) in period 2, and this choice can made in period 1 because there is no uncertainty
in this example. If they repay (non default), then they behave as the committed type, so that
cnc,nd
= cc1 .
1
If they default, then they will borrow in period 1 so that to equalise marginal utility of consumption
with marginal psychological cost of default. The optimal choice will then satisfy
u0 (cnc,d
1 )=

45

0

(cnc,d
1 ),

(A.2)

while cnc,d
= !.
2
The optimal decision to default or not depends on the direction of the following inequality:
⇣
⌘
d
) + u(!)
(cnc,d
u(cc1 ) + u ! R(cc1 )cc1 ? u(cnc
1 ).
1
|
{z
}
{z
}
|
if default

if no default

For given u(·), and !, there is always a psychological cost function (·) such that household
of the non-committed type choose to imitate the committed ones. In this case, we have a pooling
equilibrium in which all households behave the same and in which there are no defaults. From the
banks zero profit, we should have R(cc1 ) = R, as there is no default. This condition is the only
restriction put on the R(·) schedule, so that any o↵-equilibrium belief R0 (·) > 0 is consistent with
a no default pooling equilibrium.

Extension to an infinite horizon model : If we assume that past actions (default or not)
are not observable, then the logic of the two-period model still holds in a standard infinite horizon
model. With asymmetric information on the household type (access or not to commitment), one
can sustain an equilibrium with no default with the following properties: (i ) households always
make the same consumption and saving choices (no observed heterogeneity), (ii ) there is no risk
premium on the interest rate in equilibrium and (iii ) households consistently face an upward sloping
interest schedule R(b). The interest of this modelling is the absence of observed heterogeneity, that
allows for a simple solving of the model.
A.2.2

Household problem with upward sloping interest schedule.

There is a measure one of identical households indexed by i.P
Each of them chooses a consumption
t⇣
⌫(Lit )), where ⇣
stream and labor supply to maximizes discounted utility E0 1
t 1 (U (Cit )
t=0
is a discount shifter.
We split the period into a morning and an afternoon. There is no di↵erence in information
between morning and afternoon. In the morning, household i must order and pay consumption
M
expenditures Pt Cit and cannot use previous savings to do so. They must borrow Dit+1
= Pt Cit
H
units of money (say dollars) at a nominal interest rate iit that, for the reasons sketched above,
will depend on the total borrowing of the household in period t (hence the subscript i). In the
A
for intertemporal smoothing motives, receives labor income
afternoon, household i can borrow Dit+1
Wt Lit and profits from intermediate firms ⌦it and must repay principal and interest on the total
M
A
debt inherited from the previous period (1 + iH
it 1 )(Dit + Dit ). The morning budget constraint is
therefore given by:
M
= Pt Cit ,
Dit+1
and the afternoon one by:
A
M
A
+ Wt Lit + ⌦it = (1 + iH
Dit+1
it 1 )(Dit + Dit ).

Putting together, we obtain the following budget constraint of period t:
A
A
H
+ Wt Lit + ⌦it = (1 + iH
Dit+1
it 1 )Dit + (1 + iit 1 )Pt

1 Cit 1 .

As there are no information between and afternoon, the interest rate iH
it faced by household i is a
function of the total real net debt subscribed in period t. We write it as a premium over the risk
free nominal rate:
!!
!!
M + DA
A
Dit+1
Dit+1
it+1
H
c1 + iit = (1 + it ) 1 + ⇢
= (1 + it ) 1 + ⇢ Cit +
,
Pt
Pt

46

with ⇢ > 0, ⇢0 > 0 and ⇢00 > 0.
The decision problem of household i is therefore given
max

1
X

t

⇣t

t=0

s.t.

1 E0

⇥

U (Cit )

⌫(Lit )

⇤

A
A
H
Dit+1
+ Wt Lit + ⌦it = (1 + iH
it 1 )Dit + (1 + iit 1 )Pt Cit ,
!!
A
D
.
= (1 + it ) 1 + ⇢ Cit + it+1
1 + iH
it
Pt

A
= 0 8i)
The first order conditions (evaluated at the symmetric equilibrium in which Dit+1
associated with this problem are:

⇣t
Pt
0
,
Et U 0 (Ct+1 )(1 + it ) 1 + ⇢(Ct ) + Ct ⇢0 (Ct )
U (Ct ) =
⇣t 1
Pt+1
⌫ 0 (lt )
Wt
=
.
0
U (Ct )
Pt

Assuming that utility is CRRA (U (Ct ) =
(omitting constants and with Lt = Ct ) :

Ct1
1

`t = ↵` Et [`t+1 ]

), the Euler equation can be log-linearized to obtain
↵r (it

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + dt ,

1
where ` and c are the logs of L and C and with ↵` = +"⇢ 2]0, 1[, ↵r = +"
> 0, "⇢ =
⇢
1
log ⇣t 1 ). This give us equation (EE) in the main text.
0 and dt =
+"⇢ (log ⇣t

B

C(2⇢0 +C⇢00 )
⇢+C⇢0

>

Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1
As  goes to infinity, the Phillips curve implies35 that `t = 0 (recall that ` is the deviation of
employment from its steady state level) when r = 0. Hence, employment is not a↵ected by
demand shocks when r = 0.

Proof of Proposition 2
Step 1 : This step consists in showing that under the RK condition, demand shocks maintain
an expansionary e↵ect of employment even as  goes to infinity. As  goes to infinity, the Philips
curve implies that
`
i Et [⇡t+1 ] = `t .
r

Replacing this is the Euler equation implies
`t =
Since under the RK condition,

↵`
1+↵r

1
`
r

↵`
↵r

`
r

Et [`t+1 ] +

1

1
↵r

`
r

dt .

is between 0 and 1, this has a unique stationary equilibrium

where current and all future expected demand disturbances have a positive e↵ect on employment.
35

This assumes that monetary policy is conducted in such away that inflation stays bounded.

47

Step 2 : This step consists in showing that if the RK condition is not satisfied then, as  goes
to infinity, demand shocks do not maintain (always) a positive e↵ect on employment.
There are two cases to consider. In the first case, the equilibrium is determinate when the
RK condition is not satisfied. This arises when ↵r ` > (1 + ↵` ) r . The second case is when
the equilibrium is indeterminate, which happens either when r < ↵r ` < (1 + ↵` ) r , or when
↵` ) r .
r > ↵r ` > (1

First case : When ↵r
and

1
1 ↵r

`
r

`

> (1 + ↵` ) r , the equilibrium is determinate since

1<

↵`
1 ↵r

`
r

<0

< 0, and the solution is given by

`t =

1
↵r

1

`
r

Et

"

1
X
i=0

↵`
(
1 ↵r

#

i

`
r

) dt+i .

Therefore the e↵ects of current demand disturbances in negative, and the e↵ects of future demand
disturbances oscilates between positive and negative.

Second case : When

< ↵r ` < (1 + ↵` ) r or when r > ↵r ` > (1 ↵` ) r .), the
equilibrium is indeterminate P
and admits a continuum of solutions. We consider the full set of
equilibrium of the form `t = 1
i=0 i dt i under the assumption that dt follows an AR(1) process
of the form dt = ⇢d dt 1 + ✏t . Since all we need to show is that demand shock do not always have
an expansionary under this configuration, this will be sufficient. The Euler equations is
r

`t =

↵`
1 ↵r

`
r

Et [`t+1 ] +

1

1
↵r

`
r

dt .

Then the set of solutions can be written as
`t =
1+

with ✓0 =

1

↵`
1 ↵r `
r
1
`
1+↵r
r

✓1
⇢d

and ✓i = (

1 ↵r
↵l

`
r

)i

1
↵r

1
1✓

1

`
r

1
X

✓i dt i ,

i=0

for i > 0. Since

↵`
1+↵r

`
r

is greater than one in absolute

value, ✓1 can take on an arbitrary value (this captures the indeterminacy). When r < ↵r ` <
(1 + ↵` ) r , there is no choice of ✓1 that makes demand shocks only have positive e↵ects (either
demand always has negative e↵ects on employment, or it oscillates between positive and negative
e↵ects). When r > ↵r ` > (1 ↵` ) r , it is possible to construct an equilibrium where demand
shocks have only positive e↵ects if ⇢d is sufficiently small, but not if ⇢d is sufficiently close to one.

Proof of Propositions 3 and 4: Before proving Proposition 3 and 4, we first prove Lemma B.1.
Lemma B.1. If monetary policy is given by it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +
stationary equilibrium.
Under the monetary rule it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +
`t =

↵`
1 + ↵r

`

` `t ,

` `t

with

`

> 0, then there is a unique

the Euler equation becomes

Et [`t+1 ] +

48

1
1 + ↵r

`

dt .

Since

↵`
1+↵r

`

< 1, this has the unique stationary solution

1
X
↵`
1
Et
`t =
1 + ↵r `
1 + ↵r

i

dt+i .

(B.3)

i=0

The Philips curve becomes

⇡t = Et [⇡t+1 ] + (

`

+

r ` )`t

+ µt ,

which also has a unique stationary solution of the form
⇡t = (

`

+

r `)

1
X

i

Et [`t+i ] +

i=0

1
X

i

Et [µt+i ].

(B.4)

i=0

Note that although this monetary policy can maintain determinacy for any value of , under many
parameter configurations it will imply that the variance of inflation will go o↵ to infinity as  goes
to infinity. Hence, this policy is not always admissible given how the limit is taken when  goes to
infinity in Proposition 2.
Proposition 3 and 4 following directly from Lemma B.1. In particular, equation (B.3) implies
that a demand shock always has a positive e↵ect of employment, regardless of the parameterization,
while a cost push shock has no e↵ect on employment. In contrast, equation (B.4) implies that a
demand shock and a cost push shock increase inflation regardless of the parameterization. The
implications for nominal and real interest rates then follow directly from the policy rule.

Proof of Proposition 5 : Equation 2 implies a positive (negative) tradeo↵ between

and
⇢↵` )
` if r (1
` ↵r > 0 (< 0). This tradeo↵ will always be positive (regardless of the value of
⇢d ) if and only if r (1 ↵` )
` ↵r > 0, which is the RK condition.

Proof of Proposition 6:

⇡

We are considering the following system of equations

`t = ↵` Et [`t+1 ]
⇡t =
it =

↵r (it

Et [⇡t+1 ] +
⇡ Et [⇡t+1 ]

d t = ⇢d d t

1

` `t

+

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + dt ,

+

r (it

Et [⇡t+1 ]),

` `t ,

+ "dt .

For this system we want to compare its implication for the variance of inflation and employment
as we move from ⇡ = 1 and ` > 0 to the situation where ⇡ = 0 and ` = 0. First, it is easy
to verify that, under a Real Keynesian parameterization, this system maintains determinacy for
all pi and ` such that 0  ⇡  1 0  ` and therefore the solution can be written in the form
`t = ⌦` dt and ⇡t = ⌦⇡ dt where
⌦` =
⌦⇡ =

`

⇢d + r (1
⇡)
↵` ⇢d ) + ( ` 1)⇢d [↵r

`

r (1

↵` ⇢d )]

`

+
↵` ⇢d ) + (

`

r (1

↵` ⇢d )]

1
(1

⇢d )(1 + ↵r

`

(1

⇢d )(1 + ↵r

,

r `)
⇡

1)⇢d [↵r

.

`
This implies that @@⌦⇡` < 0 and @⌦
@ ` < 0, hence the variance of employment necessarily increases as
we move from ⇡ = 1 and ` > 0 to the situation where ⇡ = 0 and ` = 0.
@⌦⇡
⇡
Moreover, we have that @⌦
@ ⇡ > 0 and @ ` > 0 when the parameterization is Real Keynesian
(and ⇡  1). Hence the variance of inflation necessarily decreases as we move from ⇡ = 1 and
` > 0 to the situation where ⇡ = 0 and ` = 0.

49

Proof of Proposition 7:

The proof of this proposition builds on that for Proposition 6. In
the case where r = 0 and ↵` is sufficiently small to maintain determinacy, the solution is still of
the form `t = ⌦` dt and ⇡t = ⌦⇡ dt with the same expressions for ⌦p i and ⌦` . Hence we still that
@⌦`
@⌦`
@ ⇡ < 0 and @ ` < 0, hence the variance of employment continues to increases as we move from
@⌦⇡
⇡ = 1 and ` > 0 to the situation where ⇡ = 0 and ` = 0. However, we now have that @ ⇡ < 0
⇡
and @⌦
@ ` < 0 . Hence the variance of inflation now increases as we move from ⇡ = 1 and ` > 0
to the situation where ⇡ = 0 and ` = 0.

Proof of Proposition 8:
We are now considering the dynamics induced by the monetary
innovation "⌫ with following system of equations which includes external habit
`t

h`t

= ↵` Et [`t+1

1

⇡t =

h`t ]

Et [⇡t+1 ] +

` `t

it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +
⌫t = ⇢⌫ ⌫t

1

↵r (it
+

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + dt ,

r (it

Et [⇡t+1 ]),

⌫ ⌫t ,

+ "⌫t .

In the case with external consumption habit, the RK condition becomes
(1

h)(1

↵` )

r

>

` ↵r .

Note that this condition is identical to the previous derived RK condition when h = 0.
Given the policy rule, it is again easy to verify that the system admit a unique stationary
solution as long as 0  ↵` < 1 which is of the form `t = ⌦`` `t 1 + ⌦`⌫ ⌫t and ⇡t = ⌦⇡` `t 1 + ⌦⇡⌫ ⌫t
with
⌦`` = h,
⌦`⌫

=

⌦⇡` =
⌦⇡⌫

=

↵r ⌫
,
1 ↵` ⇢⌫
`h
,
1
h
✓
1
r
1
⇢⌫

⌫

(1

↵r ⌫
↵` ⇢⌫ )(1

h)

◆

.

Since ⌦`` and ⌦`⌫ are positive, it follows that contractionary monetary shocks, as captured by
increases in ⌫t always have a negative e↵ects of output regardless of whether we are in an RK
parameterization or not. The more complicated case is the relationship between ⇡t and all ⌫t i .
When h < ⇢ this relationship can be expressed as
✓
◆
1
X
⇢i⌫ ⌫
↵r `
(i, ⇢⌫ ) ⌫t i ,
⇡t = ⌦⇡⌫ ⌫t +
r
1
⇢⌫
(1 ↵` ⇢⌫ )(1 h)
i=1

where
(i, ⇢⌫ ) =

(1

h)[(1

h
⇢⌫ )

+ (1

(1

h
⇢⌫ )(1

⇢⌫ )(1
)

( ⇢h⌫ )i )h]

,

with @@i > 0 and (i, 1)  0.
Therefore, as ⇢ 7! 1, all the coefficients on inflation will be positive under a Real Keynesian
parametrization. However, if we are not in a Real Keynesian parametrization, the e↵ect of a
monetary shock will eventually be negative since r (1 ↵↵`r)(1` h) (i, 1) is negative for sufficiently
large i.

50

C

Policy Trade-o↵ with Cost-Push Shocks

Here we study the stabilization of cost-push shocks, and assume that the policy authorities can
recognize a cost shock, so that the policy rule for setting the interest rate is now given by
it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +

µ µt .

The type of policy trade-o↵ that arises as the authorities change µ is described in the next
proposition. We are assuming that the cost shocks follow a first order autoregressive process.
Proposition C.1. If the monetary policy rule is given by it = Et [⇡t+1 ] + µ µt with µ > 0, then
increasing µ always increases the variance of both inflation and employment when the model is in
the Real Keynesian configuration. In contrast, when ` ↵r > r (1 ⇢µ ↵` ) (which holds in the New
Keynesian model), starting from µ = 0, some increase in µ will lead to a lower variance of ⇡,
Here again we get that the e↵ects of changing policy has di↵erent implications if we are in
the Real Keynesian case or in the New Keynesian one. In the Real Keynesian case, for stabilizing
purposes, it is not desirable to react to cost shocks by increasing interest rates as this will destabilize
both inflation and employment. In contrast, in the New Keynesian case, at least some increase in
rates in response to cost shocks may be desirable as one can thereby stabilize both inflation even
if it destabilizes employment.
Proof of C.1 We are now considering the dynamics induced by µ within the following system
of equations
`t = ↵` Et [`t+1 ]
⇡t =

↵r (it

Et [⇡t+1 ] +

it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +
µt = ⇢µ µt

1

` `t

+

Et [⇡t+1 ]),
r (it

Et [⇡t+1 ]),

µ µt ,

+ "µt .

The solutions for `t and ⇡t are
↵r µ
µt ,
1 ⇢µ ↵ `
◆
✓
` ↵r
=
r
1 ⇢µ ↵ r

`t =
⇡t

µ

+1

µt
1

⇢µ

.

From these two expression, one can see that if r 1 `⇢↵µr↵r > 0, which is always the case under the
RK condition, then an increase in µ will lead to a greater variance in both ⇡ and `t . In contrast,
if ( r 1 `⇢↵µr↵r ) < 0, then an increase in µ starting from µ = 0 will lead to a decrease in the
volatility of inflation and an increase in the volatility of employment.

D

Data Definition and Sources
Inflation : Gross Domestic Product: Implicit Price Deflator, Index 2009=100, Quarterly,
Seasonally Adjusted, obtained from the FRED database, (GDPDEF). Sample is 1947Q1-2016Q3.
Inflation: Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items, Percent Change,
Quarterly, Seasonally Adjusted, obtained from the FRED database, (CPIAUCSL). Sample is
1947Q1-2016Q3.

51

Nominal interest rate: E↵ective Federal Funds Rate, Percent, Quarterly, Not Seasonally Adjusted, obtained from the FRED database, (FEDFUNDS). Sample is 1954Q3-2016Q3.
Unemployment: Civilian Unemployment Rate, Percent, Quarterly, Seasonally Adjusted, obtained from the FRED database, (FEDFUNDS). Sample is 1948Q1-2016Q3.
Oil price: Spot Crude Oil Price: West Texas Intermediate (WTI), Dollars per Barrel, Quarterly, Not Seasonally Adjusted, obtained from the FRED database, (WTISPLC). Sample is
1946Q1-2016Q3. The real oil price is then obtained by deflating by GDP price.
U.S. Total GDP is obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and
Product Accounts. Real quantities are computed as nominal quantities (Table 1.1.5) over
prices (Table 1.1.4.). Sample is 1947Q1-2015Q2.
Non-Farm Business Hours is obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Sample is 1947Q12015Q2.
U.S. Population: Total Population: All Ages including Armed Forces Overseas, obtained from
the FRED database (POP) from 1952Q1 to 2015Q2. Quarters from 1947Q1 to 1952Q1 are
obtained from linear interpolation of the annual series of National Population obtained from
U.S. Census, where the levels have been adjusted so that the two series match in 1952Q1.

E

Equivalence of Di↵erent Forms of Policy Rules

In the main text, we make the case that the tradeo↵ between activity variance and inflation variation
changes depending on whether r (1 ↵` ) >< ` ↵r . To show this, it was easiest to work with a
policy rule of the form it = Et [⇡t+1 ] + d dt (or it = Et [⇡t+1 ] + ` `t ). The question is whether this
was restrictive, Below are the elements of the proof that it is without loss of generality as long as
the equilibirum is determinate.
Suppose we have a model (with no state variables) of the form
⇣
⌘
Xt = AEt [Xt+1 ] + B it GEt [Xt+1 ] + Cdt ,

where dt = ⇢d dt1 + "dt and where the eigenvalues of A are on the unit disc. Note that this model
embeds our sticky price setup as a special case,36 where Xt = {⇡t , lt } and GEt [Xt+1 ] would simply
be Et [⇡t+1 ]. Now suppose we consider a feedback policy rule of the form it = DXt , where D is
such that the solution is determinate.37 Then the solution is
Xt = (I

(I

BD)

1

(A

BG)⇢d )

1

(I

BD)

1

Cdt = F dt .

Alternatively, we could suppose that the policy rule was of the form
it = GEt [Xt+1 ] + F 0 dt ,
where if we choose to set F 0 according to F 0 = (D G⇢d )F , then it will give the same solution. In
other words, in this case the model can be rewritten as
⇣
⌘
Xt = AEt [Xt+1 ] + B(D G⇢d )(I (I BD) 1 (A BG)⇢) 1 (I BD) 1 C + C dt ,
36

This does not cover the case where ↵` is exactly 1. We can easily generalize the following analysis for
this case.
37
That is, the eigenvalues of (I (I BD) 1 (A BG)⇢d ) are on the unit disc.

52

and it also has as its solution
Xt = F dt = (I

(I

BD)

1

(A

BG)⇢d )

BD)

1

1

(I

BD)

1

Cdt .

To see this, note that the solution is
Xt = (1

A⇢d )

1

(B(D

G⇢d )(I

Then it is easy to verify that
⇣
(1 A⇢d ) 1 B(D G⇢d )(I

(I

(A

BG)⇢d )

1

(I

BD)

(I BD) 1 (A BG)⇢d ) 1 (I BD)
⇣
1
I (I BD) 1 (A BG)⇢d
(I

1

1

+ I)Cdt .

⌘
+I =

BD)

1

.

Hence, as long as we are restricting attention to policy rules that induce determinacy, there is no
loss of generality exploring properties of such a model under a policy rule of the form it = DXt or
of the form it = GEt [Xt+1 ] + F 0 dt . In fact, the latter will cover the the full set of policy options
o↵ered by the former, but the reverse may mot be true.38
The same type of equivalence can be show for the case where the policy rule takes the form
it = GEt [Xt+1 ] + F 0 Xt instead of it = GEt [Xt+1 ] + F 0 dt .

F

The Case of

`

<0

In the main, we have not considered the possibility that ` may be negative, i.e. that the marginal
cost could be in equilibrium a decreasing function of the production scale. This could happen if
there are for example thick market externalities If ` < 0, then the system’s response to increasing
` is non monotonic on inflation. Nonetheless we have the following result.
Proposition F.2. If ` < 0 , then stabilizing the economy with respect to demand shocks will lead
to increased inflation variability if (1 ⇢d ↵` ) r >
` ↵r
So if we want to allow for case where ` could be negative, the more general condition for
unfavorable tradeo↵ between inflation and employment variability can be stated as
(1

↵` )

r

> | ` |↵r .

When monetary policy is of the form i = Et+1 ⇧t + ` `t , it is easy to verify that demand shocks will
again increase employment and inflation regardless of whether the economy is in a Real Keynesian
regime or not.
38

The mapping between the two policies is given by
F 0 = (D

⇣
G⇢d ) I

(I

BD)

1

(A

BG)⇢d

⌘

1

(I

BD)

1

C.

For a given D, this gives an F 0 . In the other direction, given F 0 there are in general multiple solutions for D,
since there are many feedback rules than can implement the same solutions as we are considering a one shock
setup. Among this set, we would want to choose a D such that the eigenvalues of (I (I BD) 1 (A BG)⇢d )
are less than 1. This will still often leave many solutions. It may also be the case that there is no D that
satisfies F 0 = (D G⇢d )(I (I BD) 1 (A BG)⇢d ) 1 (I BD) 1 C and guarantees determinacy. For this
reason, the rule of the type it = GEt [Xt+1 ] + F 0 dt may be considered more general.

53

G

Explicit Mapping From Reduced Form to Parameters

We first solve for the structural model, and then inverse the mapping from structural parameters
to the reduced form one. The model is given by
⇡t =

Et [⇡t+1 ] + 

it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +

d dt

`t = ↵` Et [`t+1 ]

` `t

+

+

µ µt

↵r (it

r (it

+

Et [⇡t+1 ]) +
⌫ ⌫t ,

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + ↵µ µt +

with AR(1) exogenous shocks
1 0
10
0
⇢d 0 0
dt
dt
@ µ t A = @ 0 ⇢µ 0 A @ µ t
⌫t
⌫t
0 0 ⇢⌫
where the covariance matrix of the " is identity.
0
1 0
⇡t
b11
@ it A = @ b21
`t
b31

µ µt ,

1
1
1

1

d dt ,

0

1
"dt
A + @ "µt A ,
"⌫t ,

To solve the model, we guess a solution of the type
10
1
dt
b12 b13
b22 b23 A @ µt A ,
b23 b33
⌫t

and solve for the undetermined coefficients b. The solution is given recursively by
b31 =

d ↵r d
1 ↵ ` ⇢d ,
( ` b31 + r
1 ⇢d

b11 =
b21 = b11 ⇢d +

b32 =
d)

,

↵µ ↵ r µ
1 ↵ ` ⇢µ ,
µ +( ` b32 +
1 ⇢µ

b12 =
b22 = b12 ⇢µ +

d,

b33 =
r µ)

,

↵r ⌫
1 ↵ ` ⇢⌫ ,
( ` b33 + r
1 ⇢⌫

b13 =
b23 = b13 ⇢⌫ +

µ,

⌫)

,

(G.5)

⌫.

We can invert the mapping (G.5) to derive the structural parameters. As the model has eleven
parameters (not including the three persistence parameters ⇢) and the reduced form nine (the
coefficients of the B matrix, again excluding the three persistence parameters ⇢), we reach just
identification by imposing the value of and ↵r . The parameter  is normalized to one. The other
parameters are derived from the structural estimation as follows:
= b21 b11 ⇢d ,
b13 ⇢⌫ ,
⌫ = b23
↵µ = (1 ↵` ⇢µ )b32 + ↵r
⇣
⌘ 1⇣
b33 d
0
r =
⌫
b31

b12 ⇢µ ,
µ = b22
r ⌫
↵` = b33b+↵
,
33 ⇢⌫
↵` ⇢d )b31 + ↵r
d = (1

d

µ

= b12 (1

⇢µ )

µ,

(b32

b13
 (1

b33
b31
`

+

⌘

,

`

=

d r
b31

d,

,

µ r ),

with

= 1 (1

H

Summary of the Results for the 40 Models

⇢d )b11 and

0

=

(G.6)

⇢⌫ ).

Here we present robustness analysis for our estimated extended model. The model is given by the
three equations
`t = ↵` Et [`t+1 ] ↵r (it Et [⇡t+1 ]) + ↵µ µt + dt ,
(EE)

54

⇡t = Et [⇡t+1 ] + 

` `t

it = Et [⇡t+1 ] +

+

r (it

d dt

+

Et [⇡t+1 ]) + µt ,
µ µt

+ ⌫t ,

(PC)
(Policy)

and the law of motions of the three shocks
dt = ⇢d dt

1

+ "dt ,

(H.7)

µt = ⇢µ dt

1

+ "µt ,

(H.8)

⌫t = ⇢⌫ dt

1

+ "⌫t .

(H.9)

We have shown in appendix G that the solution if this model takes the following form:
1 0
10
1
0
b11 b12 b13
dt
⇡t
@ it A = @ b21 b22 b23 A @ µt A .
`t
b31 b23 b33
⌫t

(H.10)

The estimation is done with the two-step procedure we have described in the main text. We first
estimate the system (H.7), (H.8), (H.9) and (H.10) by Maximum Likelihood, where d, µ and ⌫ are
latent variables. We then use the mapping (G.6) to derive the estimated parameters.
In the following tables, we present the results for two measures of inflation (using GDP deflator
or CPI) and two measures of employment (minus unemployment or linearly detrended Non-Farm
Business Hours per capita). The parameter ↵r , that relates to the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution of consumptio, is nit estimated, and we set it to five di↵erent values: .1, 1/3, .5, .75
and 1. In total, this amounts to estimating 40 models.
Results are displayed in Tables 5 to 12. In all the 40 cases, the parameters configuration is in
the Real Keynesian zone. All parameters have expected signs except in two configurations. When
↵r = 1 for the full sample, GDP deflator and unemployment, we find a negative ↵` , which makes
the model uninterpretable. For CPI inflation and hours over the full sample, we find ↵` > 1 except
for ↵r = 1.
[Table 5 about here.]
[Table 6 about here.]
[Table 7 about here.]
[Table 8 about here.]
[Table 9 about here.]
[Table 10 about here.]
[Table 11 about here.]
[Table 12 about here.]

55

I

Estimating the SVAR Representation of a Structural
Model

I.1

Setup

Assume that the Data Generating Process is an economic model (typically a DSGE) of the type
Xt = M1 Xt 1 + M2 Et [Xt+1 ] + M3 ⇥t ,
⇥t = R⇥t 1 + "t .

(I.11)

X is a n ⇥ 1 vector of endogenous variables and ⇥ is a n ⇥ 1 vector of structural shocks. Those
shocks are assumed to be autoregressive of order one.39 The structural innovations " are normally
distributed, with zero mean and their covariance matrix is identity. Some substitutions might
be needed to eliminate some variables in order to obtain an expression with as many shocks as
variables. Matrices M1 , M2 , M2 are functions of the model deep parameters P , and R is the matrix
of the shocks process parameters. Those matrices may contain some zero elements. It is assumed
that all the variables in X are observable, while the shocks ⇥ are not.40 Assuming determinacy of
the model solution41 , the model solution can be written as
Xt = AXt
⇥t = R⇥t

+ B⇥t ,
+
"t .
1
1

(I.12)

where A and B are functions of M1 , M2 , M2 and R, and therefore of P and R, according to the
mapping
(A, B) = (P, R).
Eliminating ⇥, the model solution (I.12) can be written as the following Structural VAR(2) process:
Xt = A + BRB

1

Xt

1

BRB

1

AXt

1

+ B"t .

(I.13)

Estimating a VAR(2) on the data, one can obtain the non structural VAR representation:
Xt =

1 Xt 1

+

2 Xt 1

+ ⌫t .

(I.14)

where ⌫ is a vector of innovations with covariance matrix ⌦. The representation (I.14) is referred
to as the non structural VAR. Matrices 1 , 2 and ⌦ are functions of A, B and R according to the
mapping
( 1 , 2 , ⌦) = (A, B, R).

I.2

Identification of Shocks and Parameters Estimation

Identification of the theoretical model (I.11) can be understood as involving two steps. The first
one is the possibility of inverting the mapping in order to find the SVAR from the non structural
VAR. This step is the one performed in the Structural VAR literature.
39

For expositional simplicity, we present only the case of a model with one lead and one lag and an order
one process for shocks. The general idea of MS-VARs can be extended to higher order models.
40
If the shocks are observable, then the identification of shocks problem is trivially solved.
41
We haven’t worked out the case of sunspots, but we think that the same logic than the one presented
here goes through, as long as one keeps the same number of variables than the number of shocks.

56

If one can recover the SVAR representation –i.e. if the mapping is invertible, one can compute
the theoretical impulse responses functions of the structural model, the variance decomposition,
compute conditional correlations, etc... At this stage, the parameters R, that describe the exogenous
shocks process, are identified, but it is not necessary to know the model deep parameters P . If
the SVAR can be identified, one can then go a step further and identify the model parameters,
provided that the mapping is invertible.
The estimation of DSGEs, as exemplified by Smets-Wouters, can be understood as directly finding the mapping between non structural VAR ( 1 , 2 , ⌦) and the parameters (P, R), as ( 1 , 2 , ⌦)
summarize all the information needed to compute the model likelihood.
As it requires less restrictions on the data, we think that it is of interest to highlight the hidden
step in traditional DSGE estimation, which is the estimation of the Structural VAR (I.12) or (I.13).

I.3

Why is the SVAR identified?

Identifying the SVAR (I.13) means knowing matrices A, B and R. Absent of any restrictions, each
matrix has n2 elements, so that we have 3n3 unknown coefficients. The available information is the
non structural VAR is given by ( 1 , 2 , ⌦). The system of equations that determines the elements
of A, B and R is, using (I.13):
8
< 1 = A + BRB 1 ,
BRB 1 A,
(I.15)
2 =
:
0
⌦ = BB .

Because ⌦ is a symmetrical matrix, this system gives us 3n2 n(n2 1) independent equations for 3n2
unknowns. This is the well-known problem of the identification of shocks in SVARs. If one adds
some extra identifying assumptions (at least n(n2 1) ), then A, B and R can be identified.42 Sims
[1980] restriction than B is lower triangular brings exactly n(n2 1) restrictions, so that the VAR is
just identified. But if one recalls that B is a complicated function of the M1 , M2 , M2 and R, a lower
triangular B matrix is quite a non generic configuration.
The Structural VAR approach we propose only uses the assumption that the shocks ⇥ are
independent one from each other at all leads and lags – i.e. that R is a diagonal matrix. This
assumption is an assumption about the theoretical Data Generating Process (the DSGE model), and
is shared by the vast majority of the literature.43 In plain words, the SVAR identifying assumption
is that all the models shocks are independent AR(1) processes. This is enough to be able to identify
the SVAR. In e↵ect, R has now only n elements, so that we have 2n2 + n unknowns and therefore
n(n 1)
more restrictions than unknowns.44 The SVAR is therefore generically identified.
2
The only disadvantage of this SVAR approach compared to the SVAR literature is that one
cannot use OLS to estimate the SVAR. Under the form (I.12), the ⇥ are not observable, and the
42

We follow here the literature by counting the number of parameters and equations to assess the possibility
of identification. Of course, this is only a necessary condition for identification of the shocks.
43
Exceptions are International Real Business Cycles models of the BKK type in which TFP are correlated
with a lag between countries. Of course, this can also be accommodated in a SVAR, as long as enough zeros
(at least n(n2 1) ) are imposed in the matrix R
44
In the case n = 1, the SVAR is just identified. More precisely, a necessary condition for just identification
is satisfied, but the case n = 1 is a well-known example of non identification although we have as many
equations than parameters. Equation (I.12) writes xt = (a + r)xt 1 arxt 2 + b"t , and has to be compared
to the non structural VAR (I.14), that is given by xt = 1 xt 1 + 2 xt 2 + ⌫t . The endogenous and exogenous
persistence parameters a and r enter symmetrically in the AR(2) representation, so that if (a, r) = (a, a2 ) is
a solution, then (a, r) = ( a2 , a) is also a solution.

57

form (I.13) is non linear in the coefficients of A, B and R. One needs to use a maximum likelihood
method, and we will do it by keeping the SVAR under the form
Xt = AXt
⇥t = R⇥t

+ B⇥t ,
1 + "t .
1

(I.12)

Such an estimation can be easily done, for example using the maximum likelihood model estimation
routine of Dynare. Note that under the null that model (I.11) is the Data Generating Process,
the structural shocks will be recovered up to a sign normalization.

58

Figures
Figure 1: The New Keynesian Configuration
(a) Initial value of

(b) An increase in

`

rt

rt
Policy rule
rt = ` `

Policy rule
rt = ` `

Euler Equation
`t = ↵r rt + dt

Euler Equation
` t = ↵r r t + d t

`t
⇡t

`

`t

Phillips Curve
⇡t =  ` ` t

⇡t

`t

Phillips Curve
⇡t =  ` `t

`t

Notes: The light gray zone corresponds to the range of fluctuations caused by the demand shocks for the
initial value for ` , while the dark gray zone corresponds to fluctuations with an increased ` . Light grey
lines correspond to initial ` and dark grey ones to increased ` .

59

Figure 2: The Extended Model in the non-Real Keynesian Configuration
(a) Initial value of

(b) An increase in

`

rt

rt
Policy rule
rt = ` `

Policy rule
rt = ` `

Euler Equation
`t = ↵r rt + dt

Euler Equation
` t = ↵r r t + d t

`t
⇡t

`

`t

Pseudo Phillips Curve
⇡t = ( ` + r ` )`t

⇡t

`t

Pseudo Phillips Curve
⇡t = ( ` + r ` )`t

`t

Notes: The light gray zone corresponds to the range of fluctuations caused by the demand shocks for the
initial value for ` , while the dark gray zone corresponds to fluctuations with an increased ` . Light grey
lines correspond to initial ` and dark grey ones to increased ` .

60

Figure 3: The Extended Model in the Real Keynesian Configuration
(a) Initial value of

(b) An increase in

`

rt

rt
Policy rule
rt = ` `

Policy rule
rt = ` `

Euler Equation
`t = ↵r rt + dt

Euler Equation
` t = ↵r r t + d t

`t
⇡t

`

`t

Pseudo Phillips Curve
⇡t = ( ` + r ` )`t

⇡t

Pseudo Phillips Curve
⇡t = ( ` + r ` )`t

`t

`t

Notes: The light gray zone corresponds to the range of fluctuations caused by the demand shocks for the
initial value for ` , while the dark gray zone corresponds to fluctuations with an increased ` . Light grey
lines correspond to initial ` and dark grey ones to increased ` .

61

Figure 4: Distribution of (1

↵` )

` ↵r

r

50
45

40

35

30
25

20

15
10

5
0
-0.1

-0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

Notes: This Figure plots the distribution of the quantity (1 ↵` ) r
` ↵r as implied by the
parameters given in Table 1 (benchmark enstimation). The distribution is based on the one million
draws of the parameters in a multivariate normal distribution with estimated mean and covariance
matrix, and where the negative draws of ↵` have been trimmed o↵.

Figure 5: SVAR Impulse Responses for the Fully Forward Model, Long Sample
"2

"1
0.8

"3

1.2

0.5

0.7

1

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.5

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.2

0

0.1

-0.2

0

-0.4

0.3
0.2
0.1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0
-0.1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Notes: These impulse responses are obtained from the estimation of the SVAR (4) and (5) by Maximum
Likelihood, over the sample 1954Q3-2007Q1. The matrix A is constrained to be zero.

62

Figure 6: Impulse Responses for the Fully Forward Model, Long Sample, ML Estimation of
the Model
"µ

"d
0.8

"⌫

0.8

0.5

0.6

0.4

0.7
0.6

0.3
0.4

0.5

0.2

0.4

0.2
0.1

0.3

0
0

0.2
-0.2

0.1
0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.4

-0.1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Notes: These impulse responses are obtained by solving the model (EE), (PC) and (Policy) with the parameter values obtained from the Maximum Likelihood estimation of (EE), (PC) and (Policy) over the sample
1954Q3-2007Q1.

63

Figure 7: SVAR Impulse Responses for the Fully Forward Model, Three Sub-Samples
First Sub-sample: 1954Q3-1979Q1
"2

"1

"3

0.7

1.2

0.6

0.6

1

0.5

0.5

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.3

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.1

0

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0
-0.1
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

Second Sub-sample: 1983Q1-2007Q1
"2

"1

0.8

0.5

20

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

"3

0.15

0.7

0.1

0.4
0.6

0.05

0.5

0.3

0

0.4
0.2

-0.05

0.3
0.2

-0.1

0.1

-0.15

0.1

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

Third Sub-sample: 2009Q1-2015Q4
"2

"1

0.8

0.35

0.7

0.3
0.25

0.6

0.2

0.5

0.15

0.4

0.1

0.3

0.05

0.2

0

0.1

-0.05

0

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Notes: These impulse responses are obtained from the estimation of the SVAR (4) and (5) by Maximum
Likelihood, separately for the three sub-samples. The matrix A is constrained to be zero.

64

Figure 8: Full Sample,“Habit Persistence”
"2

"1
0.7

"3

1.2

0.8

1

0.6

0.6
0.8

0.5

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.2

0
0

0.1
0

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.4

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Notes: These impulse responses are obtained from the estimation of the SVAR (4) and (5) by Maximum
Likelihood. The matrix A is constrained to have the two first columns filled with zeros.

65

Figure 9: SVAR Impulse Responses for the Model with Habit Persistence, Three Sub-Samples
First Sub-sample: 1954Q3-1979Q1
"2

"1

"3

0.7

1.2

0.6

1

0.5

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.3

0.3

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

0.1
0

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

-0.1
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

Second Sub-sample: 1983Q1-2007Q1
"2

"1
0.5

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

"3

0.5

0.8
0.7

0.4

20

0.4

0.6
0.3
0.5

0.3

0.2

0.4

0.2

0.3

0.1

0.2
0
0.1

0.1

-0.1

0

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.1

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

Third Sub-sample: 2009Q1-2015Q4
"2

"1

0.8

0.35

0.7

0.3
0.25

0.6

0.2

0.5

0.15

0.4

0.1

0.3

0.05

0.2

0

0.1

-0.05

0

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Notes: These impulse responses are obtained from the estimation of the SVAR (4) and (5) by Maximum
Likelihood, separately for the three sub-samples. The matrix A is constrained to have the two first columns
filled with zeros.

66

Figure 10: SVAR Impulse Responses When Allowing for More Propagation, Full sample
"1

Habit persistence and “Hybrid New Phillips Curve”
"2

0.6

"3

0.8

1

0.7

0.8
0.6

0.5
0.6
0.4
0.3

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.4

0.2

0.1
0
0

0
-0.2

-0.1
-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

-0.4

40

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

35

40

Habit persistence, Gradual Adjustment of i and “Hybrid New Phillips Curve”

"1

"2

0.6

1

0.5

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.3

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.1

0

0

-0.2

"3
0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

-0.4

40

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Notes: These impulse responses are obtained from the estimation of the SVAR (4) and (5) by Maximum
Likelihood. In the first row, the matrix A is constrained to have the second column filled with zeros. In the
second row, A is unrestricted.

Figure 11: SVAR Impulse Responses of the Price of Oil (po )
Fully Forward

Habit Persistence

Fully Forward

Habit Persistence

0.6

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.5

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.4

0.4

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4
0.3

0.4

0.3

0.3
0.3

0.2
0.2

0.2
0.1

0.1
0

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Full sample

35

40

-0.1

0.2

0.1

0.1

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Full sample

-0.1

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Post-Volcker

35

40

-0.1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Post-Volcker

Notes: These impulse responses are obtained from the estimation of the SVAR (4) and (5) by Maximum
Likelihood, adding the real oil price as the fourth variable. With habit persistence, the matrix A is constrained
to have the first, second and fourth columns filled with zeros. In the fully forward case, A is constrained to
be zero.

67

40

Figure 12: SVAR Impulse Responses with the Relative Price of Oil (po ) as the Fourth
Variable
Fully Forward Model, Full Sample
"2
"3

"1
0.8

"4

1.2

0.5

0.07

0.7

1

0.4

0.06

0.6

0.8

0.3

0.05

0.5

0.6
0.2

0.04

0.1

0.03

0

0.02
0.01

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.2

0

0.1

-0.2

-0.1

0

-0.4

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0

0

5

10

15

Habit Persistence Model, Full sample
"2
"3

"1
0.7

1.2

20

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

"4

0.8

0.1

0.6

0.08

1

0.6

0.8

0.5

0.06

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.04

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.02

0.2

0
0

0.1

-0.2

0

-0.4

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.02

0

5

10

15

“Fully Forward”, Post-Volcker
"2
"3

"1
0.5

0.7

"4
0.1

0.15

0.6

20

0.1

0.4

0.05

0.5
0.05

0.4

0.3

0

0

0.3

0.2

-0.05

0.2

0.1

-0.1
-0.15

0

0

-0.05

-0.1

0.1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

“Habit persistence”, Post-Volcker
"2
"3

"1
0.5

0.7
0.6

0.15

0.3
0.1

0.5
0.2

0.4

0.3

0.05

0.3

0.2

20

"4

0.4

0.4

0.1
0

0.2

0

0.1

0.1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.1

-0.05

-0.1

0

0

-0.15

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.1

0

5

10

15

20

Notes: These impulse responses are obtained from the estimation of the SVAR (4) and (5) by Maximum
Likelihood, adding the real oil price as the fourth variable. With habit persistence, the matrix A is constrained
to have the first, second and fourth columns filled with zeros. In the fully forward case, A is constrained to
be zero.

68

Figure 13: SVAR Impulse Responses of the Real growth ( y)
Fully Forward

Habit Persistence

1

Fully Forward

0.6
0.5

0.8

Habit Persistence

0.1

0.4

0

0.3

-0.1

0.2

-0.2

0.1

0.4
0.6

0.3

0.4

0.2
0.1

0.2

-0.3

0

-0.4

-0.1

0
0
-0.2

-0.1
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Full sample

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Full sample

-0.5

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Post-Volcker

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Post-Volcker

Notes: These impulse responses are obtained from the estimation of the SVAR (4) and (5) by Maximum
Likelihood, adding the real GDP growth rate as the fourth variable. With habit persistence, the matrix A
is constrained to have the first, second and fourth columns filled with zeros. In the fully forward case, A is
constrained to be zero.

69

40

Figure 14: SVAR Impulse Responses with the Real growth ( y) as the Fourth Variable
“Fully Forward”, Full sample
"2
"3

"1
0.8

1.2

0.5

0.7

1

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.5

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.2

0

0.1

-0.2

"4
0.05

0.3
0

0.2
0.1

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.4

-0.05

0
-0.1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.1

0

5

10

15

“Habit persistence”, Full sample
"2
"3

"1
0.7

1.2

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

"4

0.8

0

1

0.6

20

-0.02

0.6
0.8

0.5

-0.04

0.6

0.4

0.4

-0.06

0.4

0.3
0.2

-0.08

0.2

0.2

-0.1

0
0

0.1
0

-0.12

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.4

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.14

0

5

10

15

“Fully Forward”, Post-Vocker
"2
"3

"1
0.5

0.7

"4
0.1

0.15

0.6

20

0.1

0.4

0.05

0.5
0.05

0.4

0.3

0

0

0.3

0.2

-0.05

0.2

0.1

-0.1
-0.15

0

0

-0.05

-0.1

0.1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

“Habit persistence”, Post-Vocker
"2
"3

"1
0.5

0.7
0.6

0.15

0.3
0.1

0.5
0.2

0.4

0.3

0.05

0.3

0.2

20

"4

0.4

0.4

0.1
0

0.2

0

0.1

0.1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.1

-0.05

-0.1

0

0

-0.15

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.1

0

5

10

15

20

Notes: These impulse responses are obtained from the estimation of the SVAR (4) and (5) by Maximum
Likelihood, adding the real GDP growth rate as the fourth variable. With habit persistence, the matrix A
is constrained to have the first, second and fourth columns filled with zeros. In the fully forward case, A is
constrained to be zero.

70

Figure 15: SVAR Impulse Responses with Order Two endogenous Dynamics
Habit Persistence, Full sample
"2

"1
0.7
0.6

"3

0.8

1.2
1

0.6
0.5

0.8

0.4

0.4

0.6
0.3
0.4

0.2

0.2
0.2

0.1

0
0

0
-0.1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

Habit Persistence, Post-Vocker
"2

"1

0.8

0.5

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

"3

0.5

0.7

0.4

0.4

0.6
0.3

20

0.3

0.5
0.2

0.4

0.2

0.1

0.3

0.1

0

0.2
0
-0.1

-0.1

0.1
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

Habit persistence, gradual adjustment of i and Hybrid New Phillips curve
Full sample
"1
"2
"3
1

1

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.3

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.1

0.6
0.4

0.2

0

0

-0.1

0.2
0

-0.2

-0.2

-0.2

-0.4

-0.3

-0.4

-0.6

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.4

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Habit persistence, gradual adjustment of i and Hybrid New Phillips curve
Post-Vocker
"1
"2
"3
0.6

0.4

0.6
0.5

0.5

0.3

0.4
0.2

0.4

0.3
0.1

0.2

0.3
0.1

0.2

0

0
-0.1
-0.1

0.1

-0.2

-0.2

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.3

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.3

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Notes: These impulse responses are obtained from the estimation of the SVAR (6) and (7) by Maximum
Likelihood. With habit persistence, the matrix A is constrained to have the first and second columns filled
with zeros. In the fully forward case, A is constrained to be zero.

71

Figure 16: Demand Shocks and Missing Inflation at the ZLB
(a) New Keynesian Configuration
rt

Policy rule
n
rt = max 0,

` `t

o

(b) Real Keynesian Configuration
rt

Euler Equation
` t = ↵r rt + d t

0

Policy rule
n
rt = max 0,

o

Euler Equation
` t = ↵r r t + d t

0

`t
⇡t

` `t

`t
⇡t

Phillips Curve
⇡t =  ` ` t

Phillips⇣ Curve
⇡t =  ` `t +

`t

r

n
max 0,

` `t

o⌘

`t

Notes: The light gray Euler equation corresponds to the initial situation, and the dark gray one to a situation
with a negative demand. For the same drop in `, a negative demand shock causes a smaller drop in ⇡ in the
Real Keynesian configuration (right column), as compared to the New Keynesian configuration) if the ZLB
binds.

72

Tables
Table 1: Estimated Parameters, Baseline Case
Not Estimated
↵r
0.33
0.99

1.00
Estimated
↵`
0.65 (.21)
0.05 (.04)
`
0.07 (.04)
r
↵µ
-0.38 (.04)

Estimated
0.33 (.15)
d
-1.06 (.09)
µ
⇢d 0.93 (.02)
⇢µ 0.74 (.05)
⇢⌫ 0.98 (.01)
0.37 (.06)
µ
0.22 (.08)
d
0.21 (.08))
⌫

Notes: This table shows the estimated coefficients of equations (EE), (PC) and (Policy)
over the sample 1954Q3-2007Q1 and using Maximum Likelihood. Standard deviations
are shown between parenthesis.

Table 2: Joint Estimation Over The Three Sub-samples
Parameter
↵r?
?

↵`
`
r


↵µ
d
µ

⇢d
⇢µ
⇢⌫
d
µ
⌫

1954Q3-1979Q1
0.33
0.98
0.83
-0.04
0.20
1.00?
-0.23
0.25
-0.64
0.93
0.40
0.98
0.17
0.84
0.07

1983Q4-2007Q1
0.33
0.98
0.83
-0.04
0.20
0.04
-0.12
0.45
-0.38
0.96
0.53
0.99
0.19
0.35
0.09

2009Q1-2016Q3
0.33
0.98
0.83
-0.04
0.20
0.04
-0.08
–
–
0.99
0.37
–
0.06
0.49
–

Notes: This table shows the estimated coefficients of equations (EE), (PC) and (Policy)
pooled over the the subsamples, using two-step estimation method.

73

Table 3: Standard-Deviations of Employment `, Inflation ⇡ and Nominal Interest rate i over
the Three Sub-samples
`

1954Q3-1979Q1 :
1983Q4-2007Q1 :
2009Q1-2016Q3 :

⇡

1.3%
1.3%
1.7%

2.6%
.9%
.8%

i

2.5%
2.5%
.1%

Notes: Employment is measured as minus unemployment, inflation is GDP deflator
growth and nominal interest rate is the E↵ective Federal Funds Rate. All the variables
are in percentage points, annualized for inflation and interest rate.

Table 4: Estimated Parameters, Model with Habit Persistence
Not Estimated
↵r
0.33
0.99

1.00
Estimated
↵`
-1.6
↵` 1
2.18
-0.008
`
0.014
r
0.019
` 1
↵µ
-0.2

Estimated
0.08
d
-.40
µ
1.13
` 1
⇢d
0.79
⇢µ
0.53
⇢⌫
0.99
0.36
µ
0.64
d
0.36
⌫
–
–

Notes: This table shows the estimated coefficients of equations (EE’), (PC’) and (Policy’) over the sample 1954Q3-2007Q1, using two-step estimation method.

74

Table 5: GDP Deflator and minus Unemployment, Full Sample
↵r?
↵`
`
r
d
µ

↵µ
d
µ
⌫

RK

0.100
0.905
0.049
0.072
0.331
-1.064
-0.122
0.079
0.368
0.208
yes

0.333
0.648
0.049
0.072
0.331
-1.064
-0.380
0.224
0.368
0.208
yes

0.500
0.465
0.049
0.072
0.331
-1.064
-0.563
0.328
0.368
0.208
yes

0.750 1.000
0.189 -0.086
0.049 0.049
0.072 0.072
0.331 0.331
-1.064 -1.064
-0.839 -1.115
0.484 0.640
0.368 0.368
0.208 0.208
yes
yes

Notes: This table shows the estimated coefficients obtained from estimating system (H.1), (H.2), (H.3)
and (H.4) by Maximum Likelihood, and then using the mapping (G.6) to derive the structural parameters. In all these estimations, is set to .99 and  is normalised to 1. the star for ↵r indicates that
this coefficient is not estimated.

Table 6: GDP Deflator and minus Unemployment, Post-Volcker Sample
↵r?
↵`
`
r
d
µ

↵µ
d
µ
⌫

RK

0.100
0.933
0.003
0.007
0.436
-0.379
-0.035
0.062
0.347
0.117
yes

0.333
0.772
0.003
0.007
0.436
-0.379
-0.123
0.190
0.347
0.117
yes

0.500
0.657
0.003
0.007
0.436
-0.379
-0.186
0.281
0.347
0.117
yes

0.750 1.000
0.485 0.312
0.003 0.003
0.007 0.007
0.436 0.436
-0.379 -0.379
-0.280 -0.374
0.419 0.556
0.347 0.347
0.117 0.117
yes
yes

Notes: This table shows the estimated coefficients obtained from estimating system (H.1), (H.2), (H.3)
and (H.4) by Maximum Likelihood, and then using the mapping (G.6) to derive the structural parameters. In all these estimations, is set to .99 and  is normalised to 1. the star for ↵r indicates that
this coefficient is not estimated.

75

Table 7: CPI Deflator and minus Unemployment, Full Sample
↵r?
↵`
`
r
d
µ

↵µ
d
µ
⌫

RK

0.100
0.936
0.078
0.144
0.225
-1.134
-0.116
0.061
0.679
0.154
yes

0.333
0.750
0.078
0.144
0.225
-1.134
-0.382
0.163
0.679
0.154
yes

0.500
0.750
0.078
0.144
0.225
-1.134
-0.382
0.163
0.679
0.154
yes

0.750 1.000
0.418 0.219
0.078 0.078
0.144 0.144
0.225 0.225
-1.134 -1.134
-0.856 -1.141
0.345 0.454
0.679 0.679
0.154 0.154
yes
yes

Notes: This table shows the estimated coefficients obtained from estimating system (H.1), (H.2), (H.3)
and (H.4) by Maximum Likelihood, and then using the mapping (G.6) to derive the structural parameters. In all these estimations, is set to .99 and  is normalised to 1. the star for ↵r indicates that
this coefficient is not estimated.

Table 8: GDP Deflator and minus Unemployment, Post-Volcker Sample
↵r?
↵`
`
r
d
µ

↵µ
d
µ
⌫

RK

0.100
0.927
0.009
0.015
0.371
-0.250
-0.020
0.056
1.165
0.125
yes

0.333
0.754
0.009
0.015
0.371
-0.250
-0.079
0.171
1.165
0.125
yes

0.500
0.631
0.009
0.015
0.371
-0.250
-0.120
0.253
1.165
0.125
yes

0.750 1.000
0.445 0.260
0.009 0.009
0.015 0.015
0.371 0.371
-0.250 -0.250
-0.182 -0.245
0.376 0.499
1.165 1.165
0.125 0.125
yes
yes

Notes: This table shows the estimated coefficients obtained from estimating system (H.1), (H.2), (H.3)
and (H.4) by Maximum Likelihood, and then using the mapping (G.6) to derive the structural parameters. In all these estimations, is set to .99 and  is normalised to 1. the star for ↵r indicates that
this coefficient is not estimated.

76

Table 9: GDP Deflator and Total Hours, Full Sample
↵r?
↵`
`
r
d
µ

↵µ
d
µ
⌫

RK

0.100
1.005
-0.007
0.051
0.483
-0.995
-0.094
0.073
0.370
0.052
yes

0.333
0.983
-0.007
0.051
0.483
-0.995
-0.326
0.199
0.370
0.052
yes

0.500
0.967
-0.007
0.051
0.483
-0.995
-0.491
0.289
0.370
0.052
yes

0.750 1.000
0.943 0.919
-0.007 -0.007
0.051 0.051
0.483 0.483
-0.995 -0.995
-0.740 -0.988
0.424 0.559
0.370 0.370
0.052 0.052
yes
yes

Notes: This table shows the estimated coefficients obtained from estimating system (H.1), (H.2), (H.3)
and (H.4) by Maximum Likelihood, and then using the mapping (G.6) to derive the structural parameters. In all these estimations, is set to .99 and  is normalised to 1. the star for ↵r indicates that
this coefficient is not estimated.

Table 10: GDP Deflator and Total Hours, Post-Volcker Sample
↵r?
↵`
`
r
d
µ

↵µ
d
µ
⌫

RK

0.100
0.984
-0.001
0.006
0.448
-0.325
0.009
0.067
0.383
0.087
yes

0.333
0.937
-0.001
0.006
0.448
-0.325
-0.066
0.192
0.383
0.087
yes

0.500
0.905
-0.001
0.006
0.448
-0.325
-0.119
0.282
0.383
0.087
yes

0.750 1.000
0.855 0.806
-0.001 -0.001
0.006 0.006
0.448 0.448
-0.325 -0.325
-0.198 -0.278
0.416 0.550
0.383 0.383
0.087 0.087
yes
yes

Notes: This table shows the estimated coefficients obtained from estimating system (H.1), (H.2), (H.3)
and (H.4) by Maximum Likelihood, and then using the mapping (G.6) to derive the structural parameters. In all these estimations, is set to .99 and  is normalised to 1. the star for ↵r indicates that
this coefficient is not estimated.

77

Table 11: CPI Deflator and Total Hours, Full Sample
↵r?
↵`
`
r
d
µ

↵µ
d
µ
⌫

RK

0.100
1.013
-0.010
0.103
0.357
-1.088
-0.079
0.056
0.653
0.011
yes

0.333
1.009
-0.010
0.103
0.357
-1.088
-0.333
0.141
0.653
0.011
yes

0.500
1.005
-0.010
0.103
0.357
-1.088
-0.514
0.203
0.653
0.011
yes

0.750 1.000
1.000 0.996
-0.010 -0.010
0.103 0.103
0.357 0.357
-1.088 -1.088
-0.786 -1.058
0.295 0.387
0.653 0.653
0.011 0.011
yes
yes

Notes: This table shows the estimated coefficients obtained from estimating system (H.1), (H.2), (H.3)
and (H.4) by Maximum Likelihood, and then using the mapping (G.6) to derive the structural parameters. In all these estimations, is set to .99 and  is normalised to 1. the star for ↵r indicates that
this coefficient is not estimated.

Table 12: CPI Deflator and Total Hours, Post-Volcker Sample
↵r?
↵`
`
r
d
µ

↵µ
d
µ
⌫

RK

0.100
0.975
0.002
0.010
0.386
-0.243
0.033
0.065
1.171
0.125
yes

0.333
0.909
0.002
0.010
0.386
-0.243
-0.023
0.185
1.171
0.125
yes

0.500
0.862
0.002
0.010
0.386
-0.243
-0.063
0.271
1.171
0.125
yes

0.750 1.000
0.791 0.720
0.002 0.002
0.010 0.010
0.386 0.386
-0.243 -0.243
-0.123 -0.183
0.399 0.528
1.171 1.171
0.125 0.125
yes
yes

Notes: This table shows the estimated coefficients obtained from estimating system (H.1), (H.2), (H.3)
and (H.4) by Maximum Likelihood, and then using the mapping (G.6) to derive the structural parameters. In all these estimations, is set to .99 and  is normalised to 1. the star for ↵r indicates that
this coefficient is not estimated.

78

