NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT DO WORKPLACE WELLNESS PROGRAMS DO? EVIDENCE FROM THE
ILLINOIS WORKPLACE WELLNESS STUDY
Damon Jones
David Molitor
Julian Reif
Working Paper 24229
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24229

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018, Revised June 2018
This research was supported by the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of
Health under award number R01AG050701; the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
1730546; the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) North America U.S. Health Care
Delivery Initiative; Evidence for Action (E4A), a program of the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation; and the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research. This study was preregistered with the American Economics Association RCT Registry (AEARCTR-0001368). We
are grateful to Andy de Barros for thoroughly replicating our analysis and to J-PAL for
coordinating this replication effort. We thank our co-investigator Laura Payne for her vital
contributions to the study, Lauren Geary for outstanding project management, Michele Guerra for
excellent programmatic support, and Illinois Human Resources for invaluable institutional
support. We are also thankful for comments from Kate Baicker, Jay Bhattacharya, Tatyana
Deryugina, Joseph Doyle, Amy Finkelstein, Eliza Forsythe, Drew Hanks, Bob Kaestner, David
Meltzer, Michael Richards, Richard Thaler, and seminar participants at AHEC, Harvard, Junior
Health Economics Summit, MHEC, NBER Summer Institute, Ohio State University, University
of Chicago AFE Conference, University of Zurich, UPenn Behavioral Economics and Health
Symposium, SEA, and SIEPR. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the
authors and do not represent the views of the National Institutes of Health, any of our funders, the
University of Illinois, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Damon Jones, David Molitor, and Julian Reif. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Do Workplace Wellness Programs Do? Evidence from the Illinois Workplace Wellness
Study
Damon Jones, David Molitor, and Julian Reif
NBER Working Paper No. 24229
January 2018, Revised June 2018
JEL No. I1,J3,M5
ABSTRACT
Workplace wellness programs cover over 50 million workers and are intended to reduce medical
spending, increase productivity, and improve well-being. Yet, limited evidence exists to support
these claims. We designed and implemented a comprehensive workplace wellness program for a
large employer with over 12,000 employees, and randomly assigned program eligibility and
financial incentives at the individual level. Over 56 percent of eligible (treatment group)
employees participated in the program. We find strong patterns of selection: during the year prior
to the intervention, program participants had lower medical expenditures and healthier behaviors
than non-participants. However, we do not find significant causal effects of treatment on total
medical expenditures, health behaviors, employee productivity, or self-reported health status in
the first year. Our 95% confidence intervals rule out 83 percent of previous estimates on medical
spending and absenteeism. Our selection results suggest these programs may act as a screening
mechanism: even in the absence of any direct savings, differential recruitment or retention of
lower-cost participants could result in net savings for employers.
Damon Jones
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
damonjones@uchicago.edu

Julian Reif
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 E. Gregory Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
jreif@illinois.edu

David Molitor
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
dmolitor@illinois.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1368
An Illinois Workplace Wellness Website is available at
http://www.nber.org/workplacewellness
Appendices are available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24229

1

Introduction

Sustained growth in medical spending has prompted policymakers, insurers, and employers
to search for ways to reduce medical spending. One widely touted solution is to increase
the use of “wellness programs,” interventions designed to encourage preventive care and discourage unhealthy behaviors such as inactivity or smoking. The 2010 Affordable Care Act
(ACA) encourages firms to adopt wellness programs by permitting them to offer participation incentives up to 30 percent of the total cost of health insurance coverage. Workplace
wellness industry revenue has more than tripled in size to $8 billion since the passage of
the ACA, wellness programs now cover over 50 million U.S. workers, and recent studies have
investigated expanding wellness programs into Medicare and Medicaid (Mattke, Schnyer and
Van Busum, 2012; Fout et al., 2013; Kaiser, 2016b; Askelson et al., 2017). A meta-analysis
by Baicker, Cutler and Song (2010) finds large medical and absenteeism cost savings, but
some studies find only limited benefits (e.g., Gowrisankaran et al., 2013; Baxter et al., 2014).
As these authors have noted, identification is limited in prior studies because employee participation, along with the firm’s decision to adopt a wellness program, is voluntary.
Moreover, the prior literature has overlooked important questions regarding selection
into wellness programs. The increasing use of large financial incentives now permitted by
the ACA may redistribute resources across employees in a manner that runs counter to the
intentions of policymakers.1 For example, wellness incentives may shift costs onto unhealthy
or lower-income employees if these groups are less likely to participate in wellness programs.
Furthermore, wellness programs may act as a screening device by encouraging employees
who benefit most from these programs to join or remain at the firm—perhaps by earning
rewards for behaviors they already enjoy.
To improve our understanding of what workplace wellness programs do, we designed and
implemented the Illinois Workplace Wellness Study, a large-scale, randomized controlled trial
1

Kaiser (2017) estimates that 13 percent of large firms (at least 200 employees) offer incentives that
exceed $500 dollars per year, and 4 percent of large firms offer incentives that exceed $1,000 per year.

1

(RCT) conducted at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC).2 In conjunction
with the director of Campus Wellbeing Services, we developed a comprehensive workplace
wellness program that included an on-site biometric health screening, an online health risk
assessment, and a wide variety of wellness activities (e.g., smoking cessation, stress management, and recreational classes). We invited 12,459 benefits-eligible university employees to
participate in our study.3 Study participants (N = 4, 834) assigned to the treatment group
(N = 3, 300) were invited to take paid time off to participate in our workplace wellness program. Those who successfully completed the entire program earned rewards ranging from
from $50 to $350, with the amounts randomly assigned and communicated at the start of
the program. The remaining subjects (N = 1, 534) were assigned to a control group, which
was not permitted to participate. Our analysis combines individual-level data from online
surveys, university employment records, health insurance claims, campus gym visit records,
and administrative records from a popular community running event. We can therefore examine outcomes commonly studied by the prior literature (namely, medical spending and
employee absenteeism) as well as a large number of novel outcomes.
In this paper, we provide the first set of findings from the Illinois Workplace Wellness
Study. We address three key research questions. First, how do financial incentives affect
the level of participation in wellness programs? Theory generally predicts that incentives
should increase participation, but the magnitude of this increase, which matters for understanding whether these programs shift costs onto non-participants, is an empirical question.
If employee participation is price elastic, then increasing the size of incentives reduces compensation gaps between participants and non-participants; if it is price inelastic, then larger
incentives exacerbate those gaps. Second, what types of employees select into wellness pro2

Supplemental materials, datasets, and additional publications from this project will be made available
on the study website at http://www.nber.org/workplacewellness.
3
UIUC administration provided access to university data and guidance to ensure our study conformed
with university regulations, but did not otherwise influence the design of our intervention. Each component
of the intervention, including the financial incentives paid to employees, was paid for entirely by our external
funders. Participation required electronically signing an informed consent form and completing a 15-minute
online survey. Our study was approved by the UIUC and University of Chicago Institutional Review Boards.

2

grams? The expected direction of the effect is ambiguous. For example, while healthy
employees may have low costs of participating in these programs, employees in poor health
may have the most to gain from participating. Third, what are the causal effects of workplace wellness programs on medical spending, employee productivity, health behaviors, and
well-being after one year? Again, the expected signs of these effects are uncertain. For
example, medical spending could decrease if wellness programs improve health, but it could
increase if wellness programs and primary care are complements.
In turn, we have three main sets of results. First, 56 percent of employees in our treatment
group completed the initial major component of our study, which included an on-campus
health screening. Completion depended on the size of the monetary incentive assigned to
an employee: increasing the screening completion reward from $0 to $100 boosted the completion rate by 12 percentage points, from 47 to 59, but further increasing the reward to
$200 only increased completion by 4 percentage points, to 63 percent. When combined with
our accounting records, these participation rates imply that the marginal cost of using financial incentives to induce additional screening participation reaches $1,750 at the highest
screening incentive level ($200). This rapidly diminishing effect implies that—at least in our
setting—increasing a large financial incentive to even greater levels will transfer large sums
of money to workplace wellness program participants, but will have little effect on their composition. We also find that incentives tied to completing downstream wellness activities are
more cost-effective than up-front incentives tied to completing the initial health screening.
Second, we find evidence of significant advantageous selection into our program: at baseline, average annual medical spending among participants was $1,393 less than among nonparticipants. A more detailed investigation reveals that this selection effect is concentrated
in the middle of the spending distribution: employees in the upper and lower tails of the
medical spending distribution were least likely to participate. Because spending is rightskewed, the net result is that average, baseline spending among participants is lower than
that of non-participants. Our estimate is economically significant: considering only medical

3

spending, if our program increased the share of participating (i.e. low-spending) workers
employed at the university by 4.5 percentage points or more, then our result implies that
this change in composition alone would offset the entire costs of our intervention.4 We also
find that participants were more likely to have visited campus recreational facilities prior
to our study, and were more likely to have participated in prior community running events.
Thus, a primary benefit of these programs to employers may be their potential to attract
and retain healthy workers with low medical spending.
Third, we do not find significant effects of our intervention on 37 out of the 39 outcomes
we examine in the first year following random assignment.5 These 37 outcomes include all
our measures of medical spending, productivity, health behaviors, and self-reported health.
We investigate the effect on medical expenditures in detail, but fail to find significant effects
on different quantiles of the spending distribution or on any major subcategory of medical
expenditures (pharmaceutical drugs, office, or hospital). We also do not find any effect of
our intervention on the number of visits to campus gym facilities or on the probability of
participating in a popular annual community running event, two health behaviors that are
relatively simple for a motivated employee to change over the course of one year.
These null estimates are meaningfully precise, particularly for two key outcomes of interest in the literature: medical spending and absenteeism. Our 95 percent confidence intervals
rule out 83 percent of the effects reported in 115 prior studies, and the 99 percent confidence
intervals for the return on investment (ROI) of our intervention rule out the widely cited
medical spending and absenteeism ROI’s reported in the meta-analysis of Baicker, Cutler and
Song (2010). In addition, we show that our OLS (non-RCT) estimate for medical spending
is in line with estimates from prior observational studies, but is ruled out by the 95 percent
confidence interval of our IV (RCT) estimate. This demonstrates the value of employing an
4
Our causal effects analysis finds positive, albeit small and insignificant, effects of the intervention on
retention after one year. Our study, which focuses on an employee cohort, was not designed to examine
recruitment effects.
5
Participants were assigned to treatment and control groups in August 2016. Health screenings occurred
in August and September, and wellness activities ran from October 2016 to April 2017.

4

RCT design in this literature.
We do find two robust, positive treatment effects from the intervention, both based on
follow-up survey responses.6 First, employees in the treatment group were more likely than
employees in the control group to report that they had ever received a health screening.
This indicates that the health screening component of our program did not merely crowd
out health screenings that otherwise would have occurred in the absence of our intervention.
Second, treatment group employees were much more likely to report that management places
a high priority on worker health and safety.
Our study contributes to the economics literature on selection in labor and insurance
markets. It is well known that signaling (Spence, 1973) and screening (Rothschild and
Stiglitz, 1976; Wilson, 1977) can be effective responses to asymmetric information about
worker productivity (e.g. Mas-Colell et al., 1995, Chapter 13; Lazear and Oyer, 2012).
Because health insurance represents an increasingly large component of firm costs, prior
studies have also focused on asymmetric information about worker health status (Cutler
and Zeckhauser, 2000; Bhattacharya and Vogt, 2014). Our results suggest that workplace
wellness programs may be an effective way to encourage workers with low medical spending
to join or remain at firms, thereby presenting a novel example of a “self-selection” device
(Salop and Salop, 1976). In doing so, we complement prior studies that show compensation
packages may be used to attract specific types of workers (Lazear, 2000; Liu et al., 2017) and
provide an additional economic justification for the prevalent and growing use of non-wage
employment benefits (Oyer, 2008). Moreover, because enrollment into wellness programs is
often linked to discounts on insurance premiums, our work is related to a broader literature
on adverse selection in insurance markets (see Chiappori and Salanié, 2013, and Geruso and
Layton, 2017, for reviews).
Our results also speak directly to the effects of workplace wellness on worker equity.
When incentives are linked to pooled expenses such as health insurance premiums, wellness
6

We address the multiple inference concern that arises when testing many hypotheses by controlling for
the family-wise error rate. We discuss our approach in greater detail in Section 3.4.

5

programs can have distributional consequences. A concern is that wellness programs may
effectively increase insurance premiums for low-income workers in poor health (Volpp et al.,
2011; Horwitz, Kelly and DiNardo, 2013; McIntyre et al., 2017). The results of our selection
analysis provide support for these concerns: non-participating employees are more likely
to be in the bottom quartile of the salary distribution, are less likely to engage in healthy
behaviors, and have higher medical spending, on average.
We also contribute to the large health literature evaluating the causal effects of workplace
wellness programs. Our randomized controlled design allows us to establish reliable causal
effects by comparing outcomes across the treatment and control groups. By contrast, the
majority of existing studies rely on observational comparisons between participants and
non-participants (see Pelletier, 2011, and Chapman, 2012, for reviews). Reviews of the
literature have called for additional research on this topic and have also noted the potential for
publication bias to skew the set of existing results (Baicker, Cutler and Song, 2010; Pelletier,
2011; Abraham and White, 2017). To that end, our intervention, empirical specifications,
and outcome variables were pre-specified and publicly archived.7 In addition, the analyses in
this paper were independently replicated by a J-PAL affiliated researcher. A number of RCTs
have focused on components of workplace wellness, such as wellness activities (Volpp et al.,
2008; Charness and Gneezy, 2009; Royer, Stehr and Sydnor, 2015), health risk assessments
(Haisley et al., 2012), or particular biometric outcomes such as obesity (Meenan et al., 2010).
To our knowledge, no RCTs of comprehensive workplace wellness programs exist.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a background on workplace
wellness, a description of our experimental design, and a summary of our datasets. Section
3 outlines our empirical methods, while Section 4 presents the results of our analysis and
discussion. Finally, section 5 offers concluding observations.
7

Our pre-analysis plan is available at http://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1368. We indicate in the paper the few instances in which we deviate from our pre-analysis plan. A small number of
pre-specified analyses have been omitted from the main text for the sake of brevity and because their results
are not informative. For completeness, we will report those omitted results in a separate appendix.

6

2

Experimental Design

2.1

Background

Workplace wellness programs are employer-provided efforts to “enhance awareness, change
behavior, and create environments that support good health practices” (Aldana, 2001, p.
297). For the purposes of this study, “wellness programs” encompass three major types of
interventions: (1) biometric screenings, which provide clinical measures of health; (2) health
risk assessments (HRA), which identify potential health issues; and (3) wellness activities,
which promote a healthy lifestyle by encouraging behaviors such as smoking cessation, stress
management, or fitness. Best practice guides advise employers to let employees take paid
time off to participate in wellness programs, and to combine wellness program components
to maximize their effectiveness (Ryde et al., 2013). In particular, it is recommended that
information from a biometric screening and HRA inform the selection of wellness activities
(Soler et al., 2010). Among firms with 200 or more employees, the share offering a biometric
screening, HRA, or wellness activities in 2016 was 53 percent, 59 percent, and 83 percent,
respectively (Kaiser, 2016a). These benefits are often coupled with financial incentives for
participation, such as cash compensation or discounted health insurance premiums. A 2015
survey estimates an average cost of $693 per employee for these programs (Jaspen, 2015)
and a recent industry analysis estimates annual revenues of $8 billion (Kaiser, 2016b).
A number of factors may explain the increasing popularity of workplace wellness programs. First, some employers believe that these programs reduce medical spending and
increase productivity. For example, Safeway famously attributed its low medical spending
to its wellness program (Burd, 2009) (although this evidence was subsequently disputed
(Reynolds, 2010)), and recent work suggests wellness programs may increase productivity (Gubler, Larkin and Pierce, 2017). Second, if employees have a high private value of
wellness-related benefits, then labor market competition may drive employers to offer wellness programs in order to attract and retain workers. Third, the Affordable Care Act (ACA)

7

has relaxed constraints on the maximum size of financial incentives offered by employers.
Prior to the ACA, health-contingent incentives could not exceed 20 percent of the cost of
employee health coverage. The ACA increased that general limit to 30 percent, and raised
it to 50 percent for tobacco cessation programs (Cawley, 2014). The average premium for a
family insurance plan in 2017 was $18,764 (Kaiser, 2017), which means that many employers
are permitted to offer wellness rewards or penalties in excess of $5,000.
Like other large employers, many universities also have workplace wellness programs. Of
the nearly 600 universities and liberal arts colleges ranked by U.S. News & World Report,
over two-thirds offer an employee wellness program.8 Prior to our intervention, UIUC’s campus wellness services were run by the University of Illinois Wellness Center, which has one
staff member. The Wellness Center coordinates smoking cessation resources for employees
and provides a limited number of wellness activities, many of which are not free. Importantly for our study, the campus did not offer any health screenings or HRAs and did not
provide monetary incentives to employees in exchange for participating in wellness activities.
Therefore, our intervention effectively represents the introduction of all major components
of a wellness program at this worksite.

2.2

The Illinois Workplace Wellness Study and iThrive

The Illinois Workplace Wellness Study is a large-scale randomized controlled trial designed
to investigate the effects of workplace wellness programs on employee medical spending,
productivity, and well-being. As part of the study, we designed a comprehensive wellness
program named “iThrive” at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. We summarize
the program here and provide full details in Appendix D.
Figure 1 illustrates the experimental design of our study. In July 2016 we invited 12,459
benefits-eligible university employees to enroll in our study by completing a 15-minute online
survey designed to measure baseline health and wellness. The invitations were sent by
8

Source: authors’ tabulation of data collected from university and colleges via website search and phone
inquiry.

8

postcard and email. Employees were offered a $30 Amazon.com gift card to complete the
survey, as well as a chance “to participate in a second part of the research study.” Over the
course of three weeks, 4,834 employees completed this baseline survey. Study participants,
whom we define as anybody completing the 15-minute baseline survey, were then randomly
assigned to either a control group (N =1,534), or one of six treatment groups (N =3,300).
Members of the control group were notified that they may be contacted for follow-up surveys
in the future, and further contact with this group was thereafter minimized. Members of the
treatment group were offered the opportunity to participate in iThrive.
The first step of iThrive included a biometric health screening and an online HRA. For a
period of 5 weeks in August and September 2016, participants had an opportunity to schedule
a screening at one of many locations on campus. They had to make an appointment in
advance and fast for 12 hours prior to the screening, where a clinician measured their height,
weight, waist circumference, and blood pressure. The clinician also performed a fingerstick
test to measure blood cholesterol, triglycerides, and glucose levels. Finally, participants met
with a health coach, who explained their health measurements to them. The entire screening
process lasted about 20 minutes. A few days later, participants received an email invitation
to complete an online HRA designed to assess their lifestyle habits. Upon completion of
the HRA, participants were given a score card incorporating the results of their biometric
screening and providing them with recommended areas of improvement. The HRA was
available as early as one week after the beginning of biometric screening and remained open
until two weeks after the last biometric screening. Only participants who completed both
the screening and HRA were eligible to participate in wellness activities.
The second step of iThrive consisted of wellness activities. Eligible participants were
offered the opportunity to participate in one of several activities in the fall and then again
in the spring. Eligibility to participate in spring wellness activities was not contingent on
enrollment or completion of fall activities. In the fall, activities included in-person classes on
chronic disease management, weight management, tai chi, physical fitness, financial wellness,

9

and healthy workplace habits; a tobacco cessation hotline; and an online, self-paced wellness
challenge. A similar set of activities was offered in the spring. Classes ranged from 6 to 12
weeks in length, and “completion” of a class was generally defined as attending at least threefourths of the sessions. Participants were given two weeks to enroll in wellness activities and
were encouraged to incorporate their HRA feedback when choosing a class.
Study participants were offered monetary rewards for completing each step of the iThrive
program, and these rewards varied depending on the treatment group to which an individual
was assigned. Individuals in treatment groups labeled A, B, and C were offered a screening
incentive of $0, $100, or $200, respectively, for completing the biometric screening and the
HRA. Treatment groups were further split based on an activity incentive of either $25 or $75
for each wellness activity completed (up to one per semester). Thus, there were six treatment
groups in total: A25, A75, B25, B75, C25, and C75 (see Figure 1). The total reward for
completing all iThrive components—the screening, the HRA, and a wellness activity during
both the fall and spring—ranged from $50 to $350, depending on the treatment group.
These amounts are in line with typical wellness programs (Mattke, Schnyer and Van Busum,
2012). The probability of assignment to each group was equal across participants, and
randomization was stratified by employee class (faculty, staff, or civil service), sex, age,
quartile of annual salary, and race (see Appendix D.1.2 for additional randomization details).
We privately informed participants about their screening and wellness activity rewards at
the start of the intervention (August 2016), and did not disclose information about rewards
offered to others.
To help guide participants through iThrive, we developed a secure online website that
granted access to information about the program. At the onset of iThrive in August, the
website instructed participants to schedule a biometric screening and then to take the online
HRA. Beginning in October, and then again in January, the website provided a menu of
wellness activities and online registration forms for those activities. The website also provided
information on a participant’s current progress and rewards earned to date, answers to

10

frequently asked questions, and contact information for participant support.

2.3

Data

Our analysis employs a combination of self-reported survey data and a number of administrative data sources, all merged together at the individual level. We briefly describe each
data source below. Appendix Table A.7 provides a definition for each variable used in our
analysis. Additional details are provided in Appendix D.2.

2.3.1

University Administrative Data

We obtained university administrative data on 12,486 employees who as of June 2016 were
(1) working at the Urbana-Champaign campus of the University of Illinois and (2) eligible for
part-time or full-time employee benefits from the Illinois Department of Central Management
Services. We excluded 27 people who did not have a university email address or who were
substantially involved with our study, yielding a final sample size of 12,459 employees.
The initial denominator file includes the employee’s name, university identification number, contact information (email and home mailing address), date of birth, sex, race, salary,
and employee class (faculty, academic staff, or civil service). We used the email and home
mailing address to invite employees to participate in our study, and we used the sex, race,
date of birth, salary, and employee class variables to generate the strata for random sampling.
A second file includes employment history information as of July 31, 2017. This provides
two employee productivity outcomes that are measured over the first 12 months of our study:
job termination and salary raises. All employees in our sample were eligible for a mid-year,
merit-based salary increase that occurred in February 2017.
A third file provides data on sick leave. The number of sick days taken is available at the
monthly level for Civil Service employees. For academic faculty and staff, the number of sick
days taken is available biannually, on August 15 and May 15. We first calculate the total
number of sick days taken during our pre-period (August 2015 - July 2016) and post-period
11

(August 2016 - July 2017) for each employee. We then normalize by the number of days
employed to make this measure comparable across employees. All specifications that include
sick days taken as an outcome variable are weighted by the number of days employed.
A fourth file contains data on exact attendance dates for the university’s gym and recreational facilities. Entering one of these facilities requires swiping an ID card, which creates
a database record linked to the individual’s university ID. We calculate the total number of
visits per year for the pre-period (August 2015 - July 2016) and the post-period (August
2016 - July 2017).

2.3.2

Online Survey Data

As described in Section 2.2, all study participants took a 15-minute online survey in July
2016 as a condition of enrollment in the study. The survey covered topics including health
status, health care utilization, job satisfaction, and productivity.
Our survey software recorded that, out of the 12,459 employees invited to take the survey,
7,468 employees clicked on the link to the survey, 4,918 employees began the survey, and
4,834 employees completed the survey. Although participants were allowed to skip questions,
response rates for the survey were very high: 4,822 out of 4,834 participants (99.7 percent)
answered every one of the questions used in our analysis. To measure the reliability of the
survey responses, we included a question about age at the end of the survey and compared
participants’ self-reported ages with the ages available in the university’s administrative data.
Of the 4,830 participants who reported an age, only 24 (<0.5 percent) reported a value that
differed from the university’s administrative records by more than one year.
All study participants were also invited via postcard and email to take a one-year, followup survey online in July 2017.9 In addition to the questions asked on the baseline survey,
the follow-up survey included additional questions on productivity, presenteeism, and job
satisfaction. A total of 3,568 participants (74 percent) successfully completed the 2017
9

Invitations to the follow-up survey were sent regardless of current employment status with the university.

12

follow-up survey. The completion rates for the control and treatment groups were 75.4
and 73.1 percent, respectively. This difference in completion rates is marginally significant
(p = 0.079). The full texts of our 2016 baseline and 2017 follow-up online surveys are
available on the study website and as part of our supplementary materials.10

2.3.3

Health Insurance Claims Data

We obtained health insurance claims data for the time period January 1, 2015, through July
31, 2017, for the 67 percent of employees who subscribe to the university’s most popular
insurance plan. We use the total payment due to the provider to calculate average total
monthly spending. We also use the place of service code on the claim to break total spending
into four major subcategories: pharmaceutical, office, hospital, and other.11 Our spending
measures include all payments from the insurer to providers, as well as any deductibles or
copays paid by individuals. We merged these data at the individual level with our other
datasets for those employees who consented to participate in our study. In addition, we
have access to anonymized panel data on health claims for non-participating employees who
subscribe to this same plan.
Employees choose their health plan annually during the month of May, and plan changes
become effective July 1. Participants were informed of their treatment assignment on August
9, 2016. We therefore define baseline medical spending to include all allowed amounts with
dates of service corresponding to the 13-month time period July 1, 2015, through July 31,
2016. We define spending in the post period to correspond to the 12-month time period
August 1, 2016, through July 31, 2017.
In our health claims sample, 11 percent of employees are not continuously enrolled
10
Interactive examples of the surveys administered for the study are available at http://www.nber.org/
workplacewellness.
11
Pharmaceutical and office-based spending each have their own place of service codes. Hospital spending
is summed across the following four codes: “Off Campus - Outpatient Hospital,” “Inpatient Hospital,” “On
Campus - Outpatient Hospital,” and “Emergency Room - Hospital.” All remaining codes are assigned to
“other” spending, which serves as the omitted category in our analysis. We did not pre-specify subcategories
of spending in our pre-analysis plan.

13

throughout the 13-month pre-period, and 9 percent are not continuously enrolled throughout the 12-month post-period. This is primarily due to job turnover. Because measures of
average monthly spending are less noisy for employees with more months of claims data, we
weight our regressions by the number of covered months whenever the outcome variable is
average spending.

2.3.4

Illinois Marathon/10K/5K Data

The Illinois Marathon is a running event held annually in Champaign, Illinois. The individual
races offered include a marathon, a half marathon, a 5K, and a 10K. When registering for
a race, a participant must provide her name, age, sex, and hometown. That information,
along with the results of the race, are published online after the races have concluded. We
downloaded those data for the 2014-2017 races and matched it to individuals in our dataset
using name, age, sex, and hometown.

2.4

Baseline Summary Statistics and Balance Tests

Tables 1a and 1b provide summary statistics at baseline for the employees in our sample.
Columns (2)-(8) report means for those who were assigned to our control group and to each
of our six treatment groups. Column (1) additionally reports summary means for employees
not enrolled in our study, where available. The variables are grouped into four panels, based
on the source and type of data. Panel A presents means of the university administrative
data variables used in our stratified randomization, Panel B presents means of variables
from our 2016 baseline survey, Panel C presents means of medical spending variables from
our health insurance claims data for the July 2015 - July 2016 time period, and Panel D
presents baseline means of administrative data variables used to measure health behaviors
and employee productivity.
Our experimental framework relies on the random assignment of study participants to the
treatment and control groups. To evaluate the validity of this assumption, we first compare
14

the means of the variables displayed in Tables 1a and 1b. For each row, we regress the study
variable on seven indicators, one for the control and each of six treatment groups, and test
for the joint equality of the seven coefficients. Column (9) reports the p-value from that
test. We also estimate a seemingly unrelated regression model to test whether the variables
listed within each panel predict enrollment into either the control or any of the six treatment
groups. The bottom of Tables 1a and 1b reports the p-value from jointly testing whether all
regression coefficients across all seven groups are equal to 0, within each panel.
By construction, we find no evidence of differences in means among the variables used for
stratification (Panel A): all p-values in column (9) are greater than 0.97. Among all other
variables listed in Panels B, C, and D, we find statistically significant differences at a 10
percent or lower level in 2 out of 34 cases, which is approximately what one would expect
from random chance. This is confirmed by our joint balance tests, which fail to reject the
null hypothesis that the variables in Panel B (p = 0.165), Panel C (p = 0.220), or Panel D
(p = 0.437) are not predictive of group assignment.
A unique feature of our study is our ability to characterize the employees who declined
to participate in our experiment. We investigate the extent of this selection into our study
by comparing means for study participants, reported in columns (2)-(9) of Tables 1a and
1b, to the means for non-participating employees who did not complete our baseline survey,
reported in column (1). Study participants are younger, are more likely to be female, are
more likely to be white, have lower incomes on average, are more likely to be administrative
staff, and are less likely to be faculty. They also have lower baseline medical spending, are
more likely to have participated in one of the Illinois Marathon/10K/5K running events, and
have a higher rate of monthly gym visits. These selection effects mirror the ones we report
below in Section 4.2, suggesting that the factors governing the decision to participate in a
wellness program are similar to the ones driving the decision to participate in our study.

15

3

Empirical Methods

3.1

Participation

We begin by estimating the effect of our wellness program incentives on participation outcomes among employees randomly assigned to a treatment group. We exclude members of
the control group, for whom participation is mechanically zero. First, we jointly estimate
the average effects of being assigned a positive screening incentive (groups B and C) or being
assigned the $75 wellness activity incentive using the following ordinary least squares (OLS)
regression:
Pi = α + βBC Ti,BC + β75 Ti,75 + ΓXi + εi .

(1)

Here, Ti,BC is an indicator for membership in treatment groups B or C, and Ti,75 is an
indicator for receiving the $75 wellness activity incentive. The omitted category includes
members of treatment group A with a $25 wellness activity incentive.
Second, we augment equation (1) to estimate participation effects for groups B and C
separately, as follows:

Pi = α + βB Ti,B + βC Ti,C + β75 Ti,75 + ΓXi + εi .

(2)

Here, the independent variables Ti,B and Ti,C are indicators for membership in treatment
groups B and C, respectively.
In equations (1) and (2), the outcome Pi is an indicator for one of the following three
participation outcomes: completing a screening and HRA, completing a fall wellness activity,
or completing a spring wellness activity. The coefficients of interest—βBC , βB , βC , and β75 —
represent the causal effect of increased incentives on participation. We estimate results with
and without the inclusion of strata fixed effects, Xi . The identifying assumption requires
that treatment be uncorrelated with unobservable determinants of participation, εi , which
is delivered by virtue of random assignment. This assumption is supported by the balance
16

tests across the treatment groups, reported in Section 2.4.

3.2

Selection

Next, we characterize the types of employees who are most likely to participate in or complete
the various stages of our wellness program. We pool data across the six treatment groups
and estimate the following OLS regression:

Xi = α + θPi + εi .

(3)

The left-hand side variable, Xi , is a pre-determined covariate. The regressor, Pi , is an
indicator for one of the following three participation outcomes: completing a screening and
HRA, completing a fall wellness activity, or completing a spring wellness activity. The
coefficient θ represents the correlation between participation and the baseline characteristic,
Xi ; it should not be interpreted causally.

3.3

Causal Effects

In our final analysis, we estimate the one-year effect of our wellness intervention on a number
of outcomes, including medical spending from health claims data, employment and productivity variables measured in administrative and survey data, health behaviors measured in
administrative data, and self-reported health status and behaviors. We compare outcomes
in the treatment group to those in the control group using the following specification:

Yi = α + γTi + ΓXi + εi .

(4)

Here, Ti is an indicator variable for membership in one of our six treatment groups, and Yi is
an outcome of interest. We estimate equation (4) with and without the inclusion of controls,
Xi . In one control specification, Xi includes baseline strata fixed effects. One could also

17

include a much broader set of controls, but doing so comes at the cost of reduced degrees
of freedom. Thus, our second control specification implements the Lasso double-selection
method of Belloni, Chernozhukov and Hansen (2014), as outlined by Urminsky, Hansen and
Chernozhukov (2016), which selects controls that predict either the dependent variable or
the focal independent variable.12 The set of potential controls includes baseline values of
the outcome variable, strata variables, the baseline survey variables reported in Table 1a,
and all pairwise interactions. We then estimate a regression that includes only the controls
selected by double-Lasso. In our tables, we follow convention and refer to this third control
strategy as “post-Lasso.” As before, our main identifying assumption requires treatment
to be uncorrelated with unobserved determinants of the outcome. The key parameter of
interest, γ, is the intent-to-treat effect of our intervention on the outcome Yi .

3.4

Inference

We report conventional robust standard errors in all tables. We do not cluster standard errors
because randomization was performed at the individual level (Abadie et al., 2017). Because
we estimate equations (3) and (4) for many different outcome variables, the probability that
we incorrectly reject at least one null hypothesis is greater than the significance level used
for each individual hypothesis test. When appropriate, we address this multiple inference
concern by controlling for the family-wise error rate, i.e. the probability of incorrectly
rejecting one or more null hypotheses belonging to a family of hypotheses.
To control for the family-wise error rate, we first define seven mutually exclusive families of hypotheses that encompass all of our outcome variables. Each family contains all
variables belonging to one of our four outcome domains (strata variables, medical spending,
employment/productivity, or health) and one of our two types of data (administrative or
12

No control variable will be predictive of a randomly assigned variable, in expectation. Thus, when
implementing the double-selection method with randomly assigned treatment status as the focal independent
variable, we only select controls that are predictive of the dependent variable. When implementing Lasso,
we use the penalty parameter that minimizes 10-fold cross-validated mean squared error.

18

survey).13 When testing multiple hypotheses using equations (3) and (4), we then calculate
family-wise adjusted p-values based on 10,000 bootstraps of the free step-down procedure of
Westfall and Young (1993).14

4

Results

4.1

Participation

We begin by summarizing the effect of incentives on participation. Figure 2 reports that
56.0 percent of participants in the treatment group completed both the health screening and
online HRA, which together comprise the first major step of our workplace wellness program.
These participants earned their assigned rewards ($0, $100, or $200), and were subsequently
allowed to sign up for wellness activities; the remaining 44 percent were excluded. In the fall,
39.5 percent of the treatment group registered for an activity, and 27.4 percent completed
enough of the activity to earn their assigned activity reward. Registration and completion
rates were slightly lower for the spring wellness activity. By way of comparison, a survey
of employers with workplace wellness programs found that less than 50 percent of their
eligible employees complete health screenings, and that most firms have wellness activity
participation rates of less than 20 percent (Mattke et al., 2013).
Figure 3 reports participation rates for different levels of incentives, first for the screening
and HRA stage and then for the fall activities.15 The first set of three dark bars in Figure 3a
show how screening participation varies as a function of the screening incentive. Increasing
the screening incentive from $0 to $100 boosts participation from 46.9 percent to 58.5 percent.
13

One could assign all variables to a single family of hypotheses. This is unappealing, however, because
it assigns equal importance to all outcomes when in fact some outcomes (e.g., total medical spending) are
of much greater interest than others. Instead, our approach groups together variables that measure related
outcomes and that originate from similar data sources.
14
We have made our generalized Stata code module publicly available for other interested researchers
to use. It can be installed by typing “ssc install wyoung, replace” at the Stata prompt. We provide
additional documentation of this multiple testing adjustment in Appendix C.
15
We report the results for spring activities, which are very similar to those for the fall, in Appendix A.

19

This difference is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Increasing the screening
incentive to $200 increases turnout further, to 62.5 percent. The second set of two dark bars
in Figure 3a shows screening participation as a function of the wellness activity incentives.
Increasing the activity incentive from $25 to $75 increases turnout from 53.6 percent to 58.4
percent, indicating that at least some participants were forward looking: they understood
that they needed to first complete the screening and HRA in order to later be eligible to
sign up for a wellness activity.
Table 2 provides formal statistical testing of the patterns described above for health
screening participation. Panel A reports estimates of equations (1) and (2), using the completion of the screening and HRA as the outcome variable. Columns (1) and (2) pool together
groups B and C, while columns (3) and (4) estimate the effects separately for groups B and
C. The omitted group in each specification is group A25: members who were assigned a $0
screening incentive and a $25 wellness incentive.
As reported in Panel A, the baseline participation rate for the screening and HRA in the
omitted group is 44.5 percent (see column (1) or (3)). Column (3) of Panel A shows that the
screening/HRA completion rates of treatment groups B and C are larger than those of group
A by 11.6 (p < 0.001) and 15.6 (p < 0.001) percentage points, respectively. In addition, the
difference between group B and C is marginally significant (p = 0.05). We also estimate that
a $75 wellness incentive increases screening and HRA completion by 4.9 percentage points
relative to a $25 wellness incentive (p < 0.01). Comparing columns (1) and (3) to columns
(2) and (4), respectively, shows that controlling for baseline stratification variables has very
little effect on the point estimates.
We find consistently positive, but marginally diminishing, effects of monetary rewards
on screening and HRA participation. The optimal reward amount depends on the marginal
cost and marginal benefit associated with additional participation. Using our participation
results, it is straightforward to provide some basic estimates of marginal cost using data on
the field costs of our study.

20

The lightly shaded bars in Figure 3a report the realized average variable costs for treatment groups with different monetary rewards. The average variable costs are equal to the
average monetary incentives paid to the group plus the costs of providing the health screening, the HRA, and the wellness activities.16 We calculate the marginal cost of the additional
participation induced by each reward by dividing the increase in average cost for each group
by the corresponding increase in participation.17 The results of those calculations are plotted
in Figure 3c. The marginal cost is increasing in the share of employees participating and is
largest (at $1,750) for group C, whose members received $200 if they completed a screening
and HRA. All else equal, this estimate implies that the optimal screening incentive is less
than $200 if the marginal benefit associated with additional participation in group C is less
than $1,750. Interestingly, the marginal cost of using activity incentives to increase screening
participation lines up closely with that of the screening incentives.
We repeat this exercise for fall activity participation in Figures 3b and 3d. Here, a
different pattern emerges. Screening incentives have only a small effect on fall activity
completion, and, as a result, generate a relatively steep marginal cost curve. On the other
hand, wellness activity incentives have a sizeable effect on activity completion, and exhibit
a much flatter marginal cost.18
Panels B and C of Table 2 report that the screening incentives for groups B and C
increase the completion probability for the fall or spring wellness activity by about 4-5
percentage points (0.004 ≤ p ≤ 0.03). Finally, the $75 wellness incentive, as compared to
a $25 incentive, generates a 12 percentage point increase in the likelihood of completing a
fall or spring wellness activity (p < 0.001). This last effect is sizeable when compared to a
16

Our variable cost measure does not account for paid time off or the fixed costs of managing the iThrive
intervention. The health screening and HRA cost $78.22 per participant. This includes the costs of purchasing a fingerstick blood test, hiring nurses to administer the test, and licensing the HRA. The wellness
activities cost an average of $26.07 per enrollee per semester. Employees who declined to participate in the
health screening are assigned a variable cost of $0.
17
For the $25 activity incentive and $0 screening incentive groups, the marginal cost is calculated relative
to a baseline of 0 percent participation and $0 average variable cost. Thus, the marginal cost for these two
groups is simply the group’s average variable cost divided by its participation rate.
18
We find qualitatively similar patterns for spring activity participation, which we present in Appendix
Figure A.1.

21

baseline completion rate of 18.2 percent in the fall and 13.7 percent in the spring for group
A (see column (1) or (3)).
Overall, we find that financial incentives have a significant, but diminishing, effect on
health screening participation. This suggests that when screening incentives are large, further increases in reward sizes will result in larger transfers to existing participants but little
change in total participation. By contrast, we find that screening incentives have little effect on subsequent wellness activity participation, while wellness incentives have a relatively
large effect. For this reason, the back-loaded wellness activity incentives are arguably more
cost-effective than the upfront screening incentives: they are about as effective as screening incentives in increasing screening participation—as evidenced by similar marginal cost
curves (Figure 3c)—and at the same time are more efficient at increasing wellness activity
completion—i.e., they have a flatter marginal cost curve (Figure 3d).

4.2
4.2.1

Selection
Average Selection

Next, we characterize the types of workers most likely to participate in our wellness program.
We focus on medical spending and health behaviors, which are primary targets of wellness
programs, and on salary, which is useful for understanding the redistribution effects of these
programs. Selection results for the full set of pre-specified observables are presented in
Appendix Tables A.1a through A.1d.
Table 3 reports our main selection results, as estimated by equation (3). We test for
selection at three different, sequential points in the study: completing the health screening
and HRA; completing a fall wellness activity; and completing a spring wellness activity.
Column (1) reports the mean of the selection variable of interest for employees assigned to
one of our study’s treatment groups. Columns (3)-(5) report the difference in means between
those employees who successfully completed the participation outcome of interest and those
who did not. We also report family-wise p-values in brackets that account for the number of
22

selection variables in each “family.” 19
Column (3) of the first row of Table 3 reports that employees who completed the screening
and HRA spent, on average, $116.1 per month less on health care in the 13 months prior to
our study than employees who did not participate. This pattern of advantageous selection
is strongly significant using conventional inference (p = 0.026), and remains marginally
significant even after adjusting for the five outcomes in this family (family-wise p = 0.080).
The magnitude is also economically significant, representing about 25 percent of the $479
in average monthly spending (column (1)). Columns (4) and (5) present further evidence
of advantageous selection into the fall and spring wellness activities, although in these cases
the magnitude of selection falls by half and becomes statistically insignificant.
In contrast, the second row of Table 3 reports that employees participating in our wellness program were more likely to have non-zero medical spending at baseline than nonparticipants, by about 5 percentage points (family-wise p ≤ 0.021), for all three participation outcomes. When combined with our results from the first row on average spending, this
suggests that our wellness program is more attractive to employees with moderate spending
than to employees in either tail of the spending distribution.
We investigate these results further in Figure 4, which displays the empirical distributions
of prior spending for those employees who participated in screening and for those who did
not. We perform two tests of the equality of the spending distributions across these two samples: Pearson’s chi-squared test and the non-parametric Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.20 Both
tests strongly reject the null hypothesis that these two samples were drawn from the same
distribution (Chi-squared p < 0.001; Kolmogorov-Smirnov p = 0.007). More specifically,
Figure 4 reveals a “tail-trimming” effect: participating (screened) employees are less likely to
be high spenders (> $2, 338 per month), but they are also less likely to be low spenders ($0
19
The seven families of outcome variables are defined in Section 3.4. The family-wise p-values reported in
Table 3 account for all the variables in the family, including ones that are not reported in the main text. An
expanded version of Table 3 that reports estimates for all pre-specified outcomes is provided in Appendix
Tables A.1a through A.1d.
20
These tests were not specified in our pre-analysis plan.

23

per month). Because medical spending is highly skewed to the right, the overall effect on
the mean among participants is negative, which explains the advantageous selection effect
reported in the first row of Table 3.
Panel B of Table 3 reports selection estimates for income. The first row reports that the
average annual salary of participants is lower than that of non-participants, significantly so
for the fall and spring wellness activities (family-wise p ≤ 0.012). This initially suggests that
participants are disproportionately lower-income. Yet, the second row of Panel B reports
that the share of screening participants in the first (bottom) quartile of income is actually
6.9 percentage points lower than the share among non-participants (family-wise p < 0.001).
Columns (4) and (5) also report negative, albeit smaller, selection effects for the fall and
spring wellness activities. We again delve deeper by comparing the entire empirical distributions of income for participants and non-participants in Figure 5. We can reject that these
two samples came from the same distribution (p ≤ 0.02). As in Figure 4, we again find a
tail-trimming effect: participating employees are less likely to come from either tail of the
income distribution.
Lastly, we test for differences in baseline health behaviors as measured by our administrative data variables. The first row of Panel C in Table 3 reports that the share of screening
participants who had previously participated in one of the IL Marathon/5K/10K running
events is 8.9 percentage points larger than the share among non-participants (family-wise
p < 0.001), a sizeable difference that represents over 75 percent of the mean participation
rate of 11.8 percent (column (1)). This selection effect is even larger for the fall and spring
wellness activities. The second row of Panel C reports that participants also visited the
campus gym facilities more frequently, although these selection effects are only statistically
significant for screening and HRA completion (family-wise p = 0.013).
Prior studies have raised concerns that the benefits of wellness programs accrue primarily
to higher-income employees with lower health risks (Horwitz, Kelly and DiNardo, 2013). Our
results are broadly consistent with these concerns: participating employees are less likely to

24

have very high medical spending, less likely to be in the bottom quartile of income, and more
likely to engage in healthy activities such as running or visiting the gym. At the same time,
participating employees are also less likely to have very low medical spending or have very
high incomes, which suggests a more nuanced story.

4.2.2

Marginal Selection

Our study design allows us to characterize not only how participants differ from nonparticipants on average, but also how the marginal participant varies as we increase incentives. As reported previously in Table 3, screening participants had lower baseline medical
spending than non-participants, on average. Figure 6a (orange bars) shows how this pattern
of selection varies by screening incentive size. For example, participants in the treatment
groups with $100 and $200 screening incentives spent, on average, $79 more per month
(p = 0.06) than participants in the treatment group with a $0 screening incentive. At low
levels of screening incentives, wellness programs attract below-average spenders, but as incentive levels increase, the marginal participants have spending levels that are higher than
the average participant. Thus, over the range of incentives we offer, increasing the size of
the screening incentive reduces the average amount of selection.
By contrast, Figure 6a (blue bars) illustrates a different pattern for wellness activity incentives: as we increase activity incentives, the marginal participant has significantly lower
spending (p = 0.03). While we have less power for other outcomes, we find similar selection
patterns when using pre-intervention health behaviors as a proxy for health status.21 As we
increase screening incentives, the marginal participant is potentially less likely to have participated in a prior marathon or have used the campus gym. Conversely, increasing wellness
activity incentives potentially draws in marginal participants with a higher propensity for
gym use. Thus, the selection patterns are potentially heterogeneous across type of incentive.
As was the case when we examined the marginal cost of increasing participation, the type
21
Marginal selection patterns with respect to income and non-zero health spending are provided in Appendix A.

25

of incentive matters when examining selection into wellness programs.

4.2.3

Health Care Cost-Savings via Selection

The selection patterns we have uncovered may provide, by themselves, a potential motive for
firms to offer wellness programs. We have shown that wellness participants have lower medical spending on average than non-participants. If wellness programs differentially increase
the recruitment or retention of these types of employees, then the accompanying reduction
in health care costs will save firms money.22
A simple back-of-the-envelope calculation demonstrates this possibility. In our setting,
39 percent (= 4, 834/12, 459) of eligible employees enrolled into our study, and 56 percent of
the treatment group completed a screening and health assessment (Figure 2). Participating
employees spent on average $132.7 per month less than non-participants in the post-period
(Table 5, column 4), which translates into an annual spending difference of $1,592. When
combined with average program costs of $271 per participant, this implies that the employer
would need to increase the share of employees who are similar to wellness participants by
4.5 (= 0.39 × 0.56 × 271/(1592 − 271)) percentage points in order for the resulting reduction
in medical spending to offset the entire cost of the wellness program. To be clear, this
calculation does not imply that adoption of workplace wellness programs is socially beneficial.
But, it does provide a profit-maximizing rationale for firms to adopt wellness programs, even
in the absence of any direct effects on health, productivity, or medical spending.

4.3
4.3.1

Causal Effects
Intent-to-Treat

Finally, we estimate the causal, intent-to-treat (ITT) effect of our intervention on three
domains of outcomes: medical spending, employment and productivity, and health behaviors.
22

Wellness participants differ from non-participants along other dimensions as well (e.g., health behaviors).
Because it is difficult in many cases to sign, let alone quantify, a firm’s preferences over these other dimensions,
we focus our cost-savings discussion on the medical spending consequences.

26

Table 4 reports estimates of equation (4) for all administratively measured outcomes, as well
as a select set of outcomes from the one-year follow-up survey. An expanded version of this
table reporting 39 administrative and survey outcomes is provided in Appendix Tables A.2a
through A.2f.
We report ITT estimates using three specifications. The first includes no control variables.
Our second specification includes fixed effects for the 69 strata used for stratified random
assignment at baseline. Because the probability of treatment assignment was constant across
strata, these controls are included not to reduce bias, but to improve the precision of the
treatment effect estimates (Bruhn and McKenzie, 2009). Our third specification includes a
set of baseline outcomes and covariates chosen via Lasso, as described in Section 3.3.

Medical spending We do not detect statistically significant effects of treatment on average medical spending over the first 12 months (August 2016 - July 2017) of the wellness
intervention in any of our specifications. Column (2) of the first row of Table 4 shows that
the difference in average spending between treatment and control was only $4.1 per month.
The point estimate increases slightly when using either of our control strategies (columns
(3) or (4)) but remains small and statistically indistinguishable from zero. The post-Lasso
specification generates a significant improvement in precision, with a standard error about 25
percent smaller than that of either the no-control or strata fixed effects specifications. In the
rest of Panel A, we continue to find small and insignificant results for different subcategories
of spending, as well as the probability of any spending over this 12-month period.
Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 7—which reproduce the basic results for total and non-zero
spending presented in Panel A, column (2) of Table 4—reveal no significant differences in
average spending or probability of any spending between treatment and control. However,
these results do not rule out mean-preserving treatment effects that alter other moments of
the distribution. We investigate this possibility in Panel (c) of Figure 7, which displays the
empirical distributions of spending for the treatment and control groups, but fail to observe

27

any clear differences between these two groups. This is confirmed formally by Pearson’s chisquared test and the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, which both fail to reject the null hypothesis
that the control and treatment samples were drawn from the same spending distribution
(p = 0.867 and p = 0.458, respectively).
Finally, we investigate the potential for spending treatment effects to vary by treatment
arm. Those results, which are available in Appendix Tables A.4a and A.4b, show no evidence
of meaningful differences in spending effects across treatment arms.

Employment and productivity Next, we estimate the effect of treatment on a variety
of employment and productivity outcomes. As reported in Panel B of Table 4, we do not
detect statistically significant effects on any of the three outcomes that are administratively
measured: annual salary, the probability of job termination after 12 months of the wellness intervention, and sick leave taken. Turning to variables measured during the one-year
follow-up survey, we find no statistically significant effects on most self-reported employment
and productivity measures, including being happier at work than last year or feeling very
productive at work. The only exception is that individuals in the treatment group are 5.7
percentage points (7.2 percent) more likely (family-wise p < .001) to believe that management places a priority on health and safety (column (2), Table 4). Appendix Tables A.2c
and A.2d report ITT estimates for all pre-specified administrative and survey productivity
measures.

Health behaviors Finally, we investigate health behaviors, which may respond more
quickly to a wellness intervention than medical spending and productivity outcomes. Our
main results are reported in Panel C of Table 4. We find very small and statistically insignificant effects of treatment assignment on participation in any running event of the April 2017
Illinois Marathon (i.e. 5K, 10K, and half/full marathons). Similarly, we do not find meaningful effects on the average number of days per month that an employee visits a campus
recreation facility. However, we do find that individuals in the treatment group are nearly 4
28

percentage points more likely (p < .01) to report having a previous health screening. This
provides evidence that our program provided biometric health information to a significant
number of employees who report not previously being screened, and did not completely
crowd out screenings that would have otherwise occurred within the first year of our study.

Discussion Across all 39 outcome variables we examine, we only find two statistically
significant effects of our intervention: an increase in the number of employees who ever
received a health screening, and an increase in the number who believe that management
places a priority on health and safety.23 The next section addresses the precision of our
estimates by quantifying what effects we can rule out. But first, we mention two caveats.
First, our post-period only includes one year of data. While we do not find significant
effects for most of the outcomes we examine, it is possible that longer-run effects may emerge
in the second or third year following the intervention. Second, our analysis assumes that
the control group was unaffected by the intervention. The research team’s contact with the
control group was confined to the communication procedures employed for the 2016 and 2017
online surveys. Although we never shared details of the intervention with the control group,
some of them may have learned about it from their colleagues. To evaluate how often this
occurred, we asked study participants on the 2017 follow-up survey whether they ever talked
about the iThrive workplace wellness program with any of their coworkers. Only 3 percent
of the control group responded affirmatively, compared to 44 percent of the treatment group.

4.3.2

Comparison to Prior Studies

We now compare our estimates to the prior literature, which has focused on medical spending
and absenteeism. This exercise employs a spending estimate derived from a data sample that
winsorizes (top-codes) medical spending at the one percent level (see Column 3 of Table 6).
We do this to reduce the influence of a small number of extreme outliers on the precision of
23

We show in the appendix that these two effects are driven by the health screening component of our
intervention rather than the wellness activity component.

29

our estimate, as has been done in prior studies (e.g. Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014).24
Figure 8 illustrates how our estimates compare to the prior literature.25 The top-left
figure in Panel (a) plots the distribution of the intent-to-treat (ITT) point estimates for
medical spending from 22 prior workplace wellness studies. The figure also plots our ITT
point estimate for total medical spending from Table 4, and shows that our 95-percent
confidence interval rules out 20 of these 22 estimates. For ease of comparison, all effects are
expressed as percent changes. The bottom-left figure in Panel (a) plots the distribution of
treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) estimates for health spending from 33 prior studies, along
with the IV estimates from our study. In this case, our 95-percent confidence interval rules
out 23 of the 33 studies. Overall, our confidence intervals rule out 43 of 55 (78 percent) prior
ITT and TOT point estimates for health spending.26 The two figures in Panel (b) repeat
this exercise for absenteeism, and show that our estimates rule out 53 of 60 (88 percent)
prior ITT and TOT point estimates for absenteeism. Across both sets of outcomes, we rule
out 96 of 115 (83 percent) prior estimates.
We can also combine our spending and absenteeism estimates with our cost data to
calculate a return on investment (ROI) for workplace wellness programs. The 99 percent
confidence intervals for the ROI associated with our intervention rule out the widely cited
savings estimates reported in the meta-analysis of Baicker, Cutler and Song (2010).27
24

Winsorizing can introduce bias if there are heterogeneous treatment effects in the tails of the spending
distribution. However, Figure 7c provides evidence of a consistently null treatment effect throughout the
spending distribution. This evidence is further supported by Table 6, which shows that the point estimate of
the medical spending treatment effect changes little after winsorization. For completeness, Appendix Figure
A.3 illustrates the stability of the point estimate across a wide range of winsorization levels.
25
Appendix B provides the sources and calculations underlying the point estimates reported in Figure 8.
26
If we do not winsorize medical spending, we rule out 37 of 55 (67 percent) prior health studies.
27
The first year of the iThrive program cost $152 (= $271 × 0.56) per person assigned to treatment. This is
a conservative estimate because it does not account for paid time off or the fixed costs of managing iThrive.
Focusing on the first year of our intervention and assuming that the cost of a sick day equals $240, we
calculate that the lower bounds of the 99 percent confidence intervals for annual medical and absenteeism
costs are -$415 (= (15.4 − 2.577 × 19.4) × 12) and -$74 (= (0.195 − 2.577 × 0.196) × 240), which imply ROI
lower bounds of 2.73 and 0.49, respectively. By comparison, Baicker, Cutler and Song (2010) found that
spending fell by $3.27, and absenteeism costs fell by $2.73, for every dollar spent on wellness programs.

30

4.3.3

IV versus OLS

Across a variety of outcomes, we find very little evidence that our intervention had any
effect in its first year. As shown above, our results differ from many prior studies that find
significant reductions in health expenditures and absenteeism. One possible reason for this
discrepancy is the presence of advantageous selection bias in these other studies, which are
generally not randomized controlled trials. A second possibility is that there is something
unique about our setting. We investigate these competing explanations by performing a
typical observational (OLS) analysis and comparing its results to those of our experimental
estimates.28 Specifically, we estimate

Yi = α + γPi + ΓXi + εi ,

(5)

where Yi is the outcome variable as in (4), Pi is an indicator for participating in the screening
and HRA, and Xi is a vector of variables that control for potentially non-random selection
into participation.
We estimate two variants of equation (5). The first is an instrumental variables (IV)
specification that includes observations for individuals in the treatment or control groups,
and uses treatment assignment as an instrument for completing the screening and HRA. The
second variant estimates equation (5) using OLS, restricted to individuals in the treatment
group. For each of these two variants, we estimate three specifications similar to those used
for the ITT analysis described above (no controls, strata fixed effects, and post-Lasso).29
This generates six estimates for each outcome variable. Table 5 reports the results for our
28

This observational analysis was not specified in our pre-analysis plan.
To select controls for the post-Lasso IV specification, we follow the “triple” selection strategy proposed in
Chernozhukov, Hansen and Spindler (2015). This strategy first estimates three Lasso regressions of (1) the
(endogenous) focal independent variable on all potential controls and instruments; (2) the focal independent
variable on all potential controls; and (3) the outcome on all potential controls. It then forms a 2SLS
estimator using instruments selected in step (1) and all controls selected in any of the steps (1)-(3). When
the instrument is randomly assigned, as it is in our setting, the set of controls selected in steps (1)-(2) above
will be the same, in expectation. Thus, we form our 2SLS estimator using treatment assignment as the
instrument and controls selected in Lasso steps (2) or (3) of this algorithm.
29

31

primary outcomes of interest. The results for all pre-specified administrative and survey
outcomes are reported in Appendix Tables A.3e-A.3f.
As in our previous ITT analysis, the IV estimates reported in columns (1)-(3) are small
and indistinguishable from zero for nearly every outcome. By contrast, the observational estimates reported in columns (4)-(6) are frequently large and statistically significant. Moreover,
the IV estimate rules out the OLS estimate for several key outcomes. Based on our most
precise and well-controlled specification (post-Lasso), the OLS monthly spending estimate of
−$88.1 (row 1, column (6)) lies outside the 95 percent confidence interval of the IV estimate
of $38.5 with a standard error of $58.8 (row 1, column (3)). For participation in the 2017
IL Marathon/10K/5K, the OLS estimate of 0.024 lies outside the 99 percent confidence interval of the corresponding IV estimate of -0.011 (standard error = 0.011). For campus gym
visits, the OLS estimate of 2.160 lies just inside the 95 percent confidence interval of the
corresponding IV estimate of 0.757 (standard error = 0.656). Under the assumption that the
IV (RCT) estimates are unbiased, these difference imply that even after conditioning on a
rich set of controls, participants selected into our workplace wellness program on the basis of
lower-than-average contemporaneous spending and higher-than-average health activity. This
is consistent with the evidence presented in Section 3.2 that pre-existing spending is lower,
and pre-existing behaviors are healthier, among participants than among non-participants.
In addition, the observational estimates presented in columns (4)-(6) are in line with
estimates from previous observational studies, which suggests that our setting is not particularly unique. In the spirit of LaLonde (1986), these estimates demonstrate that even
well-controlled observational analyses can suffer from significant selection bias in our setting, suggesting that similar biases might be at play in other wellness program settings as
well.

32

5

Conclusion

This paper presents a first set of findings from the Illinois Workplace Wellness Study. We
find a large but diminishing effect of incentives on wellness participation. At large incentive
levels, further increases have little effect on participation and thus primarily just increase
compensation for inframarginal participants. We also find that employees who chose to
participate in our wellness program were less likely to be in the bottom quartile of the
income distribution, and already had lower medical spending and healthier behaviors than
non-participants prior to our intervention. These selection results have two implications.
First, they suggest that workplace wellness programs shift costs onto low-income employees
with high health care spending and poor health habits. Second, the large magnitude of
our spending estimate suggests the primary value of wellness programs to firms may be their
potential to attract and retain workers with low health care costs. All else equal, reducing the
share of non-participating employees by just 4.5 percentage points would lower total medical
spending in our setting by an amount sufficient to pay for our entire wellness program.
After one year we find no significant effects of our wellness program on the many outcomes we examine, with two exceptions: employees are more likely to have received a health
screening and to believe that the employer places a priority on worker health and safety. Our
null results are economically meaningful: we can rule out 83 percent of the medical spending
and absenteeism estimates from the prior literature, along with the average ROIs calculated
by Baicker, Cutler and Song (2010) in a widely cited meta-analysis. Our OLS estimate is
consistent with results from the prior literature, but ruled out by our IV estimate, suggesting
that non-RCT studies in this literature suffer from selection bias.
Although we fail to find effects of our workplace wellness program on the majority of
the outcomes in our analysis, we emphasize that we have only examined outcomes in the
first year following randomization. It is possible that meaningful effects may emerge in later
years, although if there is sufficient employee turnover then these benefits may not accrue
to the employer who made the initial investment in workplace wellness. The net effect is
33

therefore an empirical question. As a part of the Illinois Workplace Wellness Study, we will
continue to collect data so that we can estimate long-run effects in future research.

References
Abadie, Alberto, Susan Athey, Guido Imbens, and Jeffrey Wooldridge. 2017.
“When Should You Adjust Standard Errors for Clustering?” NBER Working Paper
#24003.
Abraham, Jean, and Katie M White. 2017. “Tracking The Changing Landscape Of
Corporate Wellness Companies.” Health Affairs, 36(2): 222–228.
Aldana, Steven G. 2001. “Financial impact of health promotion programs: a comprehensive review of the literature.” American Journal of Health Promotion, 15(5): 296–320.
Askelson, Natoshia M, Brad Wright, Suzanne Bentler, Elizabeth T Momany,
and Peter Damiano. 2017. “Iowa’s Medicaid Expansion Promoted Healthy Behaviors
But Was Challenging To Implement And Attracted Few Participants.” Health Affairs,
36(5): 799–807.
Baicker, Katherine, David Cutler, and Zirui Song. 2010. “Workplace wellness programs can generate savings.” Health Affairs, 29(2): 304–311.
Baxter, Siyan, Kristy Sanderson, Alison J Venn, C Leigh Blizzard, and Andrew J Palmer. 2014. “The relationship between return on investment and quality of
study methodology in workplace health promotion programs.” American Journal of Health
Promotion, 28(6): 347–363.
Belloni, Alexandre, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen. 2014. “Inference
on treatment effects after selection among high-dimensional controls.” The Review of Economic Studies, 81(2): 608–650.
Bhattacharya, Jayanta, and William B Vogt. 2014. “Employment and adverse selection
in health insurance.” Vol. 17, 79–104.
Bruhn, Miriam, and David McKenzie. 2009. “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization
in Practice in Development Field Experiments.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 1(4): 200–232.
Burd, Steven A. 2009. “How Safeway Is Cutting Health-Care Costs.” The Wall Street
Journal. http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB124476804026308603.
Cawley, John. 2014. “The Affordable Care Act permits greater financial rewards for weight
loss: a good idea in principle, but many practical concerns remain.” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 33(3): 810–820.
Chapman, Larry S. 2012. “Meta-evaluation of worksite health promotion economic return
studies: 2012 update.” American Journal of Health Promotion, 26(4): 1–12.
34

Charness, Gary, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. “Incentives to exercise.” Econometrica,
77(3): 909–931.
Chernozhukov, Victor, Christian Hansen, and Martin Spindler. 2015. “PostSelection and Post-Regularization Inference in Linear Models with Many Controls and
Instruments.” American Economic Review, 105(5): 486–90.
Chiappori, Pierre-André, and Bernard Salanié. 2013. “Asymmetric information in
insurance markets: Predictions and tests.” In Handbook of insurance. 397–422. Springer.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2014. “Do Physicians’ Financial Incentives
Affect Medical Treatment and Patient Health?” American Economic Review, 104(4): 1320–
1349.
Cutler, David M, and Richard J Zeckhauser. 2000. “The anatomy of health insurance.”
Handbook of health economics, 1: 563–643.
Fout, Betty, Daniel Weinberg, Nicholas Bill, Katherine Kahn, and Cary Sennett.
2013. “Evaluation of the Senior Risk Reduction Demonstration (SRRD) Under Medicare:
Final Evaluation Report.” IMPAQ International.
Geruso, Michael, and Timothy J. Layton. 2017. “Selection in Health Insurance Markets
and Its Policy Remedies.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(4): 23–50.
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Karen Norberg, Steven Kymes, Michael E Chernew,
Dustin Stwalley, Leah Kemper, and William Peck. 2013. “A hospital system’s
wellness program linked to health plan enrollment cut hospitalizations but not overall
costs.” Health Affairs, 32(3): 477–485.
Gubler, Timothy, Ian Larkin, and Lamar Pierce. 2017. “Doing well by making well:
The impact of corporate wellness programs on employee productivity.” Management Science.
Haisley, Emily, Kevin G Volpp, Thomas Pellathy, and George Loewenstein. 2012.
“The impact of alternative incentive schemes on completion of health risk assessments.”
American Journal of Health Promotion, 26(3): 184–188.
Horwitz, Jill R, Brenna D Kelly, and John E DiNardo. 2013. “Wellness incentives in
the workplace: cost savings through cost shifting to unhealthy workers.” Health Affairs,
32(3): 468–476.
Jaspen, Bruce. 2015. “Employers Boost Wellness Spending 17% From Yoga to Risk
Assessments.” Forbes Online. http://www.forbes.com/sites/brucejapsen/2015/03/
26/employers-boost-wellness-spending-17-from-yoga-to-risk-assessments/
#6a37ebf2350f.
LaLonde, Robert J. 1986. “Evaluating the econometric evaluations of training programs
with experimental data.” The American economic review, 604–620.
Lazear, Edward P. 2000. “Performance pay and productivity.” American Economic Review,

35

90(5): 1346–1361.
Lazear, Edward P., and Paul Oyer. 2012. “Personnel Economics.” The Handbook of
Organizational Economics, 479–519. Princeton University Press.
Liu, Tim, Christos Makridis, Paige Ouimet, and Elena Simintzi. 2017. “Is Cash Still
King: Why Firms Offer Non-Wage Compensation and the Implications for Shareholder
Value.” Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3088067.
Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael Dennis Whinston, Jerry R Green, et al. 1995. Microeconomic theory. Vol. 1, Oxford university press New York.
Mattke, Soeren, Christopher Schnyer, and Kristin R Van Busum. 2012.
“A review of the US workplace wellness market.” The RAND Corporation, Occasional Paper Series, https://www.dol.gov/sites/default/files/ebsa/researchers/
analysis/health-and-welfare/workplacewellnessmarketreview2012.pdf.
Mattke, Soeren, Hangsheng Liu, John Caloyeras, Christina Y Huang, Kristin R
Van Busum, Dmitry Khodyakov, and Victoria Shier. 2013. “Workplace wellness
programs study: Final report.” RAND Health Quarterly, 3(2).
McIntyre, Adrianna, Nicholas Bagley, Austin Frakt, and Aaron Carroll. 2017.
“The dubious empirical and legal foundations of workplace wellness programs.” Health
Matrix, 27: 59.
Meenan, Richard T, Thomas M Vogt, Andrew E Williams, Victor J Stevens,
Cheryl L Albright, and Claudio Nigg. 2010. “Economic evaluation of a worksite obesity prevention and intervention trial among hotel workers in Hawaii.” Journal of occupational and environmental medicine/American College of Occupational and Environmental
Medicine, 52(Suppl 1): S8.
Oyer, Paul. 2008. “Salary or benefits?” In Work, Earnings and Other Aspects of the Employment Relation. 429–467. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Pelletier, Kenneth R. 2011. “A review and analysis of the clinical and cost-effectiveness
studies of comprehensive health promotion and disease management programs at the worksite: update VIII 2008 to 2010.” Journal of occupational and environmental medicine,
53(11): 1310–1331.
Reynolds,
Chelsea. 2010. “Myth Surrounds Reform’s ‘Safeway Amendment.”
Covering
Health.
http://healthjournalism.org/blog/2010/01/
myth-surrounds-reforms-safeway-amendment/.
Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph Stiglitz. 1976. “Equilibrium in competitive insurance
markets: An essay on the economics of imperfect information.” The quarterly journal of
economics, 629–649.
Royer, Heather, Mark Stehr, and Justin Sydnor. 2015. “Incentives, commitments, and
habit formation in exercise: evidence from a field experiment with workers at a fortune-500
company.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(3): 51–84.
36

Ryde, Gemma C, Nicholas D Gilson, Nicola W Burton, and Wendy J Brown.
2013. “Recruitment rates in workplace physical activity interventions: characteristics for
success.” American Journal of Health Promotion, 27(5): e101–e112.
Salop, Joanne, and Steven Salop. 1976. “Self-selection and turnover in the labor market.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 619–627.
Soler, Robin E, Kimberly D Leeks, Sima Razi, David P Hopkins, Matt Griffith,
Adam Aten, Sajal K Chattopadhyay, Susan C Smith, Nancy Habarta, Ron Z
Goetzel, et al. 2010. “A systematic review of selected interventions for worksite health
promotion: the assessment of health risks with feedback.” American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, 38(2): S237–S262.
Spence, Michael. 1973. “Job market signaling.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
87(3): 355–374.
The Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust.
2016a. “Employer Health Benefits: 2016 Annual Survey.” http://files.kff.org/
attachment/Report-Employer-Health-Benefits-2016-Annual-Survey.
The
Kaiser
Family
Foundation
and
Health
Research
and
Educational
Trust.
2016b.
“Workplace
Wellness
Programs
Characteristics
and
Requirements.”
http://files.kff.org/attachment/
Issue-Brief-Workplace-Wellness-Programs-Characteristics-and-Requirements.
The Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust. 2017.
“Employer Health Benefits: 2017 Annual Survey.” http://files.kff.org/attachment/
Report-Employer-Health-Benefits-Annual-Survey-2017.
Urminsky, Oleg, Christian Hansen, and Victor Chernozhukov. 2016. “Using DoubleLasso Regression for Principled Variable Selection.”
Volpp, Kevin G, David A Asch, Robert Galvin, and George Loewenstein. 2011.
“Redesigning employee health incentives—lessons from behavioral economics.” New England Journal of Medicine, 365(5): 388–390.
Volpp, Kevin G, Leslie K John, Andrea B Troxel, Laurie Norton, Jennifer
Fassbender, and George Loewenstein. 2008. “Financial incentive–based approaches
for weight loss: a randomized trial.” Journal of the American Medical Association,
300(22): 2631–2637.
Westfall, Peter H, and S Stanley Young. 1993. Resampling-based multiple testing:
Examples and methods for p-value adjustment. Vol. 279, John Wiley & Sons.
Wilson, Charles. 1977. “A model of insurance markets with incomplete information.” Journal of Economic theory, 16(2): 167–207.

37

Figure 1: Experimental Design of the Illinois Workplace Wellness Study
Initial Pool:
Benefits-Eligible Employees
(12,459)

Summer
2016

Study Sample:
Online Survey
(4,834)

Control Group
(1,534)

Summer
2016

Biometric
Screening
+ HRA Reward

Fall
2016

Fall Wellness
Activity Reward

Spring
2017

Spring Wellness
Activity Reward

Treatment Group
(3,300)

A25
(551)

A75
(549)

B25
(552)

B75
(548)

C25
(551)

C75
(549)

$0
(246)

$0
(270)

$100
(305)

$100
(339)

$200
(335)

$200
(353)

$25
(102)

$75
(167)

$25
(82)

$25
(115)

$75
(132)

Follow-Up Sample
(4,834)

Summer
2017

$75
(197)

$25
(94)

$25
(133)

$75
(174)

$75
(189)

$25
(99)

$75
(159)

Continuation conditional
on completion
Random assignment

Online Survey
(3,568)

Continuation by
choice

38

Figure 2: Employee participation rates in the first year of the workplace wellness program

62.0%
60%

57.6%

56.0%

39.5%

40%
39

32.1%
27.4%
22.4%
20%

0%
Registered
Screening

Completed
Screening

Completed
Screening
and HRA

Registered
Completed
Fall Activity Fall Activity

Notes: Participation rates are measured as a fraction of the treatment group (N = 3, 300).

Registered
Spring
Activity

Completed
Spring
Activity

Figure 3: Marginal cost of inducing additional participation into health screening/HRA and fall activities
Screening

Avg. variable cost

participation

Screening

Avg. variable cost

Fall Activity

participation

Avg. variable cost

Fall Activity

participation

75%

$250

Avg. variable cost

participation

75%

$250

62.5% $224

$224

58.5%

58.4%
$200
53.6%

50%

46.9%

$200

$178

$178
50%

$154

$154

$150

$150

$127

$127
28.4%
$100

$79

25%

25%

33.6%

29.3%
$100

24.5% $79

21.2%

$50

0%

$0
$0 (N=1,100)

$100 (N=1,100)
$200 (N=1,100)
Screening Incentive

$50

0%

$25 (N=1,654)
$75 (N=1,646)
Activity Incentive

$0
$0 (N=1,100)

(a) Screening participation and costs

$25 (N=1,654)
$75 (N=1,646)
Activity Incentive

(b) Fall activities participation and costs

40

$2,000

$10,000
Screening incentive

Activity incentive

Screening incentive

Activity incentive

$7,500
Marginal Cost

$1,500
Marginal Cost

$100 (N=1,100)
$200 (N=1,100)
Screening Incentive

$1,000

$500

$5,000

$2,500

$0

$0
0%

25%
50%
Screening Participation Rate

(c) Marginal cost of additional screening participation

75%

0%

15%
30%
Fall Activity Participation Rate

45%

(d) Marginal cost of additional fall activity participation

Notes: Panels (a) and (b) plot health screening participation rates (PR) and average variable costs (AVC) as a function of screening and activity
incentives, separately for screening and fall activity particpation. Vertical bars display 95% confidence intervals on the difference in means relative to
the lowest reward group. AVC includes costs of the health screening, HRA, and wellness activities. Panels (c) and (d) plot the implied marginal
costs (MC), calculated as MC= ∆AVC
∆PR . The MC of the control group (PR=0 percent) is set equal to 0.

Figure 4: Pre-intervention medical spending among treatment group, by participation status

35%
Not Screened

Screened

30%
Pearson's chi-squared test for equality: p-value < 0.001
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality: p-value = .007

25%
20%
41

15%
10%
5%
0%
$0

(0-25]

(25-148]

(148-428]

(428-1252]

(1252-2338]

Monthly spending in pre-period (dollars)

2338+

Notes: Data are from claims covering the period July 2015 - July 2016 (N = 2, 187). The first two bins ($0 and (0 − 25]) include 25 percent of those
not screened. The remaining five bins were defined to include 25, 25, 15, 5, and 5 percent of those not screened, respectively. The null hypothesis of
the Pearson’s chi-squared and the non-parametric Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests is that the two samples are drawn from the same distribution.

Figure 5: Pre-intervention salary among treatment group, by participation status

35%
Not Screened

Screened

30%
Pearson's chi-squared test for equality: p-value < 0.001
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality: p-value = .002

25%
20%
42

15%
10%
5%
0%
($0-39]

($39-52]

($52-74]

($74-100]

($100-131]

Salary in pre-period (thousands of dollars)

$131+

Notes: Salary was measured on June 1, 2016 (N = 3, 257). The six bins were defined to include 25, 25, 25, 15, 5, and 5 percent of employees not
screened, respectively. The null hypothesis of the Pearson’s chi-squared and the non-parametric Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests is that the two samples
are drawn from the same distribution.

Figure 6: Marginal Selection on Medical Spending and Health Behaviors
$600

Monthly spending in pre-period (dollars)

$481

$400

$386

$376

$200

$0

Percent IL Marathon/5K/10K participant (2014-2016)

20%
$455

15.8%

15.2%
17.1%
15.6%

10%

0%
$0
$100/$200
Screening Incentive

$25
$75
Activity Incentive

(a) Total spending (dollars/month)

$0
$100/$200
Screening Incentive

$25
$75
Activity Incentive

(b) IL Marathon/10K/5K participant (2014-2016)

43

8.63

Campus gym visits in pre-period (days/year)

7.65

10

7.97
6.77

5

0
$0
$100/$200
Screening Incentive

$25
$75
Activity Incentive

(c) Gym visits (days/year)
Notes: Each panel presents average characteristics of members of different treatment arms, conditional on having completed the screenings/HRA.
The $100 and $200 treatment groups are combined. Vertical bars represent 95% confidence intervals on the difference in means between each pair of
treatment groups.

Figure 7: Post-intervention medical spending by treatment status
$750

100%
$576
$568

90.7%

89.9%

Control (N=1,031)

Treatment (N=2,207)

75%

$500
50%
$250
25%

$0

Control (N=1,031)

0%

Treatment (N=2,207)

(a) Average monthly spending (dollars)

(b) Probability of any spending

30%
Control

25%

Treated

Pearson's chi-squared test for equality: p-value = .844
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality: p-value = .533

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
$0

(0-59]

(59-197]

(197-538]

(538-1207]

(1207-2049]

Monthly spending in post-period (dollars)

2049+

(c) Histogram of average monthly spending, by quantile of control group spending (N = 3, 238)
Notes: Results based on health care claims over the 12-month period August 2016 - July 2017. The null
hypothesis of the Pearson’s chi-squared and the non-parametric Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests is that the two
samples are drawn from the same distribution.

44

Figure 8: Comparison of experimental estimates to prior studies

-50%

-25%
0%
Percent Change in Medical Spending (ITT)
RCT Estimate
Prior Studies:

[ ] 95% Confidence
N = 22Interval
Ruled Out

-75%

25%

-50%
-25%
0%
Percent Change in Absenteeism (ITT)

RCT Estimate
Prior Studies:

Not Ruled Out

[ ] 95% Confidence
N = 23Interval
Ruled Out

25%

Not Ruled Out

45
-100%

-50%

0%
50%
100%
Percent Change in Medical Spending (TOT)

RCT Estimate
Prior Studies:

N = Interval
33
[ ] 95% Confidence
Ruled Out

150%

Not Ruled Out

-75%

-50%

RCT Estimate
Prior Studies:

-75%
-50%
-25%
0%
25%
(a) Medical spending
estimates
Percent Change in Absenteeism (TOT)
RCT Estimate
Prior Studies:

-25%
0%
25%
Percent Change in Absenteeism (TOT)

[ ] 95% Confidence Interval
Ruled Out

[ ] 95% Confidence
N = 37Interval
Ruled Out

50%
75%
(b) Absenteeism

50%

75%

Not Ruled Out

estimates

Not Ruled Out

Notes: Each figure shows the distribution of N point estimates from prior workplace wellness studies. Panel (a) plots intent-to-treat (ITT) and
treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) estimates for medical spending. Panel (b) plots corresponding estimates for absenteeism. The point estimates from
our own study (“RCT Estimate”), and their associated confidence intervals, are taken from Table 6, Column 3, for medical spending, and Table 4,
Column 4 and Table 5, Column 3 for absenteeism. Our RCT estimates and confidence intervals are plotted in order to demonstrate the share of
prior study point estimates we are able to rule out. Appendix Table B.1 provides the full details of this meta-analysis.

Table 1a: Means of Study Variables at Baseline
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Enrolled in Study
Not in
Study

Control

A25

A75

B25

B75

C25

C75

p-value

Sample
size

0.536
0.430
0.362
0.774
0.234
0.189
0.197
0.298
0.324

0.426
0.323
0.340
0.841
0.244
0.255
0.249
0.196
0.443

0.423
0.332
0.330
0.828
0.243
0.254
0.252
0.198
0.439

0.434
0.322
0.333
0.847
0.239
0.259
0.260
0.202
0.439

0.429
0.326
0.330
0.835
0.246
0.255
0.250
0.199
0.438

0.427
0.325
0.336
0.832
0.237
0.261
0.248
0.203
0.434

0.421
0.328
0.330
0.842
0.241
0.258
0.250
0.198
0.436

0.432
0.326
0.335
0.831
0.244
0.266
0.240
0.204
0.435

1.000
1.000
0.999
0.971
1.000
0.999
0.996
1.000
1.000

12,459
12,459
12,459
12,459
12,459
12,459
12,459
12,459
12,459

0.885
0.359
0.822
0.072
0.085
0.198
0.657
0.050
0.729
0.586
0.989
0.392
0.310
0.308
0.545
0.308
0.545
0.723
0.772
0.038
0.618
0.187
0.396
0.836
0.771

0.895
0.350
0.799
0.051
0.075
0.216
0.641
0.051
0.751
0.613
0.982
0.387
0.339
0.247
0.577
0.328
0.569
0.736
0.797
0.036
0.628
0.162
0.385
0.858
0.797

0.900
0.397
0.791
0.060
0.062
0.186
0.658
0.035
0.729
0.619
0.991
0.395
0.324
0.326
0.530
0.281
0.499
0.710
0.734
0.020
0.622
0.168
0.426
0.829
0.780

0.891
0.399
0.799
0.062
0.089
0.185
0.636
0.054
0.712
0.612
0.993
0.380
0.346
0.292
0.507
0.292
0.538
0.710
0.774
0.024
0.580
0.192
0.408
0.841
0.746

0.876
0.392
0.843
0.075
0.089
0.204
0.625
0.044
0.741
0.604
0.987
0.392
0.327
0.288
0.518
0.266
0.571
0.670
0.712
0.022
0.607
0.175
0.389
0.847
0.781

0.887
0.370
0.797
0.071
0.096
0.211
0.656
0.056
0.701
0.563
0.995
0.401
0.323
0.279
0.552
0.290
0.530
0.708
0.715
0.034
0.583
0.176
0.435
0.842
0.791

0.902
0.381
0.827
0.075
0.100
0.171
0.656
0.055
0.721
0.603
0.989
0.375
0.321
0.299
0.514
0.313
0.545
0.701
0.760
0.026
0.581
0.164
0.408
0.852
0.796

0.817
0.387
0.161
0.513
0.224
0.481
0.836
0.553
0.562
0.433
0.509
0.979
0.790
0.078
0.202
0.273
0.239
0.286
0.003
0.168
0.325
0.711
0.534
0.818
0.399

4,834
4,834
4,834
4,833
4,833
4,833
4,830
4,829
4,834
4,834
4,834
4,834
4,834
4,834
4,834
4,834
4,833
4,830
4,833
4,833
4,828
4,831
4,832
4,832
4,831

1,534

551

549

552

548

551

549
1.000
0.165

4,834
4,817

A. Stratification Variables
Male
Age 50+
Age 37-49
White
Salary Q1 (bottom quartile)
Salary Q2
Salary Q3
Faculty
Academic Staff
B. 2016 Survey Variables

46

Ever screened
Physically active
Trying to be active
Current smoker (cigarettes)
Current smoker (other)
Former smoker
Drinker
Heavy drinker
Chronic condition
Excellent or v. good health
Not poor health
Physical problems
Lots of energy
Bad emotional health
Overweight
High BP/cholesterol/glucose
Sedentary
Pharmaceutical drug utilization
Physician/ER utilization
Hospital utilization
Any sick days in past year
Worked 50+ hours/week
Very satisfied with job
Very or somewhat satisfied with job
Management priority on health/safety
Sample size
Joint balance test for panel A (p-value)
Joint balance test for panel B (p-value)

7,625

Notes: Columns (1)-(8) report unweighted means for different, nonoverlapping subsets of university employees. Column (9) reports the p-value from a joint
test of equality of the seven coefficients reported in Columns (2)-(8). We also estimate a seemingly unrelated regression model to test whether the variables
listed in a particular panel predict enrollment into any of the seven control or treatment groups. The joint balance test row reports the p-value from jointly
testing whether all regression coefficients across all seven study groups are equal to 0.

Table 1b: Means of Study Variables at Baseline, Continued
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Enrolled in Study
Not in
Study

Control

A25

A75

B25

B75

C25

C75

pvalue

Sample
size

579
54
345
105
0.888

505
67
283
103
0.899

452
61
242
97
0.911

393
53
231
75
0.886

486
54
281
113
0.901

458
49
239
124
0.862

502
80
263
95
0.869

494
50
299
103
0.886

0.570
0.327
0.711
0.843
0.311

8,095
8,095
8,095
8,095
8,095

Sick leave (days/year)
Annual salary (dollars)
IL Marathon/10K/5K (2014-2016)
Campus gym visits (days/year)

5.89
73,927
0.072
6.14

6.04
61,528
0.107
7.36

6.53
62,774
0.120
5.44

5.82
60,579
0.120
8.68

5.69
60,906
0.118
7.68

6.36
62,719
0.111
5.69

6.24
61,042
0.102
5.34

6.13
62,407
0.137
7.86

0.393
0.875
0.597
0.119

12,459
12,221
12,459
12,459

Sample size
Joint balance test for panel C (p-value)
Joint balance test for panel D (p-value)

7,625

1,534

551

549

552

548

551

549
0.220
0.437

3,222
4,770

C. Health Claims Variables (2015-2016)
Total spending (dollars/month)
Office spending
Hospital spending
Drug spending
Non-zero medical spending
D. Health Behavior and Productivity Variables

47

Notes: Columns (1)-(8) report unweighted means for different, nonoverlapping subsets of university employees. Column (9) reports the p-value from a joint
test of equality of the seven coefficients reported in Columns (2)-(8). We also estimate a seemingly unrelated regression model to test whether the variables
listed in a particular panel predict enrollment into any of the seven control or treatment groups. The joint balance test row reports the p-value from jointly
testing whether all regression coefficients across all seven study groups are equal to 0.

Table 2: Wellness Program Participation by Treatment Group
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.117***
(0.021)
0.157***
(0.021)
0.049***
(0.017)
0.444***
(0.017)

A. Screening and HRA Completion
Group B* or C* (B25, B75, C25, C75)

0.136***
(0.018)

0.137***
(0.018)

Group B* (B25, B75)

0.049***
(0.017)
0.445***
(0.017)

0.050***
(0.017)
0.444***
(0.017)

0.116***
(0.021)
0.156***
(0.021)
0.049***
(0.017)
0.445***
(0.017)

3,300
No
0.000

3,300
Yes
0.000

3,300
No
0.000

3,300
Yes
0.000

0.039**
(0.018)
0.049***
(0.019)
0.126***
(0.015)
0.182***
(0.014)

Group C* (C25, C75)
Group *75 (A75, B75, C75)
Constant
N
Strata FE
F Test

B. Fall 2016 Activity Completion
Group B* or C* (B25, B75, C25, C75)

0.044***
(0.016)

0.044***
(0.016)

Group B* (B25, B75)

0.124***
(0.015)
0.182***
(0.014)

0.126***
(0.015)
0.182***
(0.014)

0.039**
(0.019)
0.048**
(0.019)
0.124***
(0.015)
0.182***
(0.014)

3,300
No
0.000

3,300
Yes
0.000

3,300
No
0.000

3,300
Yes
0.000

0.049***
(0.017)
0.040**
(0.017)
0.117***
(0.014)
0.136***
(0.013)
3,300
Yes
0.000

Group C* (C25, C75)
Group *75 (A75, B75, C75)
Constant
N
Strata FE
F Test

C. Spring 2017 Activity Completion
Group B* or C* (B25, B75, C25, C75)

0.045***
(0.015)

0.045***
(0.015)

Group B* (B25, B75)

0.116***
(0.014)
0.137***
(0.013)

0.117***
(0.014)
0.136***
(0.013)

0.049***
(0.017)
0.040**
(0.017)
0.116***
(0.014)
0.137***
(0.013)

3,300
No
0.000

3,300
Yes
0.000

3,300
No
0.000

Group C* (C25, C75)
Group *75 (A75, B75, C75)
Constant
N
Strata FE
F Test

Notes: This table reports rates of completion for the three components of the wellness program tied to
completion incentives. Each column in each panel reports estimates from a separate regression estimated
over individuals in one of the six treatment groups (A25, A75, B25, B75, C25, and C75). The outcome in
each regression is an indicator for completing the program component indicated by the panel, and the
independent variables are indicators for inclusion in the specified treatment groups. The regressions
reported in Columns (2) and (4) are the same as those reported in Columns (1) and (3), respectively, but
with the addition of strata fixed effects. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. A */**/***
indicates significance at the 10/5/1% level using conventional inference.

48

Table 3: Selection on Medical Spending, Income, and Health Behaviors
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mean

N

Completed
Screening
and HRA

Completed
Fall Activity

Completed
Spring
Activity

479

2187

0.886

2187

-116.1**
(52.3)
[0.080]
0.049***
(0.014)
[0.009]

-60.9
(43.6)
[0.401]
0.049***
(0.014)
[0.006]

-62.8
(44.3)
[0.271]
0.045***
(0.014)
[0.021]

Annual salary (dollars) [admin]

61,736

3257

Salary Q1 (bottom quartile) [admin]

0.242

3300

-782.7
(1248.3)
[0.519]
-0.069***
(0.015)
[0.000]

-3363.9***
(1191.6)
[0.009]
-0.022
(0.016)
[0.398]

-3429.1***
(1251.8)
[0.012]
-0.036**
(0.017)
[0.121]

IL Marathon/10K/5K (2014-2016) [admin]

0.118

3300

Campus gym visits (days/year) [admin]

6.780

3300

0.089***
(0.011)
[0.000]
2.178**
(0.885)
[0.013]

0.111***
(0.014)
[0.000]
1.006
(1.024)
[0.328]

0.090***
(0.016)
[0.000]
1.629
(1.132)
[0.153]

Selection Variable
A. Baseline Medical Spending
Total spending (dollars/month) [admin]

Non-zero medical spending [admin]

B. Baseline Income

C. Baseline Health Behaviors

Notes: Column (1) reports the mean among subjects assigned to treatment. Columns (3)-(5) report the
difference in means between those who completed the participation outcome and those who did not.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. A */**/*** indicates significance at the 10/5/1% level
using conventional inference, i.e., not adjusting for multiple outcomes. Family-wise p-values, reported in
brackets, adjust for the number of outcome (selection) variables in each family and are estimated using
10,000 bootstraps.

49

Table 4: Treatment Effects (ITT)
Outcome Variable

(1)
Mean

(2)
No Controls

(3)
Strata FEs

(4)
Post-Lasso

573.6

7.6
(48.4)
[0.950]
N=3,238

17.8
(48.5)
[0.941]
N=3,238

30.9
(36.7)
[0.903]
N=3,152

-8.4
(26.5)
[0.950]
N=3,238

-5.3
(25.7)
[0.941]
N=3,238

-6.1
(12.0)
[0.947]
N=3,152

-6.1
(10.0)
[0.950]
N=3,238

-5.7
(9.8)
[0.941]
N=3,238

-2.0
(4.4)
[0.947]
N=3,152

19.4
(30.7)
[0.950]
N=3,238

26.2
(32.0)
[0.899]
N=3,238

22.1
(27.7)
[0.903]
N=3,152

-0.007
(0.011)
[0.950]
N=3,238

-0.007
(0.011)
[0.941]
N=3,238

0.002
(0.010)
[0.947]
N=3,152

-0.000
(0.005)
[0.969]
N=4,146

-0.002
(0.005)
[0.687]
N=4,146

-0.001
(0.004)
[0.771]
N=4,130

-0.012
(0.010)
[0.538]
N=4,834

-0.013
(0.010)
[0.395]
N=4,834

-0.012
(0.009)
[0.467]
N=4,753

0.229
(0.226)
[0.538]
N=4,782

0.292
(0.204)
[0.395]
N=4,782

0.195
(0.196)
[0.546]
N=4,711

0.057***
(0.015)
[0.001]
N=3,566

0.057***
(0.015)
[0.001]
N=3,566

0.050***
(0.014)
[0.003]
N=3,514

0.002
(0.008)
[0.975]
N=4,834

0.002
(0.008)
[0.962]
N=4,834

-0.005
(0.006)
[0.471]
N=4,817

-0.062
(0.733)
[0.975]
N=4,834

-0.068
(0.721)
[0.962]
N=4,834

0.401
(0.360)
[0.471]
N=4,817

0.039***
(0.009)
[0.001]
N=3,567

0.042***
(0.009)
[0.000]
N=3,567

0.036***
(0.008)
[0.000]
N=3,557

A. Medical Spending
Total spending (dollars/month) [admin]

N=3,238
Drug spending [admin]

132.0

N=3,238
Office spending [admin]

69.5

N=3,238
Hospital spending [admin]

310.7

N=3,238
Non-zero medical spending [admin]

0.902

N=3,238
B. Employment and Productivity
Annual salary (share of baseline salary) [admin]

0.059

N=4,146
Job terminated [admin]

0.112

N=4,834
Sick leave (days/year) [admin]

6.336

N=4,782
Management priority on health/safety [survey]

0.790

N=3,566
C. Health Status and Behaviors
IL Marathon/10K/5K 2017 [admin]

0.066

N=4,834
Campus gym visits (days/year) [admin]

5.839

N=4,834
Ever screened [survey]

0.942

N=3,567

Notes: Each row and column reports estimates from a separate regression, where observations include individuals in the
control or treatment groups. The outcome in each regression is specified by the table row. The focal independent variable is
an indicator for inclusion in the treatment group, and the control strategy is specified by the column. Post-Lasso controls
include covariates selected by Lasso to predict the dependent variable. The set of potential predictors include baseline
values of all available variables in the same family of outcomes, strata variables, and the baseline (2016) survey variables
reported in Table 1a, as well as all two-way interactions between these predictors. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. A */**/*** indicates significance at the 10/5/1% level using conventional inference, i.e., not adjusting for
multiple outcomes. Family-wise p-values, reported in brackets, adjust for the number of outcome variables in each family.
See Appendix Tables A.2a-A.2f for results for all outcomes, categorized by family.

50

Table 5: Treatment Effects: IV and OLS
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

IV
Outcome Variable

(5)

(6)

OLS

No Controls

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

No Controls

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

12.4
(78.8)
N=3,238

29.1
(78.4)
N=3,238

45.0
(59.1)
N=3,152

-132.7*
(68.0)
N=2,207

-157.8**
(65.5)
N=2,207

-98.4
(61.1)
N=2,140

Drug spending [admin]

-13.7
(43.2)
N=3,238

-8.6
(41.6)
N=3,238

-12.8
(20.4)
N=3,152

-26.5
(27.3)
N=2,207

-34.9
(26.9)
N=2,207

-7.3
(12.0)
N=2,140

Office spending [admin]

-9.9
(16.2)
N=3,238

-9.3
(15.9)
N=3,238

-3.2
(6.8)
N=3,152

12.1
(7.5)
N=2,207

9.4
(7.2)
N=2,207

8.8*
(5.1)
N=2,140

Hospital spending [admin]

31.6
(50.0)
N=3,238

42.8
(51.7)
N=3,238

40.6
(45.0)
N=3,152

-113.9**
(55.1)
N=2,207

-123.0**
(52.1)
N=2,207

-101.1*
(54.2)
N=2,140

-0.012
(0.018)
N=3,238

-0.011
(0.018)
N=3,238

0.004
(0.016)
N=3,152

0.060***
(0.014)
N=2,207

0.042***
(0.013)
N=2,207

0.036***
(0.012)
N=2,140

Annual salary (share of baseline salary) [admin]

-0.000
(0.008)
N=4,146

-0.003
(0.008)
N=4,146

-0.003
(0.008)
N=4,130

0.004
(0.005)
N=2,840

0.005
(0.005)
N=2,840

0.006
(0.005)
N=2,828

Job terminated [admin]

-0.022
(0.018)
N=4,834

-0.023
(0.017)
N=4,834

-0.023
(0.017)
N=4,753

-0.082***
(0.011)
N=3,300

-0.080***
(0.011)
N=3,300

-0.068***
(0.011)
N=3,244

Sick leave (days/year) [admin]

0.397
(0.391)
N=4,782

0.506
(0.351)
N=4,782

0.311
(0.336)
N=4,711

0.266
(0.273)
N=3,265

0.030
(0.254)
N=3,265

-0.072
(0.249)
N=3,216

Management priority on health/safety [survey]

0.087***
(0.023)
N=3,566

0.087***
(0.023)
N=3,566

0.077***
(0.021)
N=3,514

-0.004
(0.017)
N=2,410

-0.012
(0.017)
N=2,410

-0.007
(0.016)
N=2,376

IL Marathon/10K/5K 2017 [admin]

0.003
(0.014)
N=4,834

0.003
(0.013)
N=4,834

-0.011
(0.011)
N=4,817

0.059***
(0.008)
N=3,300

0.054***
(0.008)
N=3,300

0.024***
(0.006)
N=3,287

Campus gym visits (days/year) [admin]

-0.110
(1.309)
N=4,834

-0.121
(1.276)
N=4,834

0.757
(0.656)
N=4,817

3.527***
(0.813)
N=3,300

3.849***
(0.804)
N=3,300

2.160***
(0.425)
N=3,287

Ever screened [survey]

0.060***
(0.014)
N=3,567

0.065***
(0.013)
N=3,567

0.056***
(0.012)
N=3,557

0.073***
(0.011)
N=2,410

0.074***
(0.010)
N=2,410

0.061***
(0.009)
N=2,404

A. Medical Spending
Total spending (dollars/month) [admin]

Non-zero medical spending [admin]

B. Employment and Productivity

C. Health Status and Behaviors

Notes: Each row and column reports estimates from a separate regression. The outcome in each regression is specified by
the table row, and the (endogenous) focal independent variable is an indicator for completing the screening and HRA. For
the IV specifications (columns (1)-(3)), the instrument is an indicator for inclusion in the treatment group, and
observations include individuals in the control or treatment groups. For the OLS specifications (columns (4)-(6)), there is
no instrument and observations are restricted to individuals in the treatment group. The control strategy is specified by the
column. Post-Lasso controls include covariates selected by Lasso to predict either the dependent variable or the focal
independent variable. The set of potential predictors include baseline values of all available variables in the same family of
outcomes, strata variables, and the baseline (2016) survey variables reported in Table 1a, as well as all two-way interactions
between these predictors. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. A */**/*** indicates significance at the
10/5/1% level using conventional inference.

51

Table 6: Winsorized Medical Spending Treatment Effects
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

30.9
(36.7)
[-41.0, 102.8]

13.7
(23.1)
[-31.7, 59.0]

15.4
(19.4)
[-22.7, 53.4]

14.6
(13.5)
[-11.8, 41.0]

10.4
(9.7)
[-8.7, 29.5]

3,152
0

3,152
0.5

3,152
1

3,152
2.5

3,152
5

45.0
(59.1)
[-70.8, 160.8]

16.2
(37.9)
[-58.1, 90.5]

18.5
(31.6)
[-43.5, 80.5]

20.0
(21.8)
[-22.8, 62.8]

15.3
(15.7)
[-15.5, 46.0]

3,152
0

3,152
0.5

3,152
1

3,152
2.5

3,152
5

A. ITT Estimates (Post-Lasso)
Total spending (dollars/month) [admin]

N
Winsorization (percent)
B. IV Estimates (Post-Lasso)
Total spending (dollars/month) [admin]

N
Winsorization (percent)

Notes: Each row and column reports estimates from a separate regression, where observations include
individuals in the control or treatment groups. The outcome in each regression is winsorized (top-coded)
average monthly medical spending over the first 12 months of the intervention, winsorized at the level
indicated in each column. Regressions are weighted by the number of months of coverage. In Panel A
(ITT), the focal independent variable is an indicator for inclusion in the treatment group, and all
regressions include the same controls as the ITT post-Lasso specification reported in row 1 and column (4)
of Table 4. In Panel B (IV), the (endogenous) focal independent variable is an indicator for completing the
screening and HRA, the instrument is an indicator for inclusion in the treatment group, and all regressions
include the same controls as the IV post-Lasso specification reported in row 1 and column (3) of Table 5.
Column (1) replicates the (non-winsorized) ITT and IV post-Lasso results reported in Table 4 and Table 5.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, and 95% confidence intervals are reported in brackets.
A */**/*** indicates significance at the 10/5/1% level using conventional inference.

52

Appendix A: For Online Publication Only
Figure A.1 reports how participation in the spring wellness activities varies as a function
of rewards. It also reports the marginal cost of the additional participation induced by
each reward. An increase in the size of screening incentives has modest, positive effects
on participation rates for spring wellness activities; an increase in the size of participation
incentives has a large, positive effect.
Panels (a)-(c) of Figure A.2 shows how selection on prior probability of nonzero medical
spending, prior annual salary, and prior annual salary in the first quartile varies as a function
of the monetary incentives assigned to study participants. Panel (a) shows that, at larger
incentive levels, participants are slightly less likely to have non-zero medical spending in the
prior year. Panels (b) and (c) show little effect of the size of incentives on selection with
respect to annual salary
Tables A.1a - A.1d provide selection results for the full set of pre-specified variables shown
in Tables 1a and 1b using equation (3). Tables A.2a - A.2f provide the causal, intent-totreat (ITT) effect of our intervention on all pre-specified variables. In addition, Table A.2g
provides results for different measures of medical utilization. Tables A.3a - A.3g provide the
corresponding IV and OLS estimates of equation (5) for all pre-specified variables.
Tables A.4a and A.4b report intent-to-treat estimates for medical spending from a model
that allows the treatment effect to vary by treatment group. We do not find statistically
significant treatment effects for any treatment group in any of these specifications.
As discussed in the main text, we find two statistically significant effects of our intervention: an increase in the number of employees who ever received a health screening, and an
increase in employees who believe that management places a priority on health and safety.
Because our monetary incentives were varied independently across the health screening and
wellness activity components of our study, these incentives can be used as instruments for
participation in those components. Table A.5 reports estimates of those IV regressions. For
both outcomes, the effects are driven by the health screening component of our intervention.
Finally, Table A.7 provides the definition, data source, and time period for every variable
presented in the paper.

53

Figure A.1: Marginal cost of inducing additional participation into spring wellness activities
Spring Activity

Avg. variable cost

Spring Activity

participation

Avg. variable cost

participation

75%

$250
$224
$200
$178

50%

$154
$150
$127
28.3%
24.4%

25%

$100

23.5%

$79
19.5%

16.6%
$50

0%

$0
$0 (N=1,100)

$100 (N=1,100)
$200 (N=1,100)
Screening Incentive

$25 (N=1,654)
$75 (N=1,646)
Activity Incentive

(a) Spring activities participation and costs
$10,000
Screening incentive

Activity incentive

Marginal Cost

$7,500

$5,000

$2,500

$0
0%

15%
30%
Spring Activity Participation Rate

45%

(b) Marginal cost of additional spring participation
Notes: Panel (a) plots health screening participation rates (PR) and average variable costs (AVC) as a
function of screening and activity incentives. Vertical bars display 95% confidence intervals on the
difference in means relative to the lowest reward group. AVC includes costs of the health screening, HRA,
and wellness activities. Panel (b) plots the implied marginal costs (MC), calculated as MC= ∆AVC
∆PR . The
MC of the control group (PR=0 percent) is set equal to 0. We omit the MC for group C because its
marginal PR is negative.

54

Figure A.2: Marginal Selection on Non-zero Spending and Income
$61
92.6%

89.7%

89.9%

91.1%

50%

0%

$61

$62

$62

$0
$100/$200
Screening Incentive

$25
$75
Activity Incentive

$60
Salary in pre-period (thousands of dollars)

Percent with nonzero medical spending in pre-period

100%

$40

$20

$0
$0
$100/$200
Screening Incentive

$25
$75
Activity Incentive

(a) Non-zero Medical Spending

(b) Salary annual (thousands of dollars)

55
Percent with salary Q1 in pre-period (bottom quartile)

30%
21.4%

21.6%

20.7%

20.5%

20%

10%

0%
$0
$100/$200
Screening Incentive

$25
$75
Activity Incentive

(c) Salary Q1 (bottom quartile)
Notes: Each panel presents average characteristics of members of different treatment arms, conditional on having completed the screenings/HRA.
The $100 and $200 treatment groups are combined. Vertical bars represent 95% confidence intervals on the difference in means between each pair of
treatment groups.

-100

-50

Treatment effect (ITT)
0
50

100

Figure A.3: Pre-intervention medical spending among treatment group, by participation status

0

5

10
15
Percent winsorization (top-coding)

ITT estimate (no controls)
ITT estimate (Lasso controls)

20

25

95% CI (no controls)
95% CI (Lasso controls)

Notes: The figure reports how intent-to-treat (ITT) medical spending effect estimates vary by the degree of winsorization
(top-coding) of medical spending, calculated as the average monthly health care spending over the first 12 months of the
wellness program (August 2016 - July 2017). Each ITT estimate is estimated from a separate regression of medical
spending (winsorized at the level indicated by the horizontal axis) on an indicator for inclusion in the treatment group.
Observations include individuals in the control or treatment groups, and regressions are weighted by the number of months
of medical coverage. The solid orange line reports estimates from a specification that includes no controls. The dashed
black line reports estimates from a specification that includes the same controls as the ITT post-Lasso specification
reported in row 1 and column (4) of Table 4. Shaded regions indicate 95% confidence intervals based on robust standard
errors. The values of the ITT point estimates and confidence intervals for selected levels of winsorization are reported in
Panel A (no controls) and Panel B (post-Lasso controls) of Table A.6.

56

Table A.1a: Selection on Strata Variables
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Completed
Screening and
HRA

Completed Fall
Activity

Completed
Spring Activity

-0.058***
(0.017)
[0.005]
-0.027
(0.016)
[0.270]
0.008
(0.017)
[0.850]
-0.001
(0.013)
[0.962]
-0.069***
(0.015)
[0.000]
0.038**
(0.015)
[0.052]
0.044***
(0.015)
[0.019]
-0.051***
(0.014)
[0.002]
0.077***
(0.017)
[0.000]

-0.114***
(0.019)
[0.000]
-0.015
(0.018)
[0.399]
0.026
(0.019)
[0.398]
0.046***
(0.014)
[0.005]
-0.022
(0.016)
[0.398]
0.028
(0.017)
[0.346]
0.043**
(0.017)
[0.067]
-0.098***
(0.014)
[0.000]
0.077***
(0.019)
[0.001]

-0.149***
(0.020)
[0.000]
-0.020
(0.019)
[0.473]
0.017
(0.020)
[0.473]
0.036**
(0.015)
[0.072]
-0.036**
(0.017)
[0.121]
0.058***
(0.019)
[0.012]
0.040**
(0.019)
[0.121]
-0.097***
(0.015)
[0.000]
0.086***
(0.021)
[0.000]

Selection Variable

Mean

N

Male [admin]

0.428

3300

Age 50+ [admin]

0.327

3300

Age 37-49 [admin]

0.332

3300

White [admin]

0.836

3300

Salary Q1 (bottom quartile) [admin]

0.242

3300

Salary Q2 [admin]

0.259

3300

Salary Q3 [admin]

0.250

3300

Faculty [admin]

0.201

3300

Academic Staff [admin]

0.437

3300

Notes: Column (1) reports the mean among subjects assigned to treatment. Columns (3)-(5) report the difference in means
between those who completed the participation outcome and those who did not. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. A */**/*** indicates significance at the 10/5/1% level using conventional inference, i.e., not adjusting for
multiple outcomes. Family-wise p-values, reported in brackets, adjust for the number of outcome (selection) variables in
each family and are estimated using 10,000 bootstraps.

57

Table A.1b: Selection on Health Care Utilization Variables
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mean

N

Completed
Screening and
HRA

Completed Fall
Activity

Completed
Spring Activity

479

2187

Office spending [admin]

59

2187

Hospital spending [admin]

268

2187

Drug spending [admin]

104

2187

Non-zero medical spending [admin]

0.886

2187

Pharmaceutical drug utilization [survey]

0.706

3297

Physician/ER utilization [survey]

0.748

3300

Hospital utilization [survey]

0.027

3299

-116.1**
(52.3)
[0.080]
2.3
(7.2)
[0.750]
-104.1***
(40.3)
[0.045]
-14.8
(20.6)
[0.728]
0.049***
(0.014)
[0.009]
-0.001
(0.016)
[0.929]
0.050***
(0.015)
[0.003]
-0.012**
(0.006)
[0.072]

-60.9
(43.6)
[0.401]
-5.7
(6.5)
[0.637]
-47.4*
(28.3)
[0.295]
-4.3
(25.5)
[0.869]
0.049***
(0.014)
[0.006]
0.029*
(0.018)
[0.183]
0.070***
(0.016)
[0.000]
-0.005
(0.006)
[0.400]

-62.8
(44.3)
[0.271]
-12.5**
(6.2)
[0.144]
-62.9**
(27.5)
[0.102]
14.5
(28.9)
[0.637]
0.045***
(0.014)
[0.021]
0.040**
(0.019)
[0.059]
0.061***
(0.017)
[0.002]
-0.012**
(0.006)
[0.059]

Selection Variable
Total spending (dollars/month) [admin]

Notes: Column (1) reports the mean among subjects assigned to treatment. Columns (3)-(5) report the difference in means
between those who completed the participation outcome and those who did not. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. A */**/*** indicates significance at the 10/5/1% level using conventional inference, i.e., not adjusting for
multiple outcomes. Family-wise p-values, reported in brackets, adjust for the number of outcome (selection) variables in
each family and are estimated using 10,000 bootstraps.

58

Table A.1c: Selection on Employment and Productivity Variables
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Completed
Screening and
HRA

Completed Fall
Activity

Completed
Spring Activity

0.473*
(0.267)
[0.144]
-782.7
(1248.3)
[0.519]
0.043**
(0.017)
[0.049]
-0.058***
(0.013)
[0.000]
0.002
(0.017)
[0.899]
0.023*
(0.013)
[0.193]
0.012
(0.015)
[0.618]

0.705**
(0.290)
[0.015]
-3363.9***
(1191.6)
[0.009]
0.057***
(0.019)
[0.008]
-0.065***
(0.014)
[0.000]
0.002
(0.019)
[0.921]
0.043***
(0.013)
[0.005]
0.033**
(0.016)
[0.062]

0.617**
(0.312)
[0.048]
-3429.1***
(1251.8)
[0.012]
0.051**
(0.020)
[0.046]
-0.064***
(0.014)
[0.000]
0.002
(0.021)
[0.911]
0.029**
(0.014)
[0.092]
0.035**
(0.017)
[0.092]

Selection Variable

Mean

N

Sick leave (days/year) [admin]

6.274

3296

Annual salary (dollars) [admin]

61,736

3257

Any sick days in past year [survey]

0.600

3296

Worked 50+ hours/week [survey]

0.173

3297

Very satisfied with job [survey]

0.408

3299

Very or somewhat satisfied with job [survey]

0.845

3299

Management priority on health/safety [survey]

0.782

3299

Notes: Column (1) reports the mean among subjects assigned to treatment. Columns (3)-(5) report the difference in means
between those who completed the participation outcome and those who did not. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. A */**/*** indicates significance at the 10/5/1% level using conventional inference, i.e., not adjusting for
multiple outcomes. Family-wise p-values, reported in brackets, adjust for the number of outcome (selection) variables in
each family and are estimated using 10,000 bootstraps.

59

Table A.1d: Selection on Health and Behavior Variables
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Selection Variable

Mean

N

Completed
Screening and HRA

Completed Fall
Activity

Completed Spring
Activity

IL Marathon/10K/5K (2014-2016) [admin]

0.118

3300

Campus gym visits (days/year) [admin]

6.780

3300

Ever screened [survey]

0.892

3300

Physically active [survey]

0.382

3300

Trying to be active [survey]

0.809

3300

Current smoker (cigarettes) [survey]

0.065

3299

Current smoker (other) [survey]

0.085

3299

Former smoker [survey]

0.196

3299

Drinker [survey]

0.645

3296

Heavy drinker [survey]

0.049

3295

Chronic condition [survey]

0.726

3300

Excellent or v. good health [survey]

0.602

3300

Not poor health [survey]

0.989

3300

Physical problems [survey]

0.388

3300

Lots of energy [survey]

0.330

3300

Bad emotional health [survey]

0.288

3300

Overweight [survey]

0.533

3300

High BP/cholesterol/glucose [survey]

0.295

3300

Sedentary [survey]

0.542

3299

0.089***
(0.011)
[0.000]
2.178**
(0.885)
[0.013]
0.033***
(0.011)
[0.029]
-0.015
(0.017)
[0.909]
0.045***
(0.014)
[0.014]
-0.041***
(0.009)
[0.000]
-0.034***
(0.010)
[0.011]
-0.009
(0.014)
[0.909]
0.026
(0.017)
[0.707]
-0.010
(0.008)
[0.798]
0.024
(0.016)
[0.707]
-0.022
(0.017)
[0.798]
0.003
(0.004)
[0.909]
0.022
(0.017)
[0.798]
-0.031*
(0.017)
[0.502]
0.001
(0.016)
[0.944]
0.057***
(0.017)
[0.015]
-0.007
(0.016)
[0.909]
0.117***
(0.017)
[0.000]

0.111***
(0.014)
[0.000]
1.006
(1.024)
[0.328]
0.042***
(0.011)
[0.002]
0.013
(0.019)
[0.964]
0.033**
(0.015)
[0.293]
-0.047***
(0.008)
[0.000]
-0.046***
(0.010)
[0.000]
-0.004
(0.015)
[0.964]
0.021
(0.019)
[0.889]
-0.005
(0.008)
[0.964]
0.038**
(0.017)
[0.293]
0.032*
(0.019)
[0.626]
0.005
(0.004)
[0.703]
-0.015
(0.019)
[0.964]
0.006
(0.018)
[0.964]
-0.019
(0.018)
[0.889]
0.015
(0.019)
[0.964]
-0.022
(0.018)
[0.866]
0.115***
(0.019)
[0.000]

0.090***
(0.016)
[0.000]
1.629
(1.132)
[0.153]
0.035***
(0.012)
[0.046]
0.040*
(0.020)
[0.445]
0.030*
(0.016)
[0.445]
-0.053***
(0.008)
[0.000]
-0.066***
(0.009)
[0.000]
-0.019
(0.016)
[0.770]
0.009
(0.020)
[0.929]
-0.006
(0.009)
[0.929]
0.023
(0.018)
[0.770]
0.060***
(0.020)
[0.045]
0.007*
(0.003)
[0.445]
-0.027
(0.020)
[0.750]
0.014
(0.020)
[0.929]
-0.041**
(0.018)
[0.280]
-0.008
(0.021)
[0.929]
-0.034*
(0.019)
[0.445]
0.110***
(0.020)
[0.000]

Notes: Column (1) reports the mean among subjects assigned to treatment. Columns (3)-(5) report the difference in means
between those who completed the participation outcome and those who did not. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. A */**/*** indicates significance at the 10/5/1% level using conventional inference, i.e., not adjusting for
multiple outcomes. Family-wise p-values, reported in brackets, adjust for the number of outcome (selection) variables in
each family and are estimated using 10,000 bootstraps.

60

Table A.2a: Treatment Effects (ITT)
Outcome Variable

(1)
Mean

(2)
No Controls

(3)
Strata FEs

(4)
Post-Lasso

573.6

7.6
(48.4)
[0.950]
N=3,238

17.8
(48.5)
[0.941]
N=3,238

30.9
(36.7)
[0.903]
N=3,152

-8.4
(26.5)
[0.950]
N=3,238

-5.3
(25.7)
[0.941]
N=3,238

-6.1
(12.0)
[0.947]
N=3,152

-6.1
(10.0)
[0.950]
N=3,238

-5.7
(9.8)
[0.941]
N=3,238

-2.0
(4.4)
[0.947]
N=3,152

19.4
(30.7)
[0.950]
N=3,238

26.2
(32.0)
[0.899]
N=3,238

22.1
(27.7)
[0.903]
N=3,152

-0.007
(0.011)
[0.950]
N=3,238

-0.007
(0.011)
[0.941]
N=3,238

0.002
(0.010)
[0.947]
N=3,152

A. Medical Spending [admin]
Total spending (dollars/month) [admin]

N=3,238
Drug spending [admin]

132.0

N=3,238
Office spending [admin]

69.5

N=3,238
Hospital spending [admin]

310.7

N=3,238
Non-zero medical spending [admin]

0.902

N=3,238

Notes: The outcomes in this table constitute a single family of outcomes for calculating family-wise p-values. Each row and
column reports estimates from a separate regression, where observations include individuals in the control or treatment
groups. The outcome in each regression is specified by the table row. The focal independent variable is an indicator for
inclusion in the treatment group, and the control strategy is specified by the column. Post-Lasso controls include covariates
selected by Lasso to predict the dependent variable. The set of potential predictors include baseline values of all available
variables in the same family of outcomes, strata variables, and the baseline (2016) survey variables reported in Table 1a, as
well as all two-way interactions between these predictors. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. A */**/***
indicates significance at the 10/5/1% level using conventional inference, i.e., not adjusting for multiple outcomes.
Family-wise p-values, reported in brackets, adjust for the number of outcome variables in the table.

Table A.2b: Treatment Effects (ITT)
Outcome Variable

(1)
Mean

(2)
No Controls

(3)
Strata FEs

(4)
Post-Lasso

0.725

-0.011
(0.016)
[0.851]
N=3,567

-0.009
(0.015)
[0.864]
N=3,567

-0.002
(0.014)
[0.894]
N=2,433

0.003
(0.016)
[0.863]
N=3,567

0.002
(0.015)
[0.919]
N=3,567

0.018
(0.017)
[0.632]
N=2,433

0.003
(0.006)
[0.851]
N=3,567

0.004
(0.006)
[0.864]
N=3,567

0.006
(0.007)
[0.632]
N=2,433

A. Medical Spending [survey]
Pharmaceutical drug utilization [survey]

N=3,567
Physician/ER utilization [survey]

0.745

N=3,567
Hospital utilization [survey]

0.026

N=3,567

Notes: The outcomes in this table constitute a single family of outcomes for calculating family-wise p-values. See notes to
Appendix Table A.2a for additional details.

61

Table A.2c: Treatment Effects (ITT)
Outcome Variable

(1)
Mean

(2)
No Controls

(3)
Strata FEs

(4)
Post-Lasso

0.059

-0.000
(0.005)
[0.969]
N=4,146

-0.002
(0.005)
[0.687]
N=4,146

-0.001
(0.004)
[0.771]
N=4,130

-0.012
(0.010)
[0.538]
N=4,834

-0.013
(0.010)
[0.395]
N=4,834

-0.012
(0.009)
[0.467]
N=4,753

0.229
(0.226)
[0.538]
N=4,782

0.292
(0.204)
[0.395]
N=4,782

0.195
(0.196)
[0.546]
N=4,711

B. Employment and Productivity [admin]
Annual salary (share of baseline salary) [admin]

N=4,146
Job terminated [admin]

0.112

N=4,834
Sick leave (days/year) [admin]

6.336

N=4,782

Notes: The outcomes in this table constitute a single family of outcomes for calculating family-wise p-values. See notes to
Appendix Table A.2a for additional details.

62

Table A.2d: Treatment Effects (ITT)
Outcome Variable

(1)
Mean

(2)
No Controls

(3)
Strata FEs

(4)
Post-Lasso

0.576

0.005
(0.018)
[0.997]
N=3,565

0.007
(0.017)
[0.994]
N=3,565

0.012
(0.016)
[0.961]
N=3,514

-0.004
(0.013)
[0.997]
N=3,566

-0.008
(0.012)
[0.991]
N=3,566

0.005
(0.010)
[0.961]
N=3,515

-0.025
(0.017)
[0.749]
N=3,564

-0.028
(0.017)
[0.631]
N=3,564

-0.029*
(0.015)
[0.376]
N=3,512

-0.004
(0.013)
[0.997]
N=3,564

-0.006
(0.013)
[0.994]
N=3,564

-0.014
(0.012)
[0.876]
N=3,512

0.057***
(0.015)
[0.001]
N=3,566

0.057***
(0.015)
[0.001]
N=3,566

0.050***
(0.014)
[0.003]
N=3,514

0.009
(0.018)
[0.995]
N=3,562

0.005
(0.018)
[0.994]
N=3,562

-0.003
(0.018)
[0.978]
N=3,510

-0.023
(0.261)
[0.997]
N=3,567

-0.050
(0.259)
[0.994]
N=3,567

-0.151
(0.238)
[0.961]
N=3,515

-0.018
(0.018)
[0.930]
N=3,567

-0.013
(0.018)
[0.991]
N=3,567

-0.021
(0.017)
[0.866]
N=3,515

0.008
(0.018)
[0.995]
N=3,562

0.000
(0.018)
[0.994]
N=3,562

0.002
(0.018)
[0.978]
N=3,511

0.031**
(0.012)
[0.095]
N=3,561

0.026**
(0.012)
[0.208]
N=3,561

0.027**
(0.011)
[0.142]
N=3,511

0.019
(0.017)
[0.908]
N=3,561

0.012
(0.017)
[0.991]
N=3,561

0.013
(0.016)
[0.961]
N=3,511

B. Employment and Productivity [survey]
Any sick days in past year [survey]

N=3,565
Worked 50+ hours/week [survey]

0.150

N=3,566
Very satisfied with job [survey]

0.387

N=3,564
Very or somewhat satisfied with job [survey]

0.835

N=3,564
Management priority on health/safety [survey]

0.790

N=3,566
Happier at work than last year [survey]

0.542

N=3,562
Presenteeism [survey]

23.900

N=3,567
Feel very productive at work [survey]

0.449

N=3,567
Received promotion [survey]

0.472

N=3,562
Job search very likely [survey]

0.139

N=3,561
Job search somewhat/very likely [survey]

0.337

N=3,561

Notes: The outcomes in this table constitute a single family of outcomes for calculating family-wise p-values. See notes to
Appendix Table A.2a for additional details.

63

Table A.2e: Treatment Effects (ITT)
Outcome Variable

(1)
Mean

(2)
No Controls

(3)
Strata FEs

(4)
Post-Lasso

0.066

0.002
(0.008)
[0.975]
N=4,834

0.002
(0.008)
[0.962]
N=4,834

-0.005
(0.006)
[0.471]
N=4,817

-0.062
(0.733)
[0.975]
N=4,834

-0.068
(0.721)
[0.962]
N=4,834

0.401
(0.360)
[0.471]
N=4,817

C. Health Status and Behaviors [admin]
IL Marathon/10K/5K 2017 [admin]

N=4,834
Campus gym visits (days/year) [admin]

5.839

N=4,834

Notes: The outcomes in this table constitute a single family of outcomes for calculating family-wise p-values. See notes to
Appendix Table A.2a for additional details.

64

Table A.2f: Treatment Effects (ITT)
Outcome Variable

(1)
Mean

(2)
No Controls

(3)
Strata FEs

(4)
Post-Lasso

0.942

0.039***
(0.009)
[0.001]
N=3,567

0.042***
(0.009)
[0.000]
N=3,567

0.036***
(0.008)
[0.000]
N=3,557

0.015
(0.017)
[0.991]
N=3,567

0.016
(0.017)
[0.981]
N=3,567

-0.009
(0.012)
[0.977]
N=3,557

0.005
(0.014)
[1.000]
N=3,567

0.007
(0.014)
[0.996]
N=3,567

0.017
(0.012)
[0.723]
N=3,557

-0.023**
(0.009)
[0.139]
N=3,566

-0.022**
(0.009)
[0.159]
N=3,566

-0.009*
(0.005)
[0.589]
N=3,556

-0.012
(0.017)
[0.998]
N=3,565

-0.013
(0.016)
[0.983]
N=3,565

-0.003
(0.013)
[0.992]
N=3,555

-0.003
(0.008)
[1.000]
N=3,563

-0.002
(0.008)
[0.999]
N=3,563

0.003
(0.007)
[0.992]
N=3,553

-0.004
(0.016)
[1.000]
N=3,565

0.003
(0.015)
[0.999]
N=3,565

0.001
(0.012)
[0.997]
N=3,555

-0.004
(0.018)
[1.000]
N=3,567

-0.007
(0.017)
[0.996]
N=3,567

-0.024
(0.015)
[0.689]
N=3,557

-0.004
(0.003)
[0.952]
N=3,567

-0.005
(0.003)
[0.863]
N=3,567

-0.005*
(0.003)
[0.675]
N=3,557

-0.007
(0.018)
[1.000]
N=3,567

-0.003
(0.017)
[0.999]
N=3,567

0.001
(0.015)
[0.997]
N=3,557

0.040**
(0.016)
[0.176]
N=3,566

0.039**
(0.016)
[0.166]
N=3,566

0.027*
(0.014)
[0.530]
N=3,556

0.017
(0.016)
[0.977]
N=3,566

0.015
(0.016)
[0.981]
N=3,566

0.021
(0.015)
[0.723]
N=3,556

0.009
(0.018)
[0.999]
N=3,567

0.018
(0.017)
[0.980]
N=3,567

0.027**
(0.011)
[0.162]
N=3,557

0.005
(0.017)
[1.000]
N=3,567

0.015
(0.016)
[0.981]
N=3,567

0.020
(0.013)
[0.699]
N=3,557

0.001
(0.018)
[1.000]
N=3,565

-0.002
(0.017)
[0.999]
N=3,565

-0.008
(0.013)
[0.977]
N=3,555

C. Health Status and Behaviors [survey]
Ever screened [survey]

N=3,567
Physically active [survey]

0.381

N=3,567
Trying to be active [survey]

0.825

N=3,567
Current smoker (cigarettes) [survey]

0.060

N=3,566
Drinker [survey]

0.672

N=3,565
Heavy drinker [survey]

0.047

N=3,563
Chronic condition [survey]

0.735

N=3,565
Excellent or v. good health [survey]

0.564

N=3,567
Not poor health [survey]

0.990

N=3,567
Physical problems [survey]

0.403

N=3,567
Lots of energy [survey]

0.309

N=3,566
Bad emotional health [survey]

0.311

N=3,566
Overweight [survey]

0.562

N=3,567
High BP/cholesterol/glucose [survey]

0.324

N=3,567
Sedentary [survey]

0.560

N=3,565

Notes: The outcomes in this table constitute a single family of outcomes for calculating family-wise p-values. See notes to
Appendix Table A.2a for additional details.

65

Table A.2g: Treatment Effects (ITT)
Outcome Variable

(1)
Mean

(2)
No Controls

(3)
Strata FEs

(4)
Post-Lasso

0.578

-0.029
(0.019)
[0.521]
N=3,162

-0.027
(0.018)
[0.564]
N=3,162

-0.011
(0.015)
[0.956]
N=3,145

-0.005
(0.018)
[0.954]
N=3,165

-0.002
(0.017)
[0.991]
N=3,165

0.011
(0.014)
[0.955]
N=3,145

0.007
(0.016)
[0.954]
N=3,166

0.009
(0.016)
[0.967]
N=3,166

0.022
(0.014)
[0.535]
N=3,145

-0.008
(0.014)
[0.954]
N=3,175

-0.006
(0.013)
[0.977]
N=3,175

-0.001
(0.012)
[0.984]
N=3,147

-0.007
(0.011)
[0.954]
N=3,238

-0.007
(0.011)
[0.967]
N=3,238

0.001
(0.010)
[0.984]
N=3,152

-0.022
(0.038)
[0.954]
N=3,238

-0.009
(0.036)
[0.991]
N=3,238

0.010
(0.018)
[0.956]
N=3,152

0.032
(0.025)
[0.698]
N=3,238

0.032
(0.026)
[0.721]
N=3,238

0.010
(0.018)
[0.956]
N=3,152

-0.011
(0.024)
[0.954]
N=3,238

-0.006
(0.024)
[0.991]
N=3,238

0.027
(0.017)
[0.543]
N=3,152

D. Medical Utilization (Quantity) [admin]
Time to first claim <= 1 month [admin]

N=3,162
Time to first claim <= 2 months [admin]

0.689

N=3,165
Time to first claim <= 3 months [admin]

0.758

N=3,166
Time to first claim <= 6 months [admin]

0.842

N=3,175
Time to first claim <= 12 months [admin]

0.902

N=3,238
Pharmaceutical events (days/month) [admin]

0.822

N=3,238
Physician office visits (days/month) [admin]

0.308

N=3,238
Hospital stays (days/month) [admin]

0.490

N=3,238

Notes: The outcomes in this table constitute a single family of outcomes for calculating family-wise p-values. See notes to
Appendix Table A.2a for additional details.

66

Table A.3a: Treatment Effects: IV and OLS
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

IV
Outcome Variable

(5)

(6)

OLS

No Controls

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

No Controls

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

12.4
(78.8)
N=3,238

29.1
(78.4)
N=3,238

45.0
(59.1)
N=3,152

-132.7*
(68.0)
N=2,207

-157.8**
(65.5)
N=2,207

-98.4
(61.1)
N=2,140

Drug spending [admin]

-13.7
(43.2)
N=3,238

-8.6
(41.6)
N=3,238

-12.8
(20.4)
N=3,152

-26.5
(27.3)
N=2,207

-34.9
(26.9)
N=2,207

-7.3
(12.0)
N=2,140

Office spending [admin]

-9.9
(16.2)
N=3,238

-9.3
(15.9)
N=3,238

-3.2
(6.8)
N=3,152

12.1
(7.5)
N=2,207

9.4
(7.2)
N=2,207

8.8*
(5.1)
N=2,140

Hospital spending [admin]

31.6
(50.0)
N=3,238

42.8
(51.7)
N=3,238

40.6
(45.0)
N=3,152

-113.9**
(55.1)
N=2,207

-123.0**
(52.1)
N=2,207

-101.1*
(54.2)
N=2,140

-0.012
(0.018)
N=3,238

-0.011
(0.018)
N=3,238

0.004
(0.016)
N=3,152

0.060***
(0.014)
N=2,207

0.042***
(0.013)
N=2,207

0.036***
(0.012)
N=2,140

A. Medical Spending [admin]
Total spending (dollars/month) [admin]

Non-zero medical spending [admin]

Notes: Each row and column reports estimates from a separate regression. The outcome in each regression is
specified by the table row, and the (endogenous) focal independent variable is an indicator for completing the
screening and HRA. For the IV specifications (columns (1)-(3)), the instrument is an indicator for inclusion in the
treatment group, and observations include individuals in the control or treatment groups. For the OLS
specifications (columns (4)-(6)), there is no instrument and observations are restricted to individuals in the
treatment group. The control strategy is specified by the column. Post-Lasso controls include covariates selected by
Lasso to predict either the dependent variable or the focal independent variable. The set of potential predictors
include baseline values of all available variables in the same family of outcomes, strata variables, and the baseline
(2016) survey variables reported in Table 1a, as well as all two-way interactions between these predictors. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. A */**/*** indicates significance at the 10/5/1% level using
conventional inference.

67

Table A.3b: Treatment Effects: IV and OLS
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

No Controls

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

No Controls

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

Pharmaceutical drug utilization [survey]

-0.017
(0.024)
N=3,567

-0.013
(0.023)
N=3,567

0.000
(0.020)
N=2,433

0.022
(0.019)
N=2,410

0.018
(0.019)
N=2,410

0.018
(0.019)
N=1,641

Physician/ER utilization [survey]

0.004
(0.024)
N=3,567

0.002
(0.023)
N=3,567

0.025
(0.025)
N=2,433

0.024
(0.019)
N=2,410

0.020
(0.019)
N=2,410

0.016
(0.022)
N=1,641

Hospital utilization [survey]

0.005
(0.008)
N=3,567

0.006
(0.008)
N=3,567

0.012
(0.010)
N=2,433

-0.009
(0.007)
N=2,410

-0.010
(0.008)
N=2,410

-0.015
(0.010)
N=1,641

IV
Outcome Variable

(6)

OLS

A. Medical Spending [survey]

Notes: See notes to Appendix Table A.3a.

Table A.3c: Treatment Effects: IV and OLS
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

IV

(5)

(6)

OLS

No
Controls

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

No
Controls

Annual salary (share of baseline salary) [admin]

-0.000
(0.008)
N=4,146

-0.003
(0.008)
N=4,146

-0.003
(0.008)
N=4,130

0.004
(0.005)
N=2,840

0.005
(0.005)
N=2,840

0.006
(0.005)
N=2,828

Job terminated [admin]

-0.022
(0.018)
N=4,834

-0.023
(0.017)
N=4,834

-0.023
(0.017)
N=4,753

-0.082***
(0.011)
N=3,300

-0.080***
(0.011)
N=3,300

-0.068***
(0.011)
N=3,244

Sick leave (days/year) [admin]

0.397
(0.391)
N=4,782

0.506
(0.351)
N=4,782

0.311
(0.336)
N=4,711

0.266
(0.273)
N=3,265

0.030
(0.254)
N=3,265

-0.072
(0.249)
N=3,216

Outcome Variable
B. Employment and Productivity [admin]

Notes: See notes to Appendix Table A.3a.

68

Table A.3d: Treatment Effects: IV and OLS
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

IV

(5)

(6)

OLS

No
Controls

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

No
Controls

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

Any sick days in past year [survey]

0.007
(0.027)
N=3,565

0.011
(0.026)
N=3,565

0.021
(0.024)
N=3,514

0.004
(0.021)
N=2,409

-0.004
(0.021)
N=2,409

-0.020
(0.019)
N=2,376

Worked 50+ hours/week [survey]

-0.006
(0.020)
N=3,566

-0.013
(0.018)
N=3,566

0.008
(0.015)
N=3,515

-0.037**
(0.016)
N=2,409

-0.034**
(0.015)
N=2,409

-0.009
(0.012)
N=2,376

Very satisfied with job [survey]

-0.038
(0.027)
N=3,564

-0.042
(0.026)
N=3,564

-0.043*
(0.023)
N=3,512

-0.017
(0.021)
N=2,407

-0.018
(0.021)
N=2,407

-0.012
(0.018)
N=2,373

Very or somewhat satisfied with job [survey]

-0.006
(0.020)
N=3,564

-0.009
(0.020)
N=3,564

-0.020
(0.018)
N=3,512

0.003
(0.016)
N=2,407

0.001
(0.016)
N=2,407

0.005
(0.015)
N=2,373

Management priority on health/safety [survey]

0.087***
(0.023)
N=3,566

0.087***
(0.023)
N=3,566

0.077***
(0.021)
N=3,514

-0.004
(0.017)
N=2,410

-0.012
(0.017)
N=2,410

-0.007
(0.016)
N=2,376

Happier at work than last year [survey]

0.014
(0.027)
N=3,562

0.008
(0.027)
N=3,562

-0.004
(0.027)
N=3,510

0.022
(0.021)
N=2,408

0.023
(0.022)
N=2,408

0.013
(0.021)
N=2,374

Presenteeism [survey]

-0.035
(0.397)
N=3,567

-0.076
(0.391)
N=3,567

-0.227
(0.361)
N=3,515

-0.378
(0.312)
N=2,410

-0.304
(0.314)
N=2,410

-0.334
(0.289)
N=2,376

Feel very productive at work [survey]

-0.027
(0.027)
N=3,567

-0.020
(0.027)
N=3,567

-0.031
(0.026)
N=3,515

-0.040*
(0.021)
N=2,410

-0.043**
(0.021)
N=2,410

-0.036*
(0.020)
N=2,376

Received promotion [survey]

0.012
(0.027)
N=3,562

0.000
(0.027)
N=3,562

0.001
(0.027)
N=3,511

0.032
(0.021)
N=2,408

0.039*
(0.021)
N=2,408

0.024
(0.021)
N=2,375

Job search very likely [survey]

0.047**
(0.018)
N=3,561

0.040**
(0.018)
N=3,561

0.039**
(0.017)
N=3,511

-0.011
(0.015)
N=2,406

-0.013
(0.015)
N=2,406

-0.001
(0.014)
N=2,374

Job search somewhat/very likely [survey]

0.028
(0.026)
N=3,561

0.019
(0.025)
N=3,561

0.018
(0.024)
N=3,511

-0.030
(0.021)
N=2,406

-0.033*
(0.020)
N=2,406

-0.023
(0.019)
N=2,374

Outcome Variable
B. Employment and Productivity [survey]

Notes: See notes to Appendix Table A.3a.

69

Table A.3e: Treatment Effects: IV and OLS
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

IV
Outcome Variable

No Controls

(5)

(6)

OLS

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

No Controls

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

C. Health Status and Behaviors [admin]
IL Marathon/10K/5K 2017 [admin]

0.003
(0.014)
N=4,834

0.003
(0.013)
N=4,834

-0.011
(0.011)
N=4,817

0.059***
(0.008)
N=3,300

0.054***
(0.008)
N=3,300

0.024***
(0.006)
N=3,287

Campus gym visits (days/year) [admin]

-0.110
(1.309)
N=4,834

-0.121
(1.276)
N=4,834

0.757
(0.656)
N=4,817

3.527***
(0.813)
N=3,300

3.849***
(0.804)
N=3,300

2.160***
(0.425)
N=3,287

Notes: See notes to Appendix Table A.3a.

70

Table A.3f: Treatment Effects: IV and OLS
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

IV
Outcome Variable

No Controls

(5)

(6)

OLS

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

No Controls

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

C. Health Status and Behaviors [survey]
Ever screened [survey]

0.060***
(0.014)
N=3,567

0.065***
(0.013)
N=3,567

0.056***
(0.012)
N=3,557

0.073***
(0.011)
N=2,410

0.074***
(0.010)
N=2,410

0.061***
(0.009)
N=2,404

Physically active [survey]

0.023
(0.026)
N=3,567

0.025
(0.026)
N=3,567

-0.016
(0.019)
N=3,557

0.020
(0.021)
N=2,410

0.032
(0.020)
N=2,410

0.027*
(0.015)
N=2,404

Trying to be active [survey]

0.008
(0.021)
N=3,567

0.010
(0.020)
N=3,567

0.028
(0.018)
N=3,557

0.052***
(0.017)
N=2,410

0.049***
(0.017)
N=2,410

0.036**
(0.015)
N=2,404

Current smoker (cigarettes) [survey]

-0.035**
(0.014)
N=3,566

-0.034**
(0.013)
N=3,566

-0.014*
(0.008)
N=3,556

-0.033***
(0.010)
N=2,410

-0.032***
(0.010)
N=2,410

-0.005
(0.006)
N=2,404

Drinker [survey]

-0.018
(0.025)
N=3,565

-0.020
(0.025)
N=3,565

-0.007
(0.021)
N=3,555

0.010
(0.020)
N=2,409

0.015
(0.020)
N=2,409

-0.010
(0.017)
N=2,403

Heavy drinker [survey]

-0.004
(0.012)
N=3,563

-0.002
(0.012)
N=3,563

0.005
(0.010)
N=3,553

-0.003
(0.009)
N=2,408

-0.003
(0.009)
N=2,408

0.001
(0.008)
N=2,402

Chronic condition [survey]

-0.005
(0.024)
N=3,565

0.005
(0.023)
N=3,565

0.000
(0.018)
N=3,555

0.033*
(0.019)
N=2,409

0.037**
(0.019)
N=2,409

0.016
(0.014)
N=2,403

Excellent or v. good health [survey]

-0.007
(0.027)
N=3,567

-0.011
(0.026)
N=3,567

-0.034
(0.023)
N=3,557

-0.015
(0.021)
N=2,410

-0.018
(0.021)
N=2,410

0.005
(0.018)
N=2,404

Not poor health [survey]

-0.006
(0.005)
N=3,567

-0.007
(0.005)
N=3,567

-0.008
(0.005)
N=3,557

0.009*
(0.005)
N=2,410

0.008
(0.005)
N=2,410

0.009*
(0.005)
N=2,404

Physical problems [survey]

-0.010
(0.027)
N=3,567

-0.005
(0.026)
N=3,567

0.000
(0.024)
N=3,557

0.025
(0.021)
N=2,410

0.026
(0.021)
N=2,410

0.011
(0.020)
N=2,404

Lots of energy [survey]

0.060**
(0.025)
N=3,566

0.060**
(0.024)
N=3,566

0.036*
(0.022)
N=3,556

-0.030
(0.020)
N=2,410

-0.026
(0.020)
N=2,410

-0.013
(0.018)
N=2,404

Bad emotional health [survey]

0.026
(0.025)
N=3,566

0.022
(0.025)
N=3,566

0.035
(0.023)
N=3,556

-0.003
(0.020)
N=2,410

-0.005
(0.020)
N=2,410

0.003
(0.019)
N=2,404

Overweight [survey]

0.014
(0.027)
N=3,567

0.027
(0.026)
N=3,567

0.041**
(0.016)
N=3,557

0.031
(0.021)
N=2,410

0.029
(0.021)
N=2,410

-0.005
(0.015)
N=2,404

High BP/cholesterol/glucose [survey]

0.008
(0.025)
N=3,567

0.023
(0.025)
N=3,567

0.028
(0.020)
N=3,557

0.030
(0.020)
N=2,410

0.033*
(0.020)
N=2,410

0.032*
(0.017)
N=2,404

Sedentary [survey]

0.002
(0.027)
N=3,565

-0.003
(0.026)
N=3,565

-0.012
(0.020)
N=3,555

0.074***
(0.021)
N=2,408

0.056***
(0.021)
N=2,408

-0.003
(0.016)
N=2,402

Notes: See notes to Appendix Table A.3a.

71

Table A.3g: Treatment Effects: IV and OLS
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

IV

(5)

(6)

OLS

No
Controls

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

No
Controls

Strata FEs

Post-Lasso

Time to first claim <= 1 month [admin]

-0.047
(0.031)
N=3,162

-0.044
(0.029)
N=3,162

-0.014
(0.024)
N=3,145

0.034
(0.022)
N=2,148

0.009
(0.021)
N=2,148

0.027
(0.018)
N=2,134

Time to first claim <= 2 months [admin]

-0.008
(0.029)
N=3,165

-0.003
(0.027)
N=3,165

0.018
(0.023)
N=3,145

0.053**
(0.021)
N=2,151

0.029
(0.020)
N=2,151

0.032*
(0.017)
N=2,134

Time to first claim <= 3 months [admin]

0.012
(0.027)
N=3,166

0.016
(0.025)
N=3,166

0.035
(0.022)
N=3,145

0.060***
(0.019)
N=2,152

0.034*
(0.019)
N=2,152

0.041**
(0.017)
N=2,134

Time to first claim <= 6 months [admin]

-0.013
(0.023)
N=3,175

-0.010
(0.022)
N=3,175

0.002
(0.020)
N=3,147

0.069***
(0.017)
N=2,159

0.048***
(0.016)
N=2,159

0.051***
(0.015)
N=2,136

Time to first claim <= 12 months [admin]

-0.012
(0.018)
N=3,238

-0.011
(0.018)
N=3,238

0.004
(0.016)
N=3,152

0.060***
(0.014)
N=2,207

0.042***
(0.013)
N=2,207

0.036***
(0.012)
N=2,140

Pharmaceutical events (days/month) [admin]

-0.036
(0.061)
N=3,238

-0.014
(0.058)
N=3,238

0.015
(0.030)
N=3,152

-0.107**
(0.045)
N=2,207

-0.137***
(0.043)
N=2,207

-0.043**
(0.022)
N=2,140

Physician office visits (days/month) [admin]

0.052
(0.041)
N=3,238

0.052
(0.041)
N=3,238

0.016
(0.029)
N=3,152

0.057*
(0.032)
N=2,207

0.043
(0.034)
N=2,207

0.042**
(0.021)
N=2,140

Hospital stays (days/month) [admin]

-0.018
(0.039)
N=3,238

-0.009
(0.038)
N=3,238

0.040
(0.028)
N=3,152

-0.019
(0.030)
N=2,207

-0.039
(0.030)
N=2,207

-0.027
(0.023)
N=2,140

Outcome Variable
D. Medical Utilization (Quantity) [admin]

Notes: See notes to Appendix Table A.3a.

72

Table A.4a: Treatment Effects (ITT) by Treatment Group: Total Health Care Spending

Treatment Group (any)

(1)

(2)

7.59
(48.35)

17.80
(48.52)

Group A* (A25, A75)
Group B* (B25, B75)
Group C* (C25, C75)
Group *75 (A75, B75, C75)

(3)

(4)

12.35
(61.74)
76.58
(94.79)
7.49
(59.36)
-50.66
(59.73)

29.18
(62.12)
84.23
(94.30)
14.71
(59.22)
-51.64
(59.82)

Group A25

(5)

(6)

24.39
(66.05)
163.06
(127.81)
-57.35
(57.16)
-17.37
(69.37)
-49.48
(70.53)
41.80
(80.74)
561.50***
(37.52)
3,238
Yes
0.59

Constant

568.38***
(37.97)

561.40***
(37.50)

568.38***
(37.99)

561.51***
(37.51)

15.51
(65.91)
150.61
(128.19)
-67.61
(58.55)
-41.58
(69.61)
-50.89
(70.27)
38.61
(80.94)
568.38***
(38.00)

N
Strata FE
F Test

3,238
No
0.88

3,238
Yes
0.71

3,238
No
0.91

3,238
Yes
0.91

3,238
No
0.56

Group B25
Group C25
Group A75
Group B75
Group C75

Notes: Each column reports estimates from a separate regression estimated over individuals in the treatment and control
groups in the claims sample. The outcome in each regression is average monthly health care spending over the first 12
months of the wellness program (August 2016 - July 2017), and regressions are weighted by the number of months of
coverage. The independent variables are indicators for inclusion in the specified treatment groups. Regressions reported in
columns (2), (4), and (6) are the same as those reported in columns (1), (3), and (5) respectively, but with the addition of
strata fixed effects. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. A */**/*** indicates significance at the 10/5/1%
level using conventional inference.

73

Table A.4b: Treatment Effects (ITT) by Treatment Group: Any Health Care Spending

Treatment Group (any)

(1)

(2)

-0.007
(0.011)

-0.007
(0.011)

Group A* (A25, A75)
Group B* (B25, B75)
Group C* (C25, C75)
Group *75 (A75, B75, C75)

(3)

(4)

0.005
(0.015)
-0.012
(0.016)
0.000
(0.016)
-0.010
(0.013)

0.005
(0.015)
-0.012
(0.015)
-0.004
(0.015)
-0.006
(0.012)

Group A25

(5)

(6)

0.012
(0.016)
-0.014
(0.018)
-0.010
(0.017)
-0.009
(0.018)
-0.017
(0.018)
-0.003
(0.018)
0.906***
(0.009)
3,238
Yes
0.799

Constant

0.907***
(0.009)

0.906***
(0.009)

0.907***
(0.009)

0.906***
(0.009)

0.017
(0.017)
-0.015
(0.018)
-0.009
(0.018)
-0.018
(0.019)
-0.019
(0.019)
-0.000
(0.018)
0.907***
(0.009)

N
Strata FE
F Test

3,238
No
0.500

3,238
Yes
0.523

3,238
No
0.684

3,238
Yes
0.749

3,238
No
0.581

Group B25
Group C25
Group A75
Group B75
Group C75

Notes: Each column reports estimates from a separate regression estimated over individuals in the treatment and control
groups in the claims sample. The outcome in each regression is an indicator for positive health care spending over the first
12 months of the wellness program (August 2016 - July 2017). The independent variables are indicators for inclusion in the
specified treatment groups. Regressions reported in columns (2), (4), and (6) are the same as those reported in columns (1),
(3), and (5) respectively, but with the addition of strata fixed effects. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
A */**/*** indicates significance at the 10/5/1% level using conventional inference.

74

Table A.5: IV Treatment Effects: Screening and Wellness Participation

Completed Screening and HRA
Completed Fall and Spring Wellness Activities
N
Strata FE
First-stage F-statistic

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Ever
screened

Ever
screened

0.097***
(0.026)
-0.098
(0.061)

0.098***
(0.026)
-0.087
(0.059)

0.124**
(0.050)
-0.122
(0.119)

0.117**
(0.050)
-0.103
(0.118)

3,567
No
12.580

3,567
Yes
12.814

3,566
No
12.580

3,566
Yes
12.814

Management Management
priority on priority on
health/safety health/safety

Notes: Each column reports estimates from a separate regression. The outcome variable is specified by the column heading.
We instrument for both regressors using six indicators for inclusion in the six treatment groups. Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. A */**/*** indicates significance at the 10/5/1% level.

75

Table A.6: Winsorized Medical Spending Treatment Effects
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

7.6
(48.4)
[-87.2, 102.4]

-4.3
(38.0)
[-78.7, 70.2]

-0.7
(32.6)
[-64.7, 63.2]

2.4
(21.1)
[-38.9, 43.7]

0.5
(13.8)
[-26.5, 27.5]

3,238
0

3,238
0.5

3,238
1

3,238
2.5

3,238
5

30.9
(36.7)
[-41.0, 102.8]

13.7
(23.1)
[-31.7, 59.0]

15.4
(19.4)
[-22.7, 53.4]

14.6
(13.5)
[-11.8, 41.0]

10.4
(9.7)
[-8.7, 29.5]

3,152
0

3,152
0.5

3,152
1

3,152
2.5

3,152
5

12.4
(78.8)
[-142.0, 166.7]

-7.0
(61.8)
[-128.2, 114.2]

-1.2
(53.1)
[-105.3, 102.9]

3.9
(34.3)
[-63.3, 71.2]

0.8
(22.4)
[-43.1, 44.8]

3,238
0

3,238
0.5

3,238
1

3,238
2.5

3,238
5

45.0
(59.1)
[-70.8, 160.8]

16.2
(37.9)
[-58.1, 90.5]

18.5
(31.6)
[-43.5, 80.5]

20.0
(21.8)
[-22.8, 62.8]

15.3
(15.7)
[-15.5, 46.0]

3,152
0

3,152
0.5

3,152
1

3,152
2.5

3,152
5

A. ITT Estimates (No Controls)
Total spending (dollars/month) [admin]

N
Winsorization (percent)
B. ITT Estimates (Post-Lasso)
Total spending (dollars/month) [admin]

N
Winsorization (percent)
C. IV Estimates (No Controls)
Total spending (dollars/month) [admin]

N
Winsorization (percent)
D. IV Estimates (Post-Lasso)
Total spending (dollars/month) [admin]

N
Winsorization (percent)

Notes: Each row and column reports estimates from a separate regression, where observations include individuals in the
control or treatment groups. The outcome in each regression is winsorized (top-coded) average monthly health care
spending over the first 12 months of the wellness program (August 2016 - July 2017), winsorized at the level indicated in
each column. Regressions are weighted by the number of months of coverage. In Panels A and B (ITT), the focal
independent variable is an indicator for inclusion in the treatment group. The specifications reported in Panel A do not
include controls, while those reported in Panel B include the same controls as the ITT post-Lasso specification reported in
row 1 and column (4) of Table 4. In Panels C and D (IV), the (endogenous) focal independent variable is an indicator for
completing the screening and HRA and the instrument is an indicator for inclusion in the treatment group. The
specifications reported in Panel C do not include controls, while those reported in Panel D include the same controls as the
IV post-Lasso specification reported in row 1 and column (3) of Table 5. There is no winsorization of the outcome in
column (1), and thus the ITT and IV estimates are identical to the total spending effects of the corresponding No Controls
and Post-Lasso specifications reported in Table 4 and Table 5. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, and 95%
confidence intervals are reported in brackets. A */**/*** indicates significance at the 10/5/1% level using conventional
inference.

76

Table A.7: Variable Definitions
Variable Name

Data Source

Male
Age 50+
Age 37-49
White

Human
Human
Human
Human

Survey Question(s)

Formula

Time Period

(C)
(C)
(C)
(C)

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

Sex = Male
50 ≤ Age
37 ≤ Age ≤ 49
Race = White

May
May
May
May

Salary Q1 (bottom
quartile)

Human resources data (C)

N/A

Salary ≤ 25th percentile

Pre-period:
May 30, 2016
Post-period:
August 15, 2017

Salary Q2

Human resources data (C)

N/A

25th pctile ≤ Salary ≤ 50th
pctile

Pre-period:
May 30, 2016
Post-period:
August 15, 2017

Salary Q3

Human resources data (C)

N/A

50th pctile ≤ Salary ≤ 75th
pctile

Pre-period:
May 30, 2016
Post-period:
August 15, 2017

Faculty

Human resources data (C)

N/A

May 30, 2016

Academic Staff

Human resources data (C)

N/A

Employment Class =
Faculty
Employment Class =
Academic Staff

Annual salary

Human resources data (C)

N/A

N/A

Pre-period:
May 30, 2016
Post-period:
August 15, 2017

Job terminated

Human resources data (C)

N/A

TerminationDate<=
August 15, 2017

Pre-period:
N/A
Post-period:
August 15, 2017

Sick leave (days/year)

Human resources data (C)

N/A

Sick days are measured
monthly for CS employees,
and biannually (August
15th and May 15th) for AP
and Faculty employees.
Number of sick days is
normalized by fraction of
year employed.

Pre-period:30
8/1/15 - 7/31/16
Post-period:
8/1/16 - 7/31/17

resources
resources
resources
resources

data
data
data
data

77
30

Pre- and Post-period are offset by 15 days for AP and Faculty employees (see description in Formula).

30,
30,
30,
30,

2016
2016
2016
2016

May 30, 2016

Table A.7: Variable Definitions
Variable Name

Data Source

Survey Question(s)

Formula

Time Period

Ever screened

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A1 (G1) Have you ever had your cholesterol
checked?
A2 (G2) Have you ever had a blood test for
high blood sugar or diabetes, other than
during pregnancy?
A3 (G3) Have you ever had a blood test for
high blood sugar or diabetes?
A4 (G4) In the last 12 months, have you had
Pap test or Pap smear?
A5 (G5) In the last 12 months, have you had
mammogram?
A8 (G8) In the last 12 months, have you had
sigmoidoscopy or a colonoscopy?
A9 (G9) In the last 12 months, have you had
blood test to check for prostate cancer?

Any of A1-A5, A8-A9
(G1-G5, G8-G9) = “Yes”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

a
a
a
a

78

Physically Active

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A11 (G11) Compared with most people your
age, would you say you are more physically
active, less physically active, or about the
same?

A11 (G11) =“More active”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Trying to be active

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A12 (G12) In the last 12 months, have you
been told by a doctor or health professional to
increase your physical activity or exercise?
A13 (G13) Are you currently trying to increase
your physical activity or exercise?

A12 (G12) = “Yes” or
A13 (G13) = “Yes”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Current smoker
(cigarettes)

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A16 (G16) Have you smoked at least 100
cigarettes in your entire life?
A17 (G17) Do you now smoke cigarettes every
day, some days, or not at all?

A16 (G16) = “Yes” and
A17 (G17) = “Every day”
or “Some days”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Current smoker
(other)

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A22 (G22) Do you now smoke or use any other
type of tobacco product, such as pipes, cigars,
or chewing tobacco, every day, some days, or
not at all?
A23 (G23) Do you now use e-cigarettes (also
known as vape-pens, hookah-pens, e-hookahs,
or e-vaporizers) every day, some days, or not at
all?

A22 (G22) & A23 (G23) !=
“Not at all”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Former smoker

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A16 (G16) Have you smoked at least 100
cigarettes in your entire life?
A17 (G17) Do you now smoke cigarettes every
day, some days, or not at all?

A16 (G16) = “Yes” and
A17 (G17) = “Not at all”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Drinker

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A24 (G24) In the last 7 days, on how many
days did you drink any type of alcoholic
beverage?

A24 (G24) != 0

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Heavy drinker

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A25 (G25) In the last 7 days, on the days
when you did drink alcohol, how many drinks
did you usually have per day? One ?drink? is
a 12 ounce can of beer, a 5 ounce glass of wine,
or a 1.5 ounce shot of liquor.

A25 (G25) ≥ 4 if female
A25 (G25) ≥ 5 if male

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Chronic condition

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A27 (G27) Have you ever been told by a
doctor or other health professional that you
have any of the following? Mark all that apply.

At least one box is checked

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Table A.7: Variable Definitions
Data Source

Survey Question(s)

Formula

Time Period

Excellent or v. good
health

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A28 (G28) Overall, how would you rate your
health during the past 4 weeks?

A28 (G28) = “Excellent” or
“Very good”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Not poor health

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A28 (G28) Overall, how would you rate your
health during the past 4 weeks?

A28 (G28) != “Poor”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Physical problems

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A29 (G29) During the past 4 weeks, how much
did physical health problems limit your usual
physical activities (such as walking or climbing
stairs)?
A30 (G30) During the past 4 weeks, how much
difficulty did you have doing your daily work,
both at home and away from home, because of
your physical health?
A31 (G31) How much bodily pain have you
had during the past 4 weeks?

A29 (G29)=“Somewhat?,
“Quite a lot?, “Could not do
physical activities? or
A30 (G30) = “Some?,
“Quite a lot?, “Could not do
daily work? or
A31 (G31) = “Mild?,
“Moderate?, “Severe?, “Very
severe?

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Lots of energy

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A32 (G32) During the past 4 weeks, how much
energy did you have?

A32 (G32) = “An
extraordinary amount”, or
“Quite a lot”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Bad emotional health

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A33 (G33) During the past 4 weeks, how much
have you been bothered by emotional problems
(such as feeling anxious, depressed or
irritable)?

A33 (G33) ov=
“Moderately”, “Quite a lot”,
“Extremely”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Overweight

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A39 (39) How would you describe your body
weight?

A39 (G39) = “Overweight”
or “Very overweight”

High BP / cholesterol
/ glucose

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A40 (G40) How would you describe your blood
pressure level? That is, if we measured it right
now, do you think your blood pressure level
would be:
A41 (G41) How would you describe your
cholesterol level? That is, if we measured it
right now, do you think your cholesterol level
would be:
A42 (G42) How would you describe your blood
glucose level? That is, if we measured it right
now, do you think your blood glucose level
would be:

A40 or A41 or A42
(G40 or G41 or G42) =
“High” or “Very high”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Sedentary

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A53 (G63) On an average day, how often does
your job involve standing or walking around?

A53 (G63) = “None at all”
or “Some, but less than 1
hour”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Pharmaceutical drug
utilization

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A34 (G34) How many different prescription
medications are you currently taking?
A35 (G35) How many different
over-the-counter medications are you currently
taking?

A34 (G34) > 0 or
A35 (G35) > 0

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Physician/ER
utilization

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A36 (G36) In the last 6 months, how many
times did you go to a doctor?s office, clinic,
emergency room, or other healthcare provider
to get care for yourself? Do not include dental
visits. Your best estimate is fine.

A36 (G36) != “None”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

79

Variable Name

Table A.7: Variable Definitions
Variable Name

Data Source

Survey Question(s)

Formula

Time Period

Hospital utilization

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A37 (G37) = In the last 6 months, how many
different times were you a patient in a hospital
at least overnight? Do not include hospital
stays to deliver a baby. Your best estimate is
fine.

A37 (G37) != “None”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Any sick days in past
year

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A45 (G46) In the last 12 months, about how
many days of work have you missed because of
disability or poor health? Your best estimate
is fine.

A45 (G46) != 0

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Worked 50+
hours/week

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A44 (G45) About how many hours a week do
you usually work at your current job or jobs?

A44 (G45) = “50 or more”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Very satisfied with job

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A46 (G53) How satisfied are you with your
current job?

A46 (G53) = “Very
satisfied”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Very or somewhat
satisfied with job

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A46 (G53) How satisfied are you with your
current job?

A46 (G53) = “Very
satisfied” or “Somewhat
satisfied”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Management priority
on health/safety

2016 Online survey (A)
2017 Online survey (G)

A52 (G62) = “Very high
priority” or “Some priority”

(A) July 2016
(G) July 2017

Happier at work than
last year
Presenteeism

2017 Online survey (G)

G54 = Yes

July 2017

Stanford Presenteeim Scale
(SPS-6), using G47-G52

July 2017

Feel very productive
at work
Received promotion

2017 Online survey (G)

A52 (G62) How much of a priority do you
think your unit’s management places on the
health and safety of workers?
G54 Do you feel happier at work this year than
you did last year?
G47 Despite having disability or poor health, I
was able to finish hard tasks in my work.
G48 At work, I was able to focus on achieving
my goals despite disability or poor health.
G49 Despite having disability or poor health, I
felt energetic enough to complete all my work.
G50 Because of disability or poor health, the
stresses of my job were much harder to handle.
G51 My disability or poor health distracted me
from taking pleasure in my work.
G52 I felt hopeless about finishing certain work
tasks, due to my disability or poor health.
G56 How productive do you feel at work?

G56 = “Very productive”

July 2017

2017 Online survey (G)

G57 = “Yes”

July 2017

Job search very likely

2017 Online survey (G)

G64 = “Very likely”

July 2017

Job search somewhat
/ very likely

2017 Online survey (G)

G57 During the last 12 months, have you been
given a promotion or more responsibility at
work?
G64 Taking everything into consideration, how
likely are you to make a genuine effort to find
a job with a new employer (outside the
university) within the next year?
G64 Taking everything into consideration, how
likely are you to make a genuine effort to find
a job with a new employer (outside the
university) within the next year?

G64 = “Very likely” or
“Somewhat likely”

July 2017

Total spending
(dollars/month)

Health Insurance Claims
Data (B)

N/A

Monthly Average

Pre-period:
7/1/15 - 7/31/16
Post-period:
8/1/16 - 7/31/17

2017 Online survey (G)

80

Table A.7: Variable Definitions

81

Variable Name

Data Source

Survey Question(s)

Formula

Time Period

Drug spending

Health Insurance Claims
Data (B)

N/A

Monthly Average

Pre-period:
7/1/15 - 7/31/16
Post-period:
8/1/16 - 7/31/17

Office spending

Health Insurance Claims
Data (B)

N/A

Monthly Average

Pre-period:
7/1/15 - 7/31/16
Post-period:
8/1/16 - 7/31/17

Hospital spending

Health Insurance Claims
Data (B)

N/A

Monthly Average

Pre-period:
7/1/15 - 7/31/16
Post-period:
8/1/16 - 7/31/17

Non-zero medical
spending

Health Insurance Claims
Data (B)

N/A

Monthly Average

Pre-period:
7/1/15 - 7/31/16
Post-period:
8/1/16 - 7/31/17

IL Marathon/10K/5K

Human Resources Data
(C)

N/A

Pre-period: participated in
at least one event during
2014 - 2016

Pre-period:
April 2014 - April 2016
Post-period:
April 2017

Campus gym visits
(days/year)

Human Resources Data
(C)

N/A

Number of visits to gym,
measured by ID card
swipe-in

Pre-period:
8/1/15 - 7/31/16
Post-period:
8/1/16 - 7/31/17

