                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               BANK FINANCING AND
                            INVESTMENT DECISIONS WITH
                             ASYMMETRIC INFORMATION




                                  Deborah Lucas

                                 Robert McDonald




                             Working Paper No. 2422




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 1987




We thank Mike Fishman, Stuart Greenbaum, Kathleen Hagerty, George Pennachi, Bill
Rogerson, and Anjan Thakor for many useful conversations, and the Banking Research
Center at Northwestern University for support for the second author. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #2422
                                                 October 1987



     Bank Financing and Investment Decisions with Asymmetric Information




                                  ABSTRACT



     Banks know more about the quality of their assets than do outside
investors. This informational asymmetry can distort investment decisions if
the bank must raise funds from uninformed outsiders, and assets sold will be
subject to a lemons discount. Using a three-period equilibrium model we
examine the effect of asymmetric information about loan quality on the asset
and liability decisions of banks and the market valuation of bank
liabilities. The existence of a precautionary demand for T-bills against
future liquidity needs depends both on the regulatory environment and the
informational structure. If banks are ex ante identical, issuing risky debt
to fund a deposit outflow is preferred to holding T-bills ex ante. However,
if banks have partial knowledge of loan quality, and if their asset choice is
observable, they may hold T-bills to signal their quality, enabling them to
issue risky debt at a lower interest rate.




Deborah Lucas                                     Robert McDonald
Finance Department                                Finance Department
Kellogg School                                    Kellogg School
Northwestern University                           Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60201                                Evanston, IL 60201
(312) 491-8333                                    (312) 491-8344
I. Introduction

     Many firms know more about the quality of their assets than do outside

investors. This informational asymmetry can distort investment decisions if

the firm must raise funds from uninformed outsiders (Myers and Majiuf, 1984).

Banks appear particularly vulnerable to these information problems; private

information about loan quality is usually obtained as part of the lending

process.1 In this paper we consider the effect of asymmetric information

about loan quality on the asset and liability decisions of banks, and the

market valuation of bank liabilities.   Bank incentives differ from those of

most other firms for two key reasons in this model:

     1.   banks receive non-risk-based deposit insurance, and

     2.   banks provide liquidity services for depositors, resulting in

          stochastic cash outflows.

     It is well known that deposit insurance creates an incentive to increase

risk (Merton, 1977). With symmetric information and costless asset sales, a

risk-neutral bank would minimize equity holdings and invest in the riskiest

available assets, which we call loans, to maximize the option value of the

insurance. It is not obvious, however, whether in practice banks actively

enhance or decrease risk. The fact that banks keep a significant proportion

of their portfolio in low-risk government securities suggests risk avoidance.

On the other hand, banks set equity close to the regulatory minimum, and off-

balance-sheet activities such as back-up lines of credit may be undertaken to

increase risk (Andrews and Sender).2 Previous studies attribute bank risk

aversion to a variety of factors: regulatory incentives (Flannery, 1987),

risk averse owners or managers (Hart and Jaffee, 1974; Koehn and Santomero,

1980), protection of charter value (Marcus, 1984; Merton, 1979), and
                                       2

exogenous costs of selling loans (Poole, 1968; Frost, 1971; Baltensperger,

1974).

     We suggest that asymmetric information about asset quality coupled with

an uncertain need for liquidity may induce a demand for low-risk securities,

despite FDIC insurance. Suppose that a bank with good quality loans suffers

a large deposit outflow. Banks have several funding alternatives, including

sales of loans, and issuing uninsured debt. If the bank sells its good

quality loans, it will be able to do so only at a discount, since the

presence of asymmetric information gives rise to a lemons market for loans

(Akerlof, 1970), in which loans sell at a discount from their average value.

For the bank which knows that it has good loans, selling at a discount is a

cost of loan sales. By the same token, if the bank issues a risky security

such as equity or uninsured debt, there is also a lemons cost, since the

security purchaser must contend with the possibility that the security is

being issued by a poor quality bank (Myers and Majluf, 1984).

     Since lemons pricing is potentially costly, one might expect banks to

take precautions against having to sell risky loans or issue debt. This is

similar to the idea that corporations with private information about asset

quality will hold financial slack to avoid more costly security issues (John

and Nachman, 1987). One such precaution is for banks to hold publicly traded

securities about which there is symmetric information and hence no discount

in the resale market.3 One cannot conclude, however, that securities or some

other form of financial slack will be used to circumvent information

problems. In fact we show that in many cases even with private information,

it is optimal to hold only risky assets to maximize the value of deposit

insurance. The reason is that the lemons cost, while it may be a cost to the
                                        3

relatively good banks ex post, is not necessarily a cost ex ante. In the

absence of FDIC insurance, for example, we show that if all banks are ex ante

identical, banks will not pay anything to avoid bearing the lemons cost. The

reason is simply that if the market sets the lemons discount based on

rational expectations about the distribution of loans which will be sold,

then banks on average are neither helped nor hurt by selling lemons loans or

securities, so ex ante banks will take no steps to reduce the probability of

entering a lemons market. The presence of the FDIC changes this conclusion,

however, and the lemons discount can then be costly ex ante to banks as a

group.

     The model answers a number questions about optimal bank behavior in the

presence of asymmetric information. Under what circumstances will insured

banks hold risk-free securities to avoid liquidity costs? How are bank debt

and secondary market loans priced? Is there a limit on the amount of

uninsured debt that banks can profitably issue? Does issuing debt dominate

loan sales as a means of attaining liquidity? Can banks with good loans

credibly signal their asset quality?

     We address these issues in a three period equilibrium model. The

results depend critically on whether or not banks have ex ante private

information about loan quality, so we consider both cases. In each case, a

signalling game (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1984) between outside investors and

banks determines the price and quantity of uninsured bank debt.

     Section II sets up Model I, in which banks are identical at the time

that they select their initial portfolio. Subsequently each receives a

private signal that reveals loan quality and a deposit realization. If there

is a withdrawal and banks have insufficient liquidity to meet it, either debt
                                        4

must be issued or loans sold. In Sections III and IV the solution to a

signalling game determines the equilibrium price and quantity of debt in

Model I, and the discount on loan sales is derived. We find that if issuing

debt is prohibited, banks may have a precautionary demand for securities to

avoid costly loan sales. However, when debt issuance in period 1 is a

possibility, in equilibrium banks prefer to issue debt when the need for

liquidity arises, rather than holding precautionary securities ex ante.

Generally there is a partial pooling equilibrium in the debt market, in which

banks with poor loans borrow at the expense of banks with good loans and

withdrawals. The amount of borrowing in equilibrium is never more than that

necessary for banks to avoid liquidating good loans. Banks with good loans

always prefer borrowing to selling loans.

     An obvious question is whether these results change when banks have

private information at the time they make incremental portfolio decisions.

Section V studies the case in which banks have old loans of privately known

quality at the time they decide whether to invest new funds in loans or in

riskiess securities. In this case the quantity of securities chosen can

signal the quality of existing bank loans, and hence affects the interest

rate at which debt may be issued in subsequent periods. Conditions for the

existence of a signalling equilibrium are derived, and examples are

calculated. Section VI concludes.



II. Model I: Banks Ex Ante Identical

a. Basic Structure

    We consider first the case where banks are ex ante identical, but

subsequently receive private information about loan quality and liquidity
                                             5

needs. Banks operate for three periods. This provides an initial investment

period, a period in which actions are taken based on private information, and

a final period in which all information becomes public. This is the minimal

number of periods in which to study the role of asymmetric information. To

begin we describe the cash flows, decision variables, and constraints in each

period.



Period 0:

           At time 0 all banks are identical. Each receives an exogenous, insured

deposit inflow D0. The capital requirement is a fraction        of assets,

implying that initial equity must be at least £(S0÷L0). We assume that banks

initially set equity to this minimum level. Banks optimally divide the funds

raised from equity and deposits between two-period loans, L0, and two-period

securities, S0. This implies that


                   —
                       S0
                            +
                                L
Securities earn the risk-free rate r in both periods 1 and 2, and all

principal is repaid in period 2. Loans made in period 0 return L0(° +

in   period 1, and return L0(l -    *)(l + O)    in period 2.   is the promised

repayment of principal, and a° is a random interest payment or default

amount.4 For a given loan, a is the same in periods 1 and 2. For

tractability, loan returns a are binomial, with probability f of a high

return H' and probability (1-f) of a low return aL. The time superscript

will be suppressed when there is no ambiguity. Loans are actuarially fair:



     (1)               (l+r) —      +
                                         6




Period 1:

     Between periods 0 and 1, the bank receives two new pieces of

information. First, the bank learns the quality of period 0 loans, so

uncertainty is resolved about ao.5 Banks also learn whether a deposit or

withdrawal will be made in period 1. Deposits are binomially distributed,

with probability g of a withdrawal       and probability (l-.g) of a deposit 8L

By convention a positive & denotes a withdrawal.

     The bank must return any deposits demanded, and pay interest on old

deposits. This outflow can be funded by sales of old securities, sales of

existing loans, Q0, or issuing debt, B. Since securities S0 are risk-free,

they can be sold at face value. Two period securities, then, are

"informationally matched" with one period deposits. If loans, Q0, are sold,

the bank receives Q0(1-c), where c is the (endogenously determined) discount

due to the information asymmetry.

     If the net cash inflow, including funds raised from loan sales and

security sales, is positive, then the bank invests the cash in new risky,

one-period loans L1. Because all remaining uncertainty is resolved in period

2, it is optimal because of FDIC insurance for cash which is not used to fund

deposit outflows to be invested in these new loans, and for all old

securities to be sold.6 Dividends, which are an alternative use of free

cash, are ruled out for tractability.7

     We assume that the market does not learn the quantity of new L1 loans

until period 2, since this would be sufficient to infer        The period 2

return on L1 is distributed independently and identically to the return on
                                                         7

         Since dividends are zero by assumption, all period 1 cash inflows are
L0.
invested in new loans:


                  L1 — A +   Q0(l-c) +   B   -   6
  (2)


where

                        (l+r)S0 + (a°+°)L0
                  A —                                -
                                                             rD0

All terms except 8 and c are non-negative, and Q0                                        We define
                                                                        L0(l-*0).
financial slack in period 1, A, as net funds available from period 0 for

investment or to fund deposit outflows. Securities S0 are included because

they can be sold costlessly at time 1. Note that banks with good loans have

more slack because a is greater.



Period 2:

        In the final period no choices remain. Loans pay off interest and

principal, and depositors and debt-holders must be repaid if possible.

Equity-holders receive the net cash flow if it is positive, and nothing if

liabilities exceed assets. The total value of equity in period 2 is


  (3)       max [0, (L0(l-°)-Q0)(l+a0) +             L1(l+a1)
                                                                   -
                                                                       (D0-6)(l+r)
                                                                                     -
                                                                                          (l+r+s)B]

where r+s is the promised rate on bank debt.



III. Equilibrium in the Debt and Used Loan Markets

A. ExDected Profit in Period 1

        Before determining the period 0 portfolio, it is necessary to derive the

equilibrium price and quantity of debt issued and loans sold in period 1,

conditional on L0 and S0. We solve for the equilibrium price and quantity of
                                                 8


subordinated bank debt by setting up a signalling game between banks and

investors. For tractability, we consider only subordinated debt. A similar

analysis could be applied to straight debt or equity.9

        Substituting (2) into (3), in period 1 banks choose B and Q0 to maximize



  (4)       II.,.     max(O, [L0(l-*°)-Q0](l+a) +           [A.-&.+B+Q0(l-c)](l+&1)
                            -
                                (l-4-r)(D0-&.)
                                                 -
                                                     B(l+r+s) )




E1 denotes the expectation operator, conditional on all information available

at the beginning of period 1.          is the discount factor, with 8=(l+r)1.

        Because of the distributions of returns and withdrawals, there are four

types of banks in period 1: a) "good/good" banks with good loans and deposit

inflows, b) "good/bad" banks with good loans and deposit outflows, c)

"bad/good" banks with bad loans and deposit inflows, and d) "bad/bad" banks

with bad loans and deposit outflows. Expected profit differs for each type,

and affects their choices of Q0 and B.

        The pricing of bank securities is complicated by differential default

probabilities and payoffs to security holders across the various types of

banks. With private information, the different types of banks have different

incentives to issue debt and sell loans. Banks with good loans want to avoid

discount sales, while banks with bad loans benefit from portfolio churning to

increase their portfolio risk. One might expect the debt market to be driven

out by the presence of asymmetric information. However, a bank with good

loans and deposit outflows (a "good/bad" bank), is willing to pay a premium

when issuing securities in order to avoid selling good loans at a discount.

This premium creates a potential rent for other market participants. In
                                           9

particular, if risky banks can pooi with these good/bad banks, they can issue

debt or sell loans at a favorable price. On the other hand, it may be

possible for the good/bad banks to distinguish themselves by the amount they

choose to borrow, and avoid paying a premium over the fair price. Here we

describe more fully the incentives for each type:


Good/bads

        The good/bads have less financial slack than deposit outflows, so loans

must be sold or debt issued. The amount of loans that must be sold is given

by:


  (5)        Q0 — max[O,


        It will be shown in Lemma 2 below that in equilibrium subordinated debt

issues never exceed that necessary to avoid loan sales, so that

min{O, SHAHB] = 0 whenever B > 0.      This is because for larger amounts of

debt the information asymmetry continues to create a lemons problem, but

there are no more potential offsetting gains from avoided forced loan sales.

        After meeting the deposit outflow the good/bad bank has no uninvested

cash, so no new loans are purchased. Thus there is no uncertainty about

returns in period 2. Evaluating (4) at         and 66L' the total benefit from

borrowing to avoid loan sales is B(l+aH)/(lc) -    B(l+r+s).   This benefit

increases with the discount c, and decreases with the premium s on debt.


Good/goods

        Good/goods have cash from deposit inflows to invest in new loans. It is

clear that they will never choose to sell good loans at a discount in order

to buy new risky loans. Whether or not they borrow depends on the premium s,
                                       10

and whether they are risky. Good/goods are risky if in the event that their

new loans are bad they go bankrupt. If they have relatively few new loans,

the above average returns from the old loans assure solvency. If good/goods

are riskfree, the expected return on new loans is 1+r, so borrowing is zero

for a premium s>0. If good/goods are risky, the payoff in period 2 from

borrowing conditional on solvency, is (l4a)B(1+r+s)B.


Bad/goods and Bad/bads

    Banks with bad loans always prefer to sell them and use the proceeds to

invest in risky new loans. This follows from the fact that the equilibrium

secondary market price for loans will be at least as great as the true value

of the bad loans, and higher if some good loans are also sold. Even if the

price were slightly less than fair, bad banks would prefer to liquidate old

loans and buy new loans because this increases risk in the final period.

Since we assume that loan sales are unobservable, they have no adverse affect

on the ability of bad banks to mimic the good banks in the debt market.

     Banks with bad L0 loans generally need to buy new risky loans in order

to have any chance of solvency in period 2. Since the bad/bads can borrow no

more than the good/bads, and the good/bads only borrow to avoid loan sales,

the bad/bads cannot borrow enough to avoid certain bankruptcy. We assume

that when they are bankrupt for certain, the bad/bads sell all their loans in

the secondary market in period 1, and wait until period 2 to go bankrupt.

This assumption has a negligible affect on the results.



B. Determination of the Lemons Discount for Loan Sales

     The informational asymmetry about loan quality implies that old loans

sell at a discount c from face value)° The value of c depends on investors'
                                                     11

beliefs about the quality of loans being sold. Risk-neutral, competitive

investors will accept a discount that provides an expected return of r.

        Let E(a) denote an investor's expectation about the return on a loan

purchased in the secondary market. Then to receive an expected return of at

least r, c must satisfy:


  (6)        (   1-c   )(   l+r   )   ( l+E(a)   )




If the quantity of loans sold were observable, this expectation would be
conditioned on quantity.1



Lemma 1: The discount c is positive when the quantity of loans sold is

unobservable and loan sales are anonymous.



Proof: Since all banks with bad loans sell them, at least a fraction (1-f)

of used loans have a return of aL. If in addition all banks with good loans

were to sell all loans, then from (6) c — 0 and c is at a minimum. But for

c—0, good/good banks will not voluntarily sell any loans, so c is Positive.//



C. Debt Market Equilibrium

        In this section the quantity and promised interest payment on debt is

found by solving a signalling game between banks and investors in period 1.



C.l.     Structure     of the Game

        The objective function of all players, distributions of loan quality and

deposit flows, and structure of the game is common knowledge. Banks know

their own type, but competitive investors observe neither loan quality,
                                             12

quantity of loan sales or new loan purchases, nor deposit realizations. We

assume that if a bank is indifferent about borrowing, it won't borrow.

        The game proceeds as follows: A bank approaches an investor with an

offer (B,s), where B is the desired quantity to be borrowed, and s is the

premium over the risk-free rate promised on B. Investors either accept or

reject the offer with a response R€(yes,no). If the bank is solvent in

period 2 the investor receives (1+r+s)B. Otherwise the investor receives the

liquidated value of the bank net of the amount owed to the FDIC. Only pure

strategies are considered.


Definition of Equilibrium: [     (B*,s*),   R*J is an equilibrium offer/response

pair if and only if

  (a)           fl.(B,s)   fl.(B*,s*)
                             1
                 1

for any other offer (B,s), where II. is expected profits for a bank of type i,

and

  (b) Investors accept any offer yielding non-negative expected profits.


        Locating equilibria requires several preliminary steps. Two types of

schedules are derived to generate candidate equilibria. The first gives the

reservation rate levels above which a bank of a particular type would not

borrow. The second provides a rate schedule yielding zero expected profits

to the investor for a particular combination of types borrowing. Together,

these schedules define a set of interest rates and quantities for which banks

willingly lend and investors willingly borrow. This set is the candidate

schedule. Theorem 1 establishes that the equilibria are points on this

candidate schedule that maximize the profits of a good/bad bank. Thus if
                                         13

there is a unique profit-maximizing offer for the good/bads, there is a

unique equilibrium.



C.2. Derivation of Borrowing Reservation Schedules for Banks

     Define reservation rates E(B) to be the maximum markup over the risk-

free rate at which type i would willingly borrow B rather than borrow

nothing. The expected profit function, equation (4), depends on B and s and

can be written as 1I(B,s). Solving fl.(B,s)—fl.(O,O) for s as a function of B

yields the reservation schedules E(B). As discussed above, the reservation

rate for a given level of borrowing depends on whether the bank is risky at

that level of borrowing. The appendix gives E and                  explicitly)2
                                                             Ebg


C.3. Derivation of Fair Lending Schedules for Investors

     Investors are competitive and risk neutral, so they are willing to lend

at any rate that yields non-negative expected profits. The pooling schedules

provide the markup over the riskfree rate for which investors will be fairly

compensated if those types assumed to borrow B always do so.

     The derivation of the pooling schedule is given in detail here only for

the case in which good/goods and good/bads borrow, and for which good/bads

are riskfree. The other schedules can be found similarly. If only

good/goods and good/bads offer (B,s), then the probability of being

approached by a good/bad making this offer is w1 —         fg/(fg-1-f(1-g)) — g,   and

the probability of a good/good is w2 —          —   l-g.
                                         1-w1
     Suppose that banks offer to borrow at a rate r÷s*. For the investor to

get an expected return of r, s* must solve
                                            14

 (7) (l+r)B — w1(l+r+s*)B + w2 [f(l+r+s*)B +       (1-f)min(   (l+r+s*)B,

           max(


The first term on the right is the sure repayment from the riskiess

good/bads, while the second term reflects a full repayment from the

good/goods if new loans are good and a partial repayment otherwise. Solving

for s*:



                   I (l-f)w2[(1+r) -   x/B]/(w1+w2f)   if good/goods risky
      (8) s*
                   1   0                               if good/goods riskfree


where x — max(    0,



     Lemma 2 establishes that the only relevant pooling schedules include the

good/ba.ds, because the other types would never choose to borrow at a fair

pooling rate.



Lemma 2:    A pool of banks not including the good/bads never would issue

subordinated debt at a fair rate to lenders. A good/bad bank never will

issue more than enough subordinated debt to avoid loan liquidations.

(proof in appendix)



D. Determination of Equilibria

     Combining the information in the         schedules and pooling schedules

provides the set of candidate equilibria.



Definition: The set of candidate equilibria are all offer pairs (B,s) with

the following properties: (pl) if all banks making positive profits with this
                                          15

offer were to make this offer, investors expectations about expected returns

would be satisfied, and (p2) For a given B, s is the minimal premium so that

(p1) holds.



     The bold line in Figure 1 gives an example of this set for the case when

bad/goods are bankrupt without borrowing, and good/goods are risky without

borrowing. Recall that the E(B) schedules give the premiums above which

type i would not choose to borrow, and the s(.) schedules give rate premiums

below which investors would not lend. From Figure 1, it is clear that on [K,

       all three types borrow along the s(gb,gg,bg) schedule. For B on

[J,K], s(gb,gg,bg) lies above the reservation level for bad/goods, so a

three-pool is impossible. On this segment any offer on Eg just prevents the

bad/goods from borrowing, and good/goods and good/bads pooi. Note that

investors make positive profits in this region, since there is no equilibrium

offer that yields zero profits. Below J, only good/goods and good/bads are

willing to borrow at the fair pooling price for these two types, so the

candidate schedule follows s(gb,gg).

     Most of the points on the bold line in Figure 1 are not equilibria,

because a good/bad bank would never choose these offers in equilibrium.

Theorem 1 characterizes the equilibria.



Theorem 1: An equilibrium of the borrowing game is any point along the

candidate schedule that maximizes the expected profits of the good/bads. The

equilibrium is unique if there is a unique profit-maximizing point.
    -r


                      s(gb,gg,bg)



S
         J
                    s(gb,gg)
     0




             B


         Figure 1
                                          16

Proof: If all banks who borrow make the same offer, these offers must lie on

the candidate set. This is because banks know that investors will accept any

offer with non-negative profits, and these are the minimum offers consistent

with non-negative profits for investors and profit maximizing behavior by

banks, by definition of the candidate schedule. The good/bads can borrow at

the risk-free rate if they can reveal their type, and would like to do so.

Thus they are unconstrained in choosing a profit-maximizing offer. It

remains to show that all borrowing banks make the same offer.

      Suppose that expected profit-maximizing offers were to differ across

types. Then investors could identify at least one type or subpool not

including the good/bads. They would only lend to this subgroup at a rate

yielding a fair return. By Lemma 2, banks would be unwilling to borrow at

this rate. Thus banks either borrow at the profit-maximizing level for

good/bads or don't borrow.



      We have not discussed beliefs about out-of-equilibrium offers. Note

that if investors believe all out-of-equilibrium offers come from banks with

bad loans, then no bank with good loans will have the incentive to make this

offer and the belief will be self-fulfilling.,

      Note that although we do not prove the necessity of a unique

equilibrium, all simulations generated a unique equilibrium.



IV.   Implications   for Period 0 Asset Choice

      In the foregoing, we determined equilibrium loan sales and subordinated

debt issues taking as given the initial portfolio of loans and securities.
                                       17

In this section we examine the optimal period 0 division between loans and

securities for a wide set of parameters by simulation.

     It is a complicated but well-defined problem to consider all possible

levels of time 0 security holdings and find ex ante expected profits with

borrowing determined as in Theorem 1. Then the optimal division of original

deposits between securities and loans is that which maximizes ex ante

expected profits.

     An algorithm for locating maximum expected profits is the following.

Fix a discount c. Divide initial deposits in varying proportions between S0

and L0. For a given allocation, find the amount of borrowing and loan sales

for each type by solving the borrowing game. Note that lenders in period 1

can observe S0 and L0, so borrowing opportunities for banks are conditional

on this choice. In particular, lenders will not lend more than the maximum

amount that a good/bad could conceivably need to borrow to avoid selling good

loans. At the initial allocation that maximizes expected profit, c is

recalculated to be fair to purchasers of used loans (eq. (6)). This is

repeated until a fixed point in c is located. The treatment of c is

consistent with the assumption that banks take c as exogenous.

     Numerical implementation of this algorithm established that for a wide

set of parameter values:

     1) Banks prefer borrowing to holding precautionary securities; when

    borrowing is possible banks optimally hold no securities.

     2) Banks with good loans never sell loans for liquidity purposes when

     there is the opportunity to borrow.

In order to interpret these results, we look more closely at banks'

incentives in several special cases in the next section.
                                          18



A. Portfolio Choice Without Borrowing. and the Role of the FDIC

       To understand the effect on bank asset choice of the ability to issue

debt, it is useful to examine the bank's period 0 portfolio choice when debt

issues in period 1 are not permitted. Intuition suggests that some

precautionary security holdings may be optimal to avoid costly loan sales in

period 1. However, depending on parameter values, it is possible that banks

will hold no securities or 100% securities. Simulations of the model suggest

that for most parameterizations, banks hold only loans, although some

precautionary security holdings appear to be optimal when a) the lemons

discount is high, and b) there are a relatively large number of good/bad

banks.

         The result that banks may hold only risk-free securities in period 0 is

somewhat surprising, but easily explainable. Suppose banks know that there

will be a net inflow of period 1 deposits, so that avoidance of forced loan

sales no longer motivates security holdings. Also assume that enough new

loans can be purchased in period 1 so that failure in period 2 is determined

entirely by the return on loans made in period 1, and is therefore unaffected

by L0 loan quality. The marginal benefit from investing in securities in

period 0 is f(l+H)(l+r), while that from investing in loans in period 0 is13



                                               —
       f(l+aH)[f(l+aH) +   (lf)(aL + (1-c))]

This   is less than the return from securities by cf(l-f)(l+a11). Thus, if

solvency depends only on       loan quality and there are no withdrawals, banks

invest only in securities. Paradoxically, in this case securities increase
                                       19

risk. Because the returns on period 0 and period 1 loans are independent, by

holding loans in period 0 the bank diversifies intertemporally, which lowers

the value of FDIC insurance.

     Suppose on the other hand that the return on period 0 loans does affect

the ultimate probability of bankruptcy, and that it is necessary that the

bank have high returns on both period 0 and period 1 loans to be solvent in

period 2. Again assume the probability of a deposit outflow is zero. The

marginal benefit to investing in securities instead of loans is



     f2[(1+aH)(l+r) - (1+a11)2} < 0



so it is optimal for the bank to invest solely in loans in period 0.

     Thus, if deposit outflows are negligible and current portfolio decisions

will not affect the ultimate probability of bankruptcy, a bank will wait and

place all its bets in one period. If current portfolio decisions affect the

ultimate probability of bankruptcy, it is optimal to invest in risky assets

in each period. This suggests that banks which expect to grow rapidly will

have less risky asset portfolios, even with FDIC insurance.

     The foregoing explains the case of no or few forced sales of loans in

the presence of FDIC insurance. We now consider the effect of removing FDIC

insurance, and reintroduce the possibility of forced loan sales. Is it

possible in this case that banks will have a precautionary motive for holding

securities? Lemma 3 establishes that there is no precautionary motive

without insurance.
                                       20

Lemma 3: In the absence of FDIC insurance, if banks have no private

information in period 0, and if the lemons price in period 1 is actuarially

fair, then banks are indifferent about period 0 asset composition and their

debt-equity ratio.

(proof in appendix)



     This result implies that the existence of a lemons market for loans in

period 1 does not in itself provide a precautionary motive for holding

securities. If the price received for liquidated loans is fair conditional

on no information, then the prospect of entering a lemons market provides no

precautionary motive.

     Why can FDIC insurance generate a precautionary demand for securities?

In period 2, the FDIC will own the banks with the worst loans, while solvent

banks will own more than the ex ante average amount of good loans. To the

extent that solvent banks in equilibrium will sell more high quality loans

than the bad banks ultimately owned by the FDIC, c is no longer ex ante fair

to banks as a group. Thus, banks may hold securities to avoid pooling with

the FDIC in the used loan market.



B.   Portfolio Choice With Borrowing in Period 1

     We have established that with FDIC insurance, there exist cases for

which banks in Model I have a precautionary demand for securities. This case

is the relevant benchmark for the analysis that follows. The question is

whether securities still dominate loans when issuing debt is an alternative

to loan sales to raise liquidity.
                                       21

     To answer this question, simulation parameter values were varied over

those for which positive security holdings are optimal when borrowing is

prohibited. A grid search located this region of parameter space (see Table

1 in the appendix). In this region, optimal security holdings are

approximately 15% when borrowing is prohibited.

     In all cases the ability to borrow drives out security holdings,

although good/bad banks always pay a premium on debt in equilibrium.

Furthermore, no good loans are sold. It is not surprising that borrowing

dominates loan sales. Selling loans has the worst pooling properties for the

good/bad banks, since all bad loans are sold on the secondary market, driving

up c. It appears that borrowing crowds out security holdings because to a

first approximation borrowing is zero sum across banks, because while the

good banks borrow at a premium, the poorer banks borrow at a discount.

However security holdings unambiguously reduce the aggregate value of FDIC

insurance for these parameters.



V. The Effect of Prior Information About Loan Quality

     The foregoing suggests that shielding loans from forced discount sales

does not explain bank security holdings when alternative financing is

available in this model. However, this result can be reversed with slightly

different, and arguably more realistic, informational assumptions. We now

ask what happens when banks have information about the quality of existing

loans before having to decide whether to hold securities or loans. In this

case securities can serve as a signal of bank quality, and will be purchased

in equilibrium.
                                       22

A. A SimDle Exanrnle

    Banks generally have a substantial number of old loans on their books

when making a new investment decision. Information about the quality of

these loans can affect investment decisions and borrowing costs. In this

section Model I is modified to include old loans of known quality, and we

demonstrate the existence of signalling equilibria in which the quantity of

securities held reveals the quality of old loans.

     It is well known that a necessary condition for a signalling equilibrium

is that high quality types have a lower cost of taking a costly action than

low quality types. When banks have information about the quality of existing

loans, it tends to be less costly for banks with good loans to hold

securities. This is because bad banks need risky assets to have any chance

of solvency, while many good banks may be locally riskfree, and thus

indifferent between loans and securities. Good banks also may want to buffer

their good loans against discount sales. If by holding securities good banks

can distinguish themselves to outside investors, holding securities will

lower borrowing costs. Good banks compare the gains from lowering expected

borrowing costs against the loss in value of FDIC insurance from holding

enough riskless securities to prevent bad banks from mimicking.

    A simple algebraic example illustrates this logic. Imagine that in

period 0 all banks have old loans, L1 of known quality, which will pay back

(1+a1)2 times the principal in period 2, where a1 is aH or aL. These loans

are backed by deposits D1. In period 0, new deposits D0 arrive, and can be

used to buy securities or loans. Consider a bank with low quality old loans.

If it does nothing or uses the new deposits for securities only, it will have
                                               23

a deficit in period 2 of D01(l+r)2 -
                                              Ll(l+aL)2.     However, by investing

deposits in risky loans recovery is possible as long as



          Ll(l+aL)2 +                    - (D1+D0)(l+r)2   > 0



If banks with existing good loans hold securities, then banks with bad loans

must also hold securities between periods 0 and 1 if they want to borrow at

the pooling rate in period 1. However, doing so means foregoing the

possibility of higher interest on loans than on securities for the period,

which may outweigh the benefit from borrowing. Let Sg be the quantity of

securities held by good banks, and B be the amount that can be borrowed in

period 1. Then the payoff to a bad bank that mimics is



     max[ 0, Ll(l+QL)2 ÷ S (l+aH)(l+r) +                            ÷ B(l+a11)
                                                    (Dosg)(l+aH)2
               -
                   (D1-f-D0)(l+r)2
                                     -
                                         B(l+r+s)


This expression approaches zero as Sg approaches D0 or B approaches zero.

Thus by choosing a sufficiently high Sg good banks may distinguish

themselves from bad banks. Whether good banks want to do this depends on the

difference between the pooling and separating rate premium on borrowing, and

the cost of holding loans rather than securities.



B.   Solution of Model II

     Model II extends Model I by assuming that banks begin period 0 with old

loans L1 of known quality, backed by deposits of D1/(l—e)=L1, where c is

the equity requirement. Returns on these loans aredistributed independently
                                                       24

and identically to L0, so that high or low interest is paid only in periods 1

and 2. A fraction of principal, *1, is also repaid in period 1 with the

balance of principal repaid in period 2. We assume that withdrawals at time

1 are sufficiently large so that old loans must be sold in the absence of

borrowing.14 Effectively there are eight types of banks; the original four

types combined with two possibilities for old loan quality. The bank profit

function corresponding to (4) is:



(9)         11ijk —    E1   max(O, [L0(1-°)-Q0](l+a.) +           L1(l-b)-Q1J(l+a.)
      +                                                 -
                                                            (l+r)(DO+Dl&k)         B(l+r+s)
          [A..-&+B4-Q0(l-c)+Q1(l-c)J(l+&)
where

            A.. =                 +               +               -
                      (l-f-r)S0       (a.-f°)L0       (a.11b)L1       r(D0-i-D1)


      Despite the increased multiplicity of types, the period 1 borrowing game

is almost identical. The exceptions are that (1) the equilibrium markup over

the riskfree rate is conditional on security holding, and (2) only

"good/good/bads" (good period -1 and period 0 loans, bad deposit

realization) will be willing to borrow at a premium to avoid selling loans15.

To find equilibrium borrowing, we follow the procedure described in Section

III. First reservation rate schedules as a function of borrowing are

calculated for each type, conditional on their earlier choice of S0 and L0

and belief about the discount c. Then fair pooling rate schedules for

investors are calculated. Combining the information in these schedules, we

find a candidate equilibrium schedule along which banks would be willing to

borrow and investors willing to lend. From this schedule, one can prove as
                                        25

in Theorem 1 that the point that maximizes expected profits for the

good/good/bads yields the debt market equilibrium.

     Once equilibrium borrowing as a function of S0 and L0 is determined, the

optimal S0 and L0 can be found as a function of old loan quality as follows.

First compute expected time 0 profit for both types as a function of S0 when

both types hold     so that there is pooling in the debt market. Call these

profit schedules gi(S) and bl(S). Then compute expected profits as a

function of S0 for banks with good old loans, assuming those with bad period

-l loans hold no securities. Call these profit schedules g25 and



Theorem 2: A necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of a

separating equilibrium is an S*, 0 < S* < D0, such that

     a) g2*) > max gl for (S: IT'bl(S) >


     b) b2

Proof: (Necessity) Assume (b) fails. Then if goods choose S* in equilibrium,

bads will also since mimicking has a higher expected value than autonomy.

Assume (a) fails. Then goods would profit by instead choosing max

over S             b2 resulting in pooling.
(Sufficiency) Both goods and bads know these expected profit schedules at

time 0. If (a) and (b) hold, a good bank knows that no bad bank would choose

to hold S*, so that at time 1 if the good bank borrows it will only be pooled

with other ex ante good banks. Thus the expected profit from choosing S* is

          By (a), this is preferred to any of the pooling outcomes. Since

bads know tthat goods will choose S*, they choose S-.O for an expected profit


  b2
                                            26




        A numerical implementation of the above algorithm provides many examples

of separating equilibria. A representative example is given in Table 2 in

the appendix. However, pooling equilibria can also be found for some

parameters. Separation is most likely to occur when a relatively large

amount    of   borrowing is necessary, and when many banks with bad period -l

loans find it advantageous to borrow although their old loans drive them

close to bankruptcy.



VI. Conclusion

         This paper explores the influence of asymmetric information on banks'

portfolio choice and liability decisions. We demonstrate that holding a

portion of the bank's portfolio in risk-free securities may be optimal even

though banks are risk neutral and receive insurance that induces risk

preference. An optimal portfolio can include securities because they signal

asset quality, mitigating the cost of asymmetric information. However,

securities are not a perfect signal, and outside borrowing still costs a

premium over the full-information rate for banks with good assets but a poor

liquidity realization. Securities serve as a signal of asset quality because

it is more costly for banks with poor assets to lower variance than for banks

with good assets. This should be true in the risk-averse case as well. An

interesting implication of the model is that banks holding relatively more

securities have higher quality assets on average, and hence a lower failure

rate.

        The model is novel in several respects. First, although the rationale

for holding securities is familiar from the transactions cost literature, the
                                            27

cost in this model is endogenously determined and linked directly to the

degree of informational asymmetries. Second, the model highlights an unusual

kind of maturity mismatch which might be described as "information mismatch".

Usually, maturity mismatch refers to interest rate risk arising from unequal

payment streams between two   securities.    In this model, however, the risk

arising from mismatched securities arises from asymmetric information that

limits the ability to sell assets of longer maturity at a fair price. Thus,

one-period demand deposits are informationally matched against two-period

riskiess securities, but mismatched against two-period loans. A similar

analysis might explain firms' tendency to issue securities with maturity

equal to the project being financed.

     In this model banks can only issue subordinated debt as an alternative

to loan sales, but of course banks also can and do issue equity and straight

debt. An interesting extension to this model would be to price equity and

debt, and determine under what conditions one form of financing dominates

another.
                                                         28

                                               Appendix
Reservation borrowing schedules for Model I:


                        0                    riskfree with or without borrowing

(10) Egg(B) —          aH
                             -   r           risky with or without borrowing

                       [(LO(l-1.aH)+SO(l+r)+BrDO&L))(l÷aH)(DO+B&L)(l+r)]/B -

                       [LO(l°)(l+aH)+(SO(l+r)+LO(°÷aH) -rD               -6 )(l+r) -

                       (l+r) (Do&L)
                                              riskfree without, risky with borrowing




                       a -
                        H
                                 r            for rL.D
                                                         g
                                                             > 0 without borrowing
(ll)Eb(B)
     g                               0
                       [L0(1-
                                                                    otnerwise



Proof of Lemma 2: First we eliminate the possibility that correctly

identified banks ("one-pools") will issue debt. We consider separately the

cases where banks are risky at B—0 as opposed to riskless. Imagine that a

good/good or bad/good is risky at B=0, borrows B and buys new loans with the

money. The expected return on the borrowing is fB[(l+aH)(l+r+s)], so

borrowing will only be undertaken if s <                            Let P(0) denote profits at
                                                             aHr.
zero borrowing. If new loans turn out to be bad, lenders receive

     P(0) +
              (l+aL)B < (l+aL)B
where the inequality follows because by assumption P(0) < 0. This occurs

with probability (1-f). Thus when the loans are good, a return of greater

than l+QH is required in order for the expected return to equal l+r. This

implies s >
              aH
                   -
                        r,       so there is no borrowing.
                                       29

     If on the other hand good/goods are initially riskfree, then FDIC

insurance has no value, and increasing risk through borrowing cannot affect

the value of FDIC insurance when the debt is subordinated. Thus, if the debt

is fairly priced the bank is indifferent to borrowing, and hence by

assumption doesn' t.

     If good/goods and bad/goods do not borrow by themselves, a two-pool is

also impossible. The good/goods are driven out because the borrowing rate

for the two-pool must be higher than the rate for a one pool with just

good/goods. Finally consider the good/bads. If they borrow slightly more

than that necessary to avoid loan sales, they are riskfree and therefore

would accept no positive premium. As borrowing increases, risk increases for

the bank but not for the FDIC, which is always entirely repaid. As for

good/goods who are riskfree at B-O, good/bads are indifferent between

borrowing and not borrowing in a one-pool because no risk can be transferre4.



Proof of Lemma 3: Let w. be the fraction of secondary market loans issued by

a bank of type i (where i denotes information learned in period 1 concerning

loan returns and deposit flows), with Q. being the loan liquidations for a

type i bank. The condition for secondary market loans to be fairly priced is



(A.3.1)        E0[Q.(1+cz?)]   (l-c)E0Q.



Assume that the bank is all-equity financed at period 0. The value of the

bank in period 2 is
                                                30


(A. 3.2)       V2= max[0,


Q and B are chosen by the bank conditional on time 1 information. Let I be an

indicator function such that I — 0 when the bank is bankrupt and I           1

                                                                          01
otherwise. Let F(x) be the joint distribution function for x—(&,a ,a ). Then

actuarial fairness for debt-holders implies that



(A.3.3)       J'(l+r-4-)B dF(x) +   f(1+r+s)B dF(x) — (l+r)B
             1—0                 I—i

where       is the realized random premium on debt which depends on x. The value

of equity in period 0 can be written



   V0 —     2[1I1(1+&°)(l-°)L+(1+&1)       dF(x) +1I1(1+&')(1-c)-Q(l+&°) dF(x)

(A.3.4)            -1-1I1(l+&1)-(1+r+s) dF(x)


Using the fact that debtholders own the firm in the event of bankruptcy,

(A.3.3) and (A.3.4) together imply



(A.3.5) V0 —       fl2[f(l+&°)(1-°)L0+(1+&iA    dF(x) +   f(1+)Q(l-c)-(l+&°)dF(x)]

(A.3.1) and equation (1) in the text imply that the term involving Q is zero.

                                                                                   -
Evaluating the first term (recall that A contains S0) gives V0           L0 + S0

           which is independent of Q and B, and of the breakdown between L0 and S0.
E0(&),
     Finally, note that all investors are risk-neutral and symmetrically

informed in period 0, so the Modigliani-Miller theorem implies that the value

of the bank is not affected by its debt-equity ratio in period 0.
                                                31




Table 1: Parameter Values Yielding Positive Security Holdings
                    When Borrowing is Prohibited

(Fixed Parameters:       —   10.,   r —   .03, 0 = .1,   £   — .05)


           1.7 to 3.8

           -100. to -8.5
6L
           .05 to .13
aH
f          .6 to .9

g          .45 to .75

Note: Not all combinations will yield positive security holdings.
aL and c are determined endogenously given these values.




Table 2.   Parameters Generating a Separating Equilibrium


Parameters:

              £".OS, D0—10., L1—12., 6H18' 6L6'
              r—.03, aH_.O9, aL_ .08, f-.65, g—.5, 0...l

Equilibrium Portfolio and Borrowing:

                                       s=.02    B=12.
              S0—2.6    L0—7.875



Types borrowing in equilibrium: good/good/bad, good/bad/good,
and good/bad/bad.



The simulation programs are available from the authors upon request.
                                        32

                                   REFERENCES

Akerlof, George. "The Market for Lemons: Qualitative Uncertainty and he
Market Mechanism", quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (1970), 488-500.

Andrews, Suzanna and Henry Sender. "off Balance Sheet Risk: Where is it
Leading the Banks?" Institutional Investor, January 1986, pp. 75-84.

Baltensperger, Ernst. "The Precautionary Demand for Reserves", American
Economic Review 64 (March, 1974), 205-10.

Flannery, Mark J. "Deposit Insurance, Capital Regulation, and the Choice of
Bank Loan Default Rates", unpublished, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, 1987.

Frost, Peter A. "Banks' Demand for Excess Reserves", Journal of Political
Economy, (July/August, 1971), 805-25.

Hart, Oliver D. and Dwight M. Jaffee. "On the Application of Portfolio Theory
to Depository Financial Intermediaries", Review of Economic Studies 41,
(January, 1974), 129-47.

John, Kose and Nachman, D., "Multiperiod Financing Strategies and Dividend
Management", unpublished, New York University and Georgia Institute of
Technology, 1987.

Koehn, Michael and Anthony Santomero. "Regulation of Bank Capital and
Portfolio Risk", Journal of Finance 35 (December, 1980), 1235-44.

Lucas, Deborah and Robert L. McDonald. "Bank Portfolio Choice with Private
Information About Loan Quality: Theory and Implications for Regulation"
Forthcoming, Journal of Banking and Finance, (1987)

Marcus, Alan J. "Deregulation and Bank Financial Policy", Journal of Bankinz
and Finance, (1984) Vol 8, 557-565

Merton, Robert C. "An Analytic Derivation of the Cost of Deposit Insurance and
Loan Guarantees: An Application of Modern Option Pricing Theory", Journal of
Banking and Finance, 1 (June, 1977), 3-11.

 Myers, Stewart C. and Nicolas Majiuf. "Corporate Investment and
.Financing Decisions When Firms Have Information that Investors do Not Have",
 Journal of Financial Economics 13, (1984), pp. 187-222.

Poole, William. "Commercial Bank Reserve Management in a Stochastic Model:
Implications for Monetary Policy", Journal of Finance 23 (December, 1968), 769-
91.

Santomero, Anthony M. "Modelling the Banking Firm: A Survey", Journal of
Money. Credit, and Banking 16 (November, 1984), 576-602.
                                       33

Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss. "Sorting Out the Differences Between
Signalling and Screening Equilibria" working paper

Thakor, Anjan. "Toward a Theory of Bank Loan Commitments", Journal of Banking
and Finance 6 (March, 1982), 55-83.
                                        34


                                    FOOTNOTES


1. Some mechanisms exist to alleviate the problem of informational
asymmetry. To take one recent example, REMICs (Real Estate Mortgage
Investment Conduits) allow banks to sell mortgages, separated into junior and
senior claims. One would expect that by selling the senior claims and
retaining the junior claims, banks would face a smaller lemons discount when
selling these claims in the secondary market. We have also been told that
some resold credit card receivables are selected by an audited randomization
procedure. Nevertheless, such mechanisms are unlikely to completely
eliminate the lemons problem, since banks with poorer assets are likelier to
enter these markets in the first place.

2. Many off balance sheet activities such as swaps, futures, backup lines of
credit, and foreign exchange trading have the potential to increase the
riskiness of a bank's portfolio.

3. Banks by law cannot hold certain risky assets. For example, the Glass-
Steagell act prohibits holdings of corporate equity. Also, regulatory
pressure presumably can influence asset choice.

4. The ,6 terms provide an extra degree of freedom by allowing the fraction
of loans repaid early to vary. Since ÷         0, for aL < 0, we need .,b > 0.
5. The assumption that uncertainty is resolved completely is made for
simplicity. The same conclusions would follow if the bank still faced some
uncertainty about loan quality, but less than the market.

6. Here we use the fact that it is optimal to invest solely in loans the
final period. Because the bank is liquidated in period 2, securities merely
reduce the value of insurance, without providing liquidity.

7. Allowing the bank to pay dividends complicates the analysis since it is
then necessary to model the equity constraint to put a limit on dividends.
For a derivation of results in this kind of model, see Lucas and McDonald
(1987).

8. If investors knew 6, this would change the interest rate on uninsured
bank debt because it would change their inference about who was borrowing.

9. When straight debt is issued, the equity requirement necessitates raising
new equity. This complicates the analysis, because the new equity also must
be priced. Generally we expect banks to prefer debt to equity for two
reasons in this model. Increased equity reduces the value of FDIC insurance,
while the affect of non-subordinated debt generally is to increase it.
Secondly, poorer batks are more likely to participate in a pooling
equilibrium with equity than with debt, so the lemons cost of equity tends to
be higher. This is similar to the findings of Myers and Majiuf. In
particular, it can be shown in our model that good/good banks never would
issue equity.
                                        35

     Borrowing at the discount window is another alternative to loan sales.
In practice this does not appear to be an unlimited source of funds, so
uninsured security issues can still be necessary.

10. If banks with good loans could signal their quality, then c would be a
premium rather than a discount for these banks.

11. The equilibrium is sensitive to whether or not loan sales are observable.
When loan sales are observable, good banks may be able to signal their
quality by their restraint in loan sales, and sell some loans costlessly.
Thus a separating equilibrium may obtain in which the informational asymmetry
is costless for the good/bad banks. This is a much more complicated problem
than the unobservable case.

12.  In the simulations the possibility that bad/bads also would choose to
borrow is accounted for. However, unless equity is large relative to the
variability of loan quality, they can never profitably borrow.

13. This expression assumes that banks with bad loans in period 1 sell them.
The comparison with securities is even less favorable if banks do. not sell
bad loans in period 1. For convenience we also assume    is zero, but any ,b<l
provides a similar result.

14. Without this restriction there would be no need to buffer old loans from
sales.

15. It is possible that good/bad/bads or bad/good/bads also would be willing
to pay a premium to protect good loans. In fact they could potentially borrow
a small amount at the riskfree rate to avoid selling good loans if the bad
loans did not push them into insolvency. However, for the parameter values
yielding separating equilibria, both of these groups are bankrupt unless they
mimic the good/good/bads.
