a

The Effect of Education on Health and Mortality: A Review of Experimental and Quasi-Experimental
Evidence.
Titus J. Galama, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Hans van Kippersluis
NBER Working Paper No. 24225
January 2018
JEL No. I26
ABSTRACT
Education is strongly associated with better health and longer lives. However, the extent to which
education causes health and longevity is widely debated. We develop a human capital framework
to structure the interpretation of the empirical evidence. We then review evidence on the causal
effects of education on mortality and its two most common preventable causes: smoking and
obesity. We focus attention on evidence from Randomized Controlled Trials, twin studies, and
quasi-experiments. There is no convincing evidence of an effect of education on obesity, and the
effects on smoking are only apparent when schooling reforms affect individuals’ track or their
peer group, but not when they simply increase the duration of schooling. An effect of education
on mortality exists in some contexts but not in others, and seems to depend on (i) gender; (ii) the
labor market returns to education; (iii) the quality of education; and (iv) whether education affects
the quality of individuals’ peers.
Titus J. Galama
Dornsife Center for Economic and Social Research
University of Southern California
635 Downey Way
Los Angeles, CA 90089
galama@usc.edu
Adriana Lleras-Muney
Department of Economics
9373 Bunche Hall
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
alleras@ECON.UCLA.EDU

Hans van Kippersluis
Erasmus University Rotterdam
P.O. Box 1738
3000 DR Rotterdam
The Netherlands
hvankippersluis@ese.eur.nl

1

Introduction

More educated individuals live longer, healthier lives. A large literature has documented substantial
associations between education and mortality, health (self-reported health, obesity, etc.)

and health

behaviors (smoking, excessive drinking, exercise, preventive care use, etc.). Although the strength of these
relationships varies, such associations have been observed in many countries and time periods. Moreover,
the gap between the educated and less educated appears to be growing (Pappas et al. 1993; Meara et al.
2008). Such disparities in health are large. For example, in the United States, at age 25, those with more
than a college degree can expect to live up to seven years longer than those without a college degree (Meara
et al. 2008; Hummer and Hernandez, 2013). Substantial theoretical and empirical research is devoted to
understanding the causes of these disparities.
The earliest theoretical contribution was made by Michael Grossman, who developed a theory in which
health is a form of capital that individuals can produce (Grossman, 1972). Grossman’s seminal theory laid
the foundation for a substantial body of empirical and theoretical research on the determinants of health. It
was also the first work to discuss the various ways in which education might affect health and longevity. In
this review, we develop a theoretical framework based on this early model but inspired by recent advances in
theory, to investigate the relationship between human capital, schooling, mortality, and health behaviors. Our
theory updates the early Grossman model in some important aspects. First, health, skills, health behavior,
schooling, and longevity are all treated as endogenous, and they are allowed to vary as a function of initial
endowments, such as genes and parental characteristics. Second, inspired by the seminal work of Heckman
and others (e.g., Heckman et al. 2006; Cunha and Heckman, 2007), we distinguish between skills developed
in school and time spent in school. Finally, we explicitly model the role of laws and institutions that affect
schooling – this allows us to make predictions about the effects of compulsory schooling and other education
policies on health outcomes. Changes in such policies have been widely exploited in the empirical literature
to estimate the causal effects of education on health.
We then review recent empirical work in this area. A very large and recent literature has investigated
whether the association between education and health is causal or not. Does going to school increase
longevity? Does it improve health behaviors? The growing availability of large data sets in combination
with a revolution in empirical methods addressing causality has produced much new evidence on this old
question. We cover papers written since 2005 that investigate how education affects i) mortality, and ii)
smoking and obesity, the two most important determinants of preventable death and disease in the US and
most developed countries (Mokdad et al. 2004). We restrict attention to papers assessing causality using
randomized controlled trials, twin differences or quasi-experiments. The vast majority of empirical studies
use data from the developed world, which should be kept in mind when interpreting results.
Our findings are not uniform. We touch upon some methodological differences across studies. But

2

our focus is more substantive. While discrepancies in findings across studies can result from differences
or flaws in the empirical methodologies applied, we conclude that there is substantial evidence of genuine
heterogeneity in the estimated effects of education. We focus on understanding this heterogeneity, in light of
our theoretical model and of findings in this large literature. We do not conduct a formal meta-analysis here,
but our observations nevertheless allow us to draw broad conclusions from the existing empirical evidence.
We find no convincing evidence of an effect of education on obesity. There appear to be effects of education
on smoking and mortality, but these are only observed in some contexts and not in others. Among others, the
effects seem to differ by (i) gender; (ii) the labor market returns to education; (iii) the quality of education;
and (iv) whether education affects the quality of individuals’ peers. We discuss these findings extensively
and end with some suggestions for future research.

2

A Theory of Schooling, Skills and Health

2.1

Theoretical formulation

The theory we discuss below draws substantially on Galama and Van Kippersluis (2015a; 2015b). Consider
a model in which we decompose human capital into two components: health H(t) and skill θ(t), where skill
includes both cognitive and non-cognitive skills (Cunha and Heckman, 2007; Conti et al. 2010).1 Although
health cannot directly be bought, it can be produced by purchasing inputs such as food and medical care.
Similarly, skills can be enhanced by investments, for example by spending time in school. Like Grossman’s
1972 model, individuals make optimal lifetime decisions concerning skill and health inputs. These choices
determine skills and health, and thus affect labor-market outcomes and consumption choices, which in turn
determine health and mortality.
Individuals derive utility from consumption, health and not being in school, and make choices in order
to maximize their lifetime utility
Z
U = max
Z(t)

S

U [.]e

−ρt

0

Z

T

dt +

U [.]e

−ρt


dt ,

(1)

S

where Z(t) is the set of choice variables (to be discussed later), t = 0 corresponds to the age at which
individuals start school,2 S denotes years of schooling, T denotes the age of death, and ρ is a subjective
discount factor. Individual preferences are represented by a concave utility function U [.] that increases with
consumption goods and services XC (t), health H(t), and decreases with being in school cS (t).
1

We assume that health and skills are orthogonal traits. There are of course exceptions to this separation, e.g., dementia and

other health conditions that impair skills, which we ignore here for simplicity.
2
We assume here that parents make the decision about when to start school but that individuals decide when to end it. We ignore
issues regarding possible conflicts between parents and children, and model children as fully rational decision makers.

3

Individuals have access to assets and labor income, and must use them over their lifetime to pay for the
goods and services they consume. In addition, they must also spend time producing skills and improving
their health. The intertemporal budget constraint for assets A(t) is given by
∂A
= rA(t) + Y (t) − [1 − λS (t)]pS (t) − pθ (t)Xθ (t)
∂t
− pH (t)XH (t) − pC (t)XC (t),

0≤t<S

(2)

∂A
= rA(t) + Y (t) − f ∗ (t)I [t − S] − pθ (t)Xθ (t)
∂t
− pH (t)XH (t) − pC (t)XC (t).

S≤t<T

(3)

Assets A(t) (equations 2 and 3) provide a return r (the rate of return on capital), increase with income Y (t),
and decrease with purchases of skill inputs Xθ (t), health inputs XH (t), and consumption goods XC (t),
bought at prices pθ (t), pH (t), and pC (t), respectively. During the schooling period (up to S) individuals
pay a tuition fee pS (t), but receive a state (or parental) transfer that is a fraction λS (t) of tuition, where both
are exogenously determined. Thus, [1 − λS (t)]pS (t) is the effective net-of-subsidy tuition rate. Individuals
incur a fine f ∗ (t)I[t − S] if they enter the labor market before the minimum school-leaving age S, where
I[t − x] is the indicator function, which is 1 for 0 ≤ t ≤ x and zero otherwise.3
Income Y (t) ≡ Y [t, S, θ(t), H(t); S] consists of the product of the wage rate w[t, S, θ(t); S] and the
time spent working τw [H(t)]
Y [t, S, θ(t), H(t); S] = w[t, θ(t); S] × τw [H(t)],

0≤t<S

(4)

Y [t, S, θ(t), H(t); S] = w[t, S, θ(t); S] × τw [H(t)].

S≤t<T

(5)

We further implicitly assume that skills θ(t) and the schooling duration S (largely) determine the wage
rate, while health capital H(t) (largely) determines the time spent working. Wages depend explicitly on
the exogenous minimum school-leaving age S. For example, labor-laws might impose a fine on those who
employ individuals younger than S so that wages are lower below that age if the law is enforced.
When an individual is still in school (equation 4), years of schooling is measured by t (i.e. the wage
rate is not a function of optimal years of schooling S). After schooling has been completed (equation 5),
the wage rate w(t) is an (increasing) function of years of completed schooling S and the individual’s level
of skill θ(t).4 While schooling S is often used as a proxy for skills θ(t), there are reasons to believe that
schooling S may capture benefits beyond skill formation. For example, the effect of schooling or college
3

A useful interpretation of the fine f ∗ (t) is as a probability of getting caught and having to pay a cost when the individual is not

in school but should have been (S < S). For this reason it is modelled not as a one-off cost but as a cost that operates for as long
as the individual has not reached the minimum schooling age. Historically fines were the way in which compulsory schooling laws
were enforced.
4
In our formulation, we ignore possible sheepskin (or diploma) effects of completing a certain level of education.

4

graduation S on wages may reflect a potential signaling effect as skills, perseverance, and work ethic are
difficult to observe by the employer (Arrow, 1973; Spence, 1973; Lang and Kropp, 1986; Bedard, 2001).
The time constraint during the schooling and working phases of life are given by
Ω = τw (t) + τS (t) + τH (t) + s[H(t)],

0≤t<S

(6)

Ω = τw (t) + τθ (t) + τH (t) + s[H(t)],

S≤t<T

(7)

where
τS (t) = τθ (t) + τL (t).

(8)

The total available time Ω (in let’s say a day) is divided between work τw (t), time spent in school τS (t)
or devoted to skill investment τθ (t), time investments in health τH (t), and time lost due to illness s[H(t)]
(assumed to be a decreasing function of health). A fixed amount of time τS (t) spent in school can be used
for skill investments τθ (t) but also unproductively τL (t) (see 8). The “time lost” τL (t) is the difference
between compulsory hours spent in school and the desired hours of skill investment, τS (t) − τθ (t). While
unproductive in terms of skill formation, we allow τL (t) to decrease the disutility of schooling, cS [t; τL (t)].
Intuitively, some children experience low returns and high costs of investing in their skill. They may prefer
“staring out of the window" τL (t) over paying attention τθ (t). This distinction is important since it implies
that skill does not automatically increase with longer (compulsory) schooling duration. As we will see,
these intuitive constructs allow us to better understand heterogeneity in responses to policy changes aimed
at encouraging schooling.
The levels (stocks) of skills θ(t) and health H(t) evolve over time. Individuals can increase them
through investments (using production functions gθ (t) and gH (t)) but they also depreciate, according to the
following equations
∂θ(t)
∂t
∂H(t)
∂t

= gθ [t, Xθ (t), τθ (t), θ(t), H(t); ξ(t)] − dθ [t, θ(t); ξ(t)],
= gH [t, XH (t), τH (t), θ(t), H(t); ξ(t)] − dH [t, H(t), XC (t); ξ(t)].

(9)
(10)

While in school, individuals invest in skill capital gθ (t) through outlays Xθ (t) (e.g., books) and time
investments τθ (t) (e.g., paying attention in class, devoting effort to study).5 While working, individuals
learn on the job, and devote goods and services and time to learning outside of work Xθ (t), τθ (t) (Becker,
1964). Individuals invest in health gH (t) (equation 10) through expenditures XH (t) and time investments
τH (t) (e.g., medical care, flu shots, exercise).
5

Further, while in school, individuals may be provided with healthy nutritious foods, or simply be kept of the street which may

keep them out of trouble (incarceration effect; Weiss, 1995; Lochner and Moretti, 2004; Black et al. 2008; Lochner, 2011). This
would suggest that skills and health could also be a function of τS (t) as well as τθ (t).

5

The efficiency of the production functions gθ (t), gH (t) is assumed to be a function of the stocks of
skill θ(t) and health H(t). This allows us to model self-productivity, where skills produced at one stage
augment skills at later stages, and dynamic complementarity, where skills produced at one stage raise the
productivity of investment at later stages (Cunha and Heckman, 2007). At a deeper level, the production
functions also depend on ξ(t), which are time-invariant and predetermined endowments, including genes
and family background, and time-varying exogenous characteristics of the schooling and work environment
(for instance one’s peers, or the quality of one’s teachers).
The stock of skill deteriorates at the rate dθ (t), assumed to be a function of age t, the level of skill θ(t)
and endowments ξ(t). The stock of health deteriorates at the rate dH (t), assumed to be a function of age
t, the level of health H(t), consumption XC (t), and endowments ξ(t).6 Consumption goods and services
can be healthy (e.g., consumption of fruits / vegetables) or unhealthy (e.g., smoking, consumption of fatty /
sugary foods). Healthy consumption provides utility and slows down health depreciation, ∂dH /∂XC ≤ 0 as
in Case and Deaton (2005) and Galama and Van Kippersluis (2015b). Unhealthy consumption also provides
utility but instead increases health depreciation, ∂dH /∂XC > 0.
We assume individuals start life with a given level of health H0 , assets A0 and skills θ0 , which may
be influenced by genetic endowments and parental investments. Following the health-capital literature
(Grossman, 1972) life cannot be sustained below a certain minimum health: H(T ) = Hmin . Also, we
assume individuals spend all of their assets during their lives, i.e. A(T ) = 0. By contrast, following the
human-capital literature, the stock of skill at the end of life can be chosen freely, i.e. θ(T ) is unconstrained
(e.g., Ben-Porath, 1967).
Thus individuals maximize life-time utility (1) subject to Z(t), the set of control variables: Z(t) ≡
{S, T, Xθ , τθ , XH , τH , XC }. The Lagrangian (Seierstad and Sydsaeter, 1987; Caputo, 2005) of this problem
is:
∂H
∂A
∂θ
+ qH (t)
+ qA (t)
=(t) = U [.]e−ρt + qθ (t)
∂t
∂t

∂t
+ λL (t) τS (t) − τθ (t) − τL (t) + λHmin (t) [H(t) − Hmin (t)] ,

(11)

where qθ (t), qH (t), and qA (t) are the co-state variables associated with, respectively, the dynamic equation
(9) for skill capital θ(t), (10) for health H(t), and (2, 3) for assets A(t). These co-state variables can be
interpreted as the marginal values (or shadow prices) of the relevant capital stock (see Galama and Van
Kippersluis, 2015a). For example, qθ (t) is the marginal value in terms of the remaining life-time utility
(from t onwards) of an additional increment of skill capital θ(t). λL (t) is the Lagrange multiplier associated
with restriction (8) and λHmin (t) is the multiplier associated with the restriction H(t) ≥ Hmin (t).
6

An important criticism of the Grossman model, made by Dalgaard and Strulik (2014), is that health decline is arguably smaller

for people in better health. Our health production function is a flexible function of health and health investment, and encompasses
various specifications, including the original Grossman model as well as Dalgaard and Strulik’s health deficit model.

6

2.2

Comparison with the literature

Our theoretical formulation builds upon and extends workhorse human-capital models. In Ben-Porath’s
(1967) model, individuals invest in human capital throughout life to increase their productivity, but human
capital is one-dimensional (skill), a schooling period does not feature in the model, and longevity is
exogenous. Card (2001) models a schooling period similar to ours, but does not distinguish between
schooling (spending time in school) and skill formation, and does not include investments in health and
longevity.
The seminal health-capital model of Grossman (1972) treats health as a capital stock that individuals
invest in, but assumes longevity T and education are exogenously given. Ehrlich and Chuma (1990),
Galama (2015) and Galama and Van Kippersluis (2015b) model both health and longevity as endogenous,
but treat education as exogenously given. Becker (2007) presents a two-period model where individuals
can invest in skill, and health, but has no schooling period and health investments solely affect mortality
risk. A closely related model is presented in Strulik (2016), where both health and human capital are
endogenously determined, and in which individuals accrue, so-called, health deficits as opposed to facing
health depreciation.
As in Galama and Van Kippersluis (2015a) and Strulik (2016), we jointly model health H(t), skill θ(t),
optimal schooling S and optimal longevity T . Hence, we distinguish explicitly between schooling duration
S and skill θ(t). Schooling S is the choice to spend a certain number of years in school, while skill is
a capital stock subject to investment and depreciation. In contrast to Strulik (2016), in which the number
of years spent in school is the only endogenous input into skill capital, we allow for (i) other inputs into
skill capital besides schooling duration; and (ii) the possibility that the stock of skill does not increase with
schooling duration if those years are spent unproductively.
While skill and schooling are separate concepts, the two are clearly connected since schooling is a period
of life that is characterized by a low opportunity cost of time, encouraging time investments in skill. This is
because 1) skills are low early in life and hence are wages, and 2) schooling imposes a fixed amount of time
τS (t) that cannot be devoted to work. We argue that both schooling and skills determine wages, as skills (at
least initially) are hard to observe for employers and so schooling may serve as a signal for skills. However,
only skills influence the production function of skill formation and health, not the duration of schooling per
se.
Importantly, the model of section 2.1 explicitly adds to Galama and Van Kippersluis (2015a) the role of
institutions and laws that regulate prices, wages, whether individuals are legally required to be in school
and until what age, and the penalties and enforcement associated with such laws. This allows us to
derive theoretical predictions about the institutional reforms that are often exploited as quasi-experiments
in empirical research, an important focus of the current review. However, as is true for most models that
investigate this question, ours does not incorporate general equilibrium effects.
7

2.3

Optimal schooling, consumption, and longevity

Schooling: Assuming that the (dis)utility of schooling is additively separable from consumption and
health, U [·] = U [XC (t), H(t)] − cS (t, τL (t))I[t − S], and making some further simplifying assumptions
detailed in the Appendix, we obtain a condition for the optimal years of schooling S,


Y (S+ ) − Y (S− ) + qA (S)−1 cS [S, τL (S)]e−ρS + [1 − λS (S− )]pS (S− )
Z

T

+pθ (S)[Xθ (S− ) − Xθ (S+ )] =
S

∂Y (t)
dt + f ∗ (S)I(S − S) + qθ/a (S) [gθ (S− ) − gθ (S+ )] ,
∂S

(12)

where qθ/a (t) ≡ qθ (t)/qA (t), S− indicates the limit in which S is approached from below, and S+ when
approached from above, and we have replaced S− and S+ with S for functions that are continuous in S.
This condition states that individuals will join the labor market at the age S, the age at which the (net)
benefits of work exceed the (net) benefits of staying in school. The left-hand side (LHS) represents the
benefits of entering the labor market, while the right-hand side (RHS) represents the benefits of staying in
school. The benefits of entering the labor market consist of (i) additional labor income Y (S+ ) − Y (S− ):
individuals have more time to work, since they no longer have to spend a fixed amount of time in school
τS (t);7 (ii) they no longer suffer disutility from schooling cS [S, τL (S)];8 (iii) they do not have to pay
(subsidized) tuition [1 − λS (S− )]pS (S− ); and (iv) they incur fewer monetary costs related to skill formation
pθ (S)[Xθ (S− ) − Xθ (S+ )].9
The benefits of staying in school are (i) increased future earnings, (ii) not incurring a fine f ∗ (S)
before the minimum school-leaving age S, and (iii) the value of additional skill investment while in school
qθ/a (S) [gθ (S− ) − gθ (S+ )].
Investment: The first order conditions for investment in skill and health are given by
qθ/a (t) = πθ (t),

(13)

qh/a (t) = πH (t),

(14)

and

where qθ/a (t) is the relative marginal value of skill, qθ/a (t) ≡ qθ (t)/qA (t), qh/a (t) is the relative marginal
value of health, qh/a (t) ≡ qH (t)/qA (t), πθ (t) is the marginal cost of skill investment, and πH (t) is the
7

Potentially the wage rate changes too right after dropping out of school, if the minimum school-leaving age coincides with

labor laws.
8
Of course, many people enjoy being in school and for them this would represent a cost rather than a benefit of working.
9
Theory predicts skill investment drops after graduation as the opportunity cost of time investment is lower during schooling
since individuals have to spent a fixed amount of time τS (t) in school. If there are complementarities between goods / services
Xθ (t) and time inputs τθ (t) then investment goods will also be lower.

8

marginal cost of health investment (see 23, 24, 26 and 27 for explicit expressions). The marginal cost of skill
investment πθ (t) and the marginal cost of health investment πH (t) increase in the level of investment in skill
and health (due to diminishing returns to scale in investment), increase in prices pθ (t), pH (t), and increase
in the wage rate w(t) (opportunity cost of time inputs, see Galama and Van Kippersluis [2015a,2015b] for
details). Leaving prices and wages aside, a higher relative marginal value of health qh/a (t) or skill qθ/a (t)
implies higher investment in health or skill (see 13 and 14).
Consumption: The first-order condition for consumption is given by
∂dH
1 ∂U −ρt
e
= pC (t) + qh/a (t)
.
qA (t) ∂XC
∂XC

(15)

Consider an unhealthy consumption good (e.g., cigarettes) that increases the health deterioration rate
∂dH /∂XC > 0. The marginal benefits (LHS of 15) consist of the discounted marginal utility of the
consumption good, while the marginal costs (RHS) consists of the monetary cost pC (t) and the health
cost qh/a (t)(∂dH /∂XC ). The health cost is the product of the relative marginal value of health, qh/a (t), and
the amount of health lost due to unhealthy consumption ∂dH /∂XC .
Longevity: Optimal longevity is determined by the point where there are no longer net benefits of staying
alive (this is the point where the Lagrangian is zero; see 28 in the Appendix),
1
∂H
∂A
=(T )
=
U [XC (T ), H(T )]e−ρT + qh/a (T )
+
= 0.
qA (T )
qA (T )
∂t
∂t

(16)

The relative marginal value of skill qθ/a (t) approaches zero near the end of life as individuals can choose
the terminal level of skill optimally. They then choose its level such that small increments in skill no longer
have value at the end of life: qθ/a (T ) = 0.10 Thus, the second term in (11) vanishes. Health declines near
the end of life as it approaches the minimum health level Hmin , and assets eventually decline as declining
health reduces earnings and increases medical expenditure, and because terminal assets are constrained
to zero. With declining health and declining assets, the second and third terms in (16) compete with the
additional utility provided by adding an increment of longevity (first term in 16). The optimal point of death
T occurs when the utility of consumption XC (T ) and health H(T ) no longer outweighs the increasing costs
of maintaining health.
10

This is not true for wealth A(T ) and health H(T ) as individuals cannot choose their terminal levels optimally. Hence, the

transversality conditions for the co-state equations are: qθ (T ) = 0, while qH (T ) ≥ 0 and qA (T ) ≥ 0.

9

2.4

Implications for empirical analyses

2.4.1

Supply side reforms and compliers

Equation (12) provides a useful reference to understand the effect of model parameters on the optimal
schooling decision, and to understand heterogeneity in schooling choices. In particular, the expression
suggests there are various ways to encourage additional schooling. First, the government or parents can
fund schooling λS (t)pS (t) (e.g., financial aid, conditional on being in school). Second, labor-laws might
stipulate that it is illegal to employ individuals younger than age S so that earnings Y (S) are effectively
zero below that age if the law is enforced. Third, in addition to the schooling subsidy λS (t)pS (t), the
government may subsidize skill investment pθ (t)Xθ (t) (e.g., books, access to libraries, additional classes,
uniforms, computers). Fourth, the government may set a minimum to hours of instruction or term length,
operating through τS (t). Last, governments often set a minimum school-leaving age S, and individuals may
incur a fine f ∗ (S) if they drop out of school before this age.
All supply side reforms work to lower the costs or to increase the benefits of schooling (equation 12),
and can often be considered as plausibly exogenous for a given individual. The most popular supply side
reform is undoubtedly changes in minimum school-leaving ages. In this section we discuss its effects.
Equation (12) highlights that increasing the minimum school-leaving age S has two effects: it increases
the period over which individuals are exposed to a possible fine f ∗ (S) (second term on the RHS of 12), and
potentially raises the legal age at which one can earn wages, and hence income Y (S+ ) − Y (S− ) (first term
on the LHS of 12). These effects alter the net benefits for each individual of staying in school longer. Taking
the derivative of equation (12) with respect to S, and assuming that individuals value skill qθ/a (t) more than
health qh/a (t) early in life, then (see 32 in the Appendix) the comparative dynamic effect of the minimum
school-leaving age on schooling can be summarized as:





 ∂q (S) ∂q (S) ∂θ(S) ∂H(S) ∂T
dS
θ/a

 A
;
=f
;
;
;
; βS  ,
dS
∂S
∂S
∂S
∂S |{z}
 ∂S
| {z } | {z } | {z } | {z } |{z} +/−
+/−

+

+

+

(17)

+

where + indicates a positive effect, − indicates a negative effect, +/− denotes an ambiguous effect, and
βS is defined in (32). The terms on the RHS represent various effects of raising the minimum school-leaving
age on the optimal schooling decision: wealth effects (1st term),11 increased relative marginal value of skill
(2nd term), a higher stock of skill (3rd term), better health (4th term), a longer life (5th term), and effects
operating through labor laws (6th term).12
11
12

The sign of this term depends on whether time in school provides utility or disutility, cS (t).
The very last term represents the possibility that wages depend explicitly on the exogenous minimum school-leaving age S:

labor-laws might impose a fine on those who employ individuals younger than S so that wages are lower below that age if the law is

10

Expression (17) captures a characteristic of the comparative dynamic analyses that many effects operate
through the marginal values of wealth, skill and health. In what follows, it is useful to adopt the usual
assumption of diminishing returns to wealth, skill and health. This implies that the marginal value of wealth
qA (t) is smaller and the relative marginal values of skill qθ/a (t) and of health qh/a (t) are larger for those
with greater wealth. Thus, if raising the minimum schooling age affects lifetime wealth, then these effects
are operational.
For some individuals, raising the minimum school-leaving age S does not affect their schooling decision
S, since they would have chosen to complete far more or far less schooling anyway. Consider an individual
who starts life endowed with skill and ability to learn, excels in school and is in an environment where
her skill formation is enabled and valued. She is efficient in absorbing and internalizing the information
provided in class, has the necessary materials at her disposal, the quality of the teaching and the school and
home environment are conducive to skill formation, and she potentially enjoys being in school (utility rather
than disutility cS (t)). As a result of these many factors, her skills θ(t) grow: the process of skill-formation is
“productive” (raises skill) and “efficient” (uses the inputs time and goods / services effectively). Further, she
is healthy and expects to live a long life T , the institutional environment (few barriers, such as discrimination,
corruption, crime, etc.) and the labor market (high wages, high employment) enable and value the use of her
RT
skills (high returns to skill, S (∂Y /∂S) dt). She would not be influenced by the minimum school-leaving
age S since she would optimally choose a far greater number of years of schooling S > S. Raising the
minimum schooling age S would not have an effect on her choice S. Effectively, since there is no change
in schooling, and thereby in wealth, all terms in equation (17) are zero (no effects on the marginal values of
wealth, skill and health).13
Another way of understanding this result is by noting that condition (12) is not the usual equilibrium
equation, but a switching equation. The optimal level of schooling S occurs when the net marginal benefits
of staying in school equal, for the first time, the net marginal costs. In this case, the net marginal benefits
of staying in school outweigh the net marginal costs for all ages before and much past the minimum school
leaving age S. Increasing the benefits of schooling for ages well before the optimal schooling age S for this
individual does not affect her choice since marginal benefits already exceeded marginal costs for those ages.
The second type of individual who is unlikely to alter her schooling decision is one who is endowed
with few skills and less ability to learn to begin with, which renders investments in skill rather unproductive.
Further, she strongly dislikes going to school, and in order to decrease the disutility of schooling, she chooses
to spend time unproductively τL (t) rather than making the effort to acquire skills τθ (t). Before the change
in the minimum school-leaving age, she already dropped out well before the legal age. Increasing the net
enforced. This would represent a discontinuity in the wage rate at S. The effect would operate only on those for whom the optimal
schooling age S and the minimum school-leaving age S coincide, i.e. it affects those individuals who are potential compliers.
13
If the completion of schooling by the compliers (those at the margin) increases competition in the labor-force then “economy"
wide (general equilibrium) effects may reduce the returns to her schooling, resulting in a negative wealth effect.

11

marginal benefits of staying in school at ages well after the age she dropped optimally out of school S
does not affect her choice (net marginal costs already exceeded net marginal benefits well before the old
minimum age).14
Now consider the marginal individual. She would prefer to enter the labor market to make more money,
but at the same time does not want to incur a fine for dropping out early and recognizes that investing in
skill increases her future earnings. She optimally decides to drop out of school exactly at S, the minimum
school leaving age. Now, if the government raises the minimum school leaving age, S, this individual has
to re-optimize. For this individual, the net benefits of staying in school longer were negative under the old
regime. Hence, the fine has to be set such that the individual will comply with the reform, and chooses to
stay in school until the new school-leaving age. This group of individuals at the margin forms the group of
‘compliers’.
Equation (17) illustrates the various factors entering the decision whether or not to comply. First, the
costs of dropping out at the previous optimal S (i.e. before the new S) increase since she would incur a
fine and forego a potential subsidy. This provides incentives to comply and increase schooling to S, and
is reinforced by the potential wealth effects associated with an extra year in school if additional schooling
increases skills and earnings (terms 1 to 3 on the RHS). Second, she might invest more in skill because
of the lower opportunity cost of time as she needs to spend a given amount of time τS (t) in school (term
2). If, for the marginal individual, the institutions and labor-market conditions are such that the additional
schooling increases life-time skills, and skills lead to higher earnings, then the resulting greater investment
in health, healthier behavior and longer lives may provide additional benefits of staying in school longer
(terms 4 and 5). Finally, labor laws may stipulate that employment is not gainful before the new minimum
school-leaving age (term 6). Thus, the complier increases (by definition) her level of schooling, but only if
additional schooling increases skills and earnings do we expect to observe improvements in health, health
behaviors and longevity. The magnitude of these health effects among compliers depends on institutions and
on economic and social conditions that may vary by cohort, gender, level of a country’s development, etc.,
as we discuss below. Also note that it is important that individuals correctly perceive these benefits, and are
not credit-constrained, in order for them to change their decisions. The theoretical model assumes perfect
information and perfect credit markets, but in practice both assumptions may not hold for certain subgroups
of the population. We discuss these possible explanations in section 4.
14

But she is not unaffected. When the minimum school-leaving age is increased, and the individual does not increase her

schooling duration, she now faces an even longer duration over which she pays a fine and / or cannot earn wages. This negatively
affects her lifetime wealth, and hence her skill and health production (terms 1-4 on the RHS of 17). The model also allows for
situations in which this group of non-compliers minimally increase or decrease their schooling duration, with ambiguous effects on
lifetime wealth, skill, and health.

12

2.4.2

Effects of compulsory schooling on consumption and mortality

Consumption The effect of a change in the minimum-school leaving age S on (unhealthy) consumption
can be summarized by:





∂qh/a (t)
∂H(t) 
∂XC (t)
∂qA (t)


; β2,C
; β3,C
= f β1,C

∂S
∂S
∂S
∂S 

|
{z
} |
{z
} | {z }
−

+

(18)

+/−

where β1,C to β3,C are defined in (33).
The effect of the minimum school-leaving age S on unhealthy consumption is ambiguous. The derivative
can be decomposed into two main terms.15 The first term represents a wealth effect, and is positive
among compliers: increased schooling leads to an increase in wealth enabling more unhealthy consumption
(∂qA (S)/∂S < 0 and β1,C < 0).
Yet, an increase in schooling, and the associated wealth effect, also leads to a higher marginal value of
health relative to wealth qh/a (t) (second term on the RHS). This is quite intuitive (see also Hall and Jones,
2007): due to diminishing marginal utility of consumption, richer people eventually start caring less about
consumption and more about other goods, such as health, since health extends life (adding additional periods
of utility rather than marginal improvements in utility from higher consumption). A higher relative marginal
value of health increases the health cost of unhealthy consumption [qh/a (t)∂d/∂XC ], and therefore reduces
the demand for unhealthy consumption. This health cost effect competes with the wealth effect, and the net
effect of the minimum-school leaving age S on unhealthy consumption XC (t) is ambiguous.
We can say a bit more on the competition between the wealth effect and the health cost effect. The
health cost increases in the severity of its impact on health, ∂dH /∂XC (the degree of “unhealthiness” of the
consumption good). This suggests that for moderately unhealthy goods the direct wealth effect dominates,
while for severely unhealthy goods the indirect wealth effect dominates (Van Kippersluis and Galama, 2014;
Galama and Van Kippersluis 2015b).
In sum, a rise in the minimum school-leaving age may impact unhealthy behaviors such as smoking and
poor diet through wealth effects (schooling leads to higher lifetime earnings enabling more consumption)
and health-cost effects (schooling increases the relative marginal value of health through better job prospects
and higher lifetime wealth, thereby reducing demand for unhealthy consumption). Because the health
cost increases in the degree of unhealthiness of the good, we expect the wealth effect to dominate among
moderately unhealthy goods, and the health cost effect to dominate among severely unhealthy goods. Note
that the results depend on the assumption that individuals are perfectly informed about the precise health
15

The third term on the RHS of (18) shows that an increase in the minimum school-leaving age may impact health at later

ages, which, depending on whether unhealthy consumption and health are complements or substitutes in utility and in the rate of
depreciation, may reinforce either the wealth or health-cost effect (see 18). This term is therefore difficult to sign.

13

consequences of consumption goods ∂d/∂XC – if people are unaware of the health effects of unhealthy
behavior, the term capturing its effect in the optimization would vanish and the wealth effect would
dominate, in which case more schooling would lead to more unhealthy behavior. This could, for example,
explain why higher educated individuals were more likely to smoke before the 1964 Surgeon General’s
report warned about its effects.
Longevity The condition for the effect of the minimum school-leaving age S on optimal length of life T
can be written as (see 37 and 40 in the Appendix)





∂qh/a (T ) 
∂qA (T )
∂θ
∂T


= f β1,T
; β2,T
; β3,T

∂S
∂S
∂S
∂S 

|
{z
} | {z } |
{z
}
+

+/−

(19)

+

where β1,T to β3,T are defined in (40).
Conditions (19) and (40) illustrate the various ways through which a rise in the minimum school-leaving
age S may affect longevity. The first term on the RHS is the wealth effect, among compliers, if extra
schooling boosts lifetime wealth, i.e. if schooling enhances skills that are valued in the labor market and
because of signalling. Individuals with more resources can afford to devote resources to increasing life
expectancy (first term on the RHS, β1,T < 0 and ∂qA (T )/∂S < 0).16 However, there also exist scenarios
in which wealthier individuals would choose to spend more resources on unhealthy consumption, and live
shorter lives as a result. Hence the ambiguous sign. The second term on the RHS of (19 and 40) shows
that, to the extent that an increase in the minimum school-leaving age boosts skills among compliers,
these additional skills improve skill and health production, and increase earnings, all of which enable
life extension through greater lifetime resources and better health (2nd term on the RHS, β2,T > 0 and
∂θ/∂S > 0). Finally, through diminishing returns to wealth and skill, and/or because of improved health
knowledge, a higher minimum school-leaving age may lead individuals to value health relatively more
compared with wealth, invest more in health (see 14), and live longer as a result (third term on the RHS,
β3,T ∂qh/a (T )/∂S

T,S

> 0).

In sum, a rise in the minimum school-leaving age may impact longevity through wealth effects, improved
skill formation, and a higher relative marginal value of health, improving health behavior. The magnitude of
these effects, and in the case of the wealth effect also its sign, depends on the relative importance of terms in
equation (19). Studying these terms more thoroughly, using equation (40) in the Appendix, reveals that the
effect of a raise of the minimum school-leaving age on longevity among compliers will be stronger when (i)
the labor market returns to schooling are high, (ii) the quality of education and the motivation of students
16

For the never-takers who drop out of school before the minimum school-leaving age, the wealth effect is negative. For them

this may lead to poorer health and lower life expectancy.

14

is such that additional schooling boosts skill formation, and (iii) the non-monetary returns to this additional
skill are large (e.g., skills improving skill formation and skills improving health production). We will discuss
whether the empirical findings are consistent with these predictions in sections 4.1 and 4.2. Obviously, the
magnitude and importance of these terms varies across time periods and settings, and our theory suggests
there will be cases where a rise in the minimum school-leaving age does not improve skills, increase wealth,
or improve health outcomes (see section 4.3). Finally, there may be other channels through which minimum
school-leaving laws affect health outcomes that are not captured in our model. We discuss those in sections
4.4 and 4.5.

3

Empirical evidence

In the following review of the literature we focus on the effects of measures of skill and schooling on
mortality, smoking and obesity. Mortality is an unambiguous and precise measure of health that captures
circumstances throughout the lifetime. For the living, a large number of health measures are available but
there is no unique health indicator, aside from self-reported health status. Because self-reported health status
is a subjective measure, we instead focus on the 1st and 2nd leading causes of preventable disease and death
in the United States: smoking and obesity (Mokdad et al. 2004). To compare across studies, we focus
on whether or not an individual smokes currently (a binary indicator), and whether their Body-Mass Index
(BMI) exceeds the threshold for obesity (BMI ≥ 30). Both obesity and smoking are unambiguous measures
of bad health.17
We organize the sections by methodology. We first discuss Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs),
arguably the gold standard for establishing causal effects (Imbens 2010). Unfortunately, there are only a
few RCTs for childhood education, and the samples are small and not representative. For this reason, we
rely mostly on quasi-experimental methods, which seek to replicate experimental conditions (sometimes
also referred to as natural experiments). We separately discuss (i) twin studies, where within-twin-pair
differences in education are related to within-twin-pair differences in health outcomes, implicitly accounting
for all genetic and family characteristics shared by twin pairs; and (ii) quasi-experiments, where instrumental
variables (IV) or Regression Discontinuity Designs (RDD) are used to estimate a treatment effect of
education on health outcomes.
There are alternative approaches to assess causality. In the absence of random assignment, one can use
observational data to infer causal effects based on a number of econometric methods. The control-function
17

Although many studies report effects of education on BMI or overweight (BMI between 25 and 30) these results are difficult

to interpret. Changes in BMI within normal ranges (18.5-25) are not strongly associated with poor health and mortality. Similarly,
overweight individuals appear to have lower mortality than individuals in the normal BMI range (e.g., Flegal et al. 2013), also
making this an ambiguous measure of health. Obesity, on the other hand, is clearly associated with increased morbidity and
mortality (ibid).

15

approach to solving the omitted variable bias problem allows researchers to control for essential observable
and unobservable variables, often using data from a specific cohort (e.g., Conti et al. 2010; Savelyev, 2014;
Bijwaard et al. 2015). A limitation of the control-function approach is that it relies on generalizations of
the conditional independence assumption. We do not include papers that follow this approach in our review
since they vary widely in terms of methodology and are therefore hard to classify. Finally, the literature on
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimations is large and diverse in terms of included control variables, which
makes it challenging to summarize. We refer the reader to Grossman (2015) for a review of methods that do
not rely on experimental or quasi-experimental randomization.
We include studies that (i) were published after 2005; (ii) focus on the causal effect of education
on all-cause mortality,18 current smoking or obesity; and (iii) used an RCT, twin difference design or
quasi-experiment to assess the causal effect of education on mortality, current smoking or obesity.19

3.1

RCTs

Randomized experiments are the preferred method to establish treatment effects. When a random subset of
individuals is treated, there are no average differences in the characteristics of the treated and the controls.
Therefore, the controls can provide a counterfactual outcome. For practical and ethical reasons, there are no
RCTs that give individuals “one more year" of formal schooling. There is, however, useful indirect evidence
based on interventions that provide incentives to individuals to attend school.
In the United States, the most studied randomized interventions of this type are the Perry Preschool
Program (implemented in the 1960s) and the Abecederian (ABC) Program (implemented in the 1970s),
both of which offered Early Childhood Education (ECE). Perry provided access to preschool education to
a random subset of children between the ages of three and five. It offered intensive cognitive and language
skill activities. The ABC program treated children between ages zero and five, and a subset up to age eight.
In addition to cognitive stimulation, children received nutritional support and other health services. Because
the Perry and ABC interventions occurred decades ago, it is now possible to investigate how they affected
formal years of schooling, IQ, wages and health in adulthood. But it is too early to use these to investigate
mortality.
Table 1 summarizes the results of RCT interventions. Males, randomly assigned to Perry, were less
18
19

Palme and Simeonova (2015) and Leuven et al. (2016) focus on the effect of education on cancer risk and mortality.
The exact search command in Google Scholar we used was “instrumental variable" OR “regression discontinuity" OR “natural

experiment" OR “exogenous variation", AND “causal effect of education on mortality" for the quasi-experiment studies, where
mortality was replaced by obesity or smoking for the other outcomes. This delivered 64 hits for mortality, 30 for obesity, and 24 for
smoking. For the twin studies we used “twin difference" OR “twin fixed effects" OR “co-twin", AND “causal effect of education on
mortality", where again mortality (5 hits) was replaced by obesity (1 hit) and smoking (1 hit) for the other outcomes. We manually
went through all of these hits, and the references therein, and applied our selection criteria to arrive at the selection of papers
reviewed here. We have done our utmost to identify all relevant papers but recognize we may have missed a few in the process.

16

likely to smoke at age 27 (Heckman et al. 2013) and less likely to be a daily smoker at age 40 (Conti et al.
2016). This was not true for females. ABC recipients were less likely to be obese, though these effects are
not statistically significant (Campbell et al. 2014, Conti et al. 2016). The likely mechanisms, by which these
two ECE interventions improved health, are interesting. Neither Perry nor ABC had statistically significant
impacts on IQ, and Perry did not affect formal measures of education (years of school). But the interventions
affected non-cognitive skills, such as externalizing behaviors, and also increased achievement scores, such
as grades, which reflect motivation in addition to skill and knowledge. In adulthood, treated individuals had
higher employment, higher earnings, lower participation in crime and higher rates of marriage.
Although these findings provide strong evidence of a causal effect of ECE, they have several limitations.
First, the Perry and ABC studies are each based on small samples of about 100 observations. Second, these
studies concentrate on very disadvantaged children from poor families. In addition, Perry preschool targeted
only African Americans within an IQ range of 70 to 85 – many would be considered cognitively impaired
today – so it is unclear to what extent results apply to less disadvantaged and higher IQ individuals. ABC
participants were not exclusively African Americans, and they had higher IQs than those in Perry, but were
still drawn from poor populations with low baseline IQs. Lastly, the ABC intervention included a large
health component, so effects on health and health behaviors do not necessarily stem from education alone.
We also report the results of one more RCT. Jensen and Lleras-Muney (2014) investigate the effects of
an intervention in the Dominican Republic. The intervention informed male students at the end of middle
school (around age 14) of the wage increases associated with attending high school (the randomization was
done at the school level). Treated boys were less likely to smoke by age 18 (and delayed the onset of alcohol
consumption). This study also investigated mechanisms. Treated boys were more likely to stay in school,
worked less and earned less pocket money while in school, and were less likely to interact with smokers.
The intervention did not affect participants’ knowledge of the harms of smoking, nor did it affect their
discount rates or their attitudes towards risk. This study also has several limitations. The children were also
disadvantaged, drawn from poor neighborhoods with low high school attendance rates, females were not
included, and all measures, except for schooling, are based on self reports.
Despite their limitations, some interesting conclusions can be drawn from these interventions. First,
interventions that provide some form of schooling appear to improve some health behaviors. Because the
ABC intervention included a health component that could directly explain the obesity results, the most
conservative conclusion is that education, early in life or in high school, appears to lower smoking among
disadvantaged males (more evidence is needed for obesity). Second, results differ for males and females,
though it is not entirely clear why this is so. Third, in all cases, earnings, social skills and connections, appear
to have been improved by the intervention, suggesting they could be mediators. Lastly, the Perry preschool
program affected some important non-cognitive skills and motivation, despite having no effect on IQ or
formal years of schooling, in line with predictions of the model (better use of school time, e.g., because of

17

better quality teachers, would result in greater skill without increases in schooling duration). It appears that
important non-cognitive skills were formed by participation in these programs. These non-cognitive skills
provided important benefits such as greater earnings, greater social connections and more stable marriages
later in life. These improvements may explain better health behaviors in later life.

3.2

Twin studies

An alternative approach to RCTs is to mimic the results of experimental variation by finding a setting were
almost all determinants of health are identical, but there is some variation in education that is close to
random. Since important determinants of health can be traced to family inputs early in life, a substantial
literature has pursued a within-twin estimation approach. The intuition behind this approach is that twins
face very similar conditions – they share food, parents, neighbours, age, genetic traits, and have the same
number of siblings. Further, identical twins share the same gender and have identical genetic endowments.
Under the assumption that differences in education between twins are due to random factors, differences in
outcomes across twins can be thought of as mostly resulting from differences in their education.
Table 2 reports the findings of studies that use twins to estimate the effect of education on mortality and
smoking. The data for these studies come mostly from twin registries in various developed countries and
contain a large number of observations (at least a thousand). The two U.S. studies rely on the Midlife U.S.
Survey, and have smaller samples (of about 350 and 650). We report results for identical twins.
Twin studies usually start by reporting the effect of education using an OLS regression. These estimates
compare the health of those with higher and lower levels of schooling. Thus the differences in outcomes
reflect differences in education within and across twins. All OLS estimates in Table 2 find that for both
men and women, education is associated with lower mortality and reduced smoking. The twin-fixed
effect estimates only use within twin variation for identification, controlling for shared genetic and family
characteristics. We discuss the twin studies in more detail below.
Four studies report effects of education on mortality (Table 2, panel A). A Swedish study (Lundborg
et al. 2016) finds statistically significant twin FE estimates that are about the same size as OLS estimates.
The results suggest that education lowers mortality very substantially for both men and women – a year of
education is estimated to reduce mortality by 4 to 5 percent – and also that the bias in OLS estimates is low.
Three studies use Danish data. Behrman et al. (2011) finds statistically insignificant twin FE effects on
mortality, that are also of “the wrong sign". Van den Berg et al. (2012) report within-twin FE estimates of
education on mortality that are negative and statistically significant for men, and these are similar to OLS
estimates. Finally, Madsen et al. (2010) uses a larger sample of Danish twins and measure duration until
death (rather than whether death has occurred by 2003 as in Berhman et al.). This study finds mixed results.
The within twin FE estimates are not statistically significant, but they are larger than OLS in magnitude for
the oldest male cohort, and smaller and close to zero for the younger male cohort. In all three Danish studies
18

the effects for women are insignificant and within pair estimates are always smaller than OLS estimates (or
have the wrong sign).
The three studies for smoking (Table 2, panel B) find a negative, but very small and statistically
insignificant, effect of education on smoking, once twin-fixed effects are included. However these studies
have very small sample sizes. Finally, there are no studies that report effects on obesity.20
There are some well-known methodological issues with twin approaches, which have been extensively
discussed elsewhere (e.g., Bound and Solon, 1999). First, twin studies have important power limitations.
The variation in education within twins is small, because the share of twins with identical education levels is
very high (more than 40 percent in all studies). And, when they exist, the observed differences in education
are often due to measurement error.
A second issue in twin studies is whether they can control for birth weight and for health conditions
since conception. Even though identical twins share identical genetic material, they have differential access
to nutrition in the womb and one twin is typically born larger and heavier than his / her counterpart. Because
nutrition is different in utero, traits that are affected by nutrition, such as IQ or heart function, could also
differ across twins. Moreover, parents might make compensating or reinforcing investments in response
to these initial differences (Aizer and Cunha, 2012). Therefore, even after controlling for birth weight,
there could be unobserved differences in inputs or environments within identical twins resulting in higher
schooling and better health. The fundamental difficulty is that it is not clear in these studies why one twin
has more schooling than the other, i.e., the source of variation is unclear.
A final question regarding twin studies is their external validity. Even though twins come from selected
parents, they are on average much closer to the general population in their characteristics and outcomes than
the participants of RCTs mentioned above. However, they have unique experiences relative to children from
singleton births with siblings – for instance their in utero environment is shared, and they are typically born
early and with low birth weights. Growing up, twins have an identical sibling, also a unique experience.
Thus, twin studies cannot estimate the average treatment effect (or ATE) of one more year of schooling.
Where does this leave us? The study with the largest sample of identical twins is the Swedish study by
Lundborg et al. (2016). This study also includes birth weight and height – two proxies for nutrition in the
womb and in childhood, and has excellent mortality measures. It also uses register data from administrative
sources, which typically contain less measurement error in education. Thus, the concerns raised above are
likely less severe in the Lundborg et al. (2016) analysis. This study finds large effects of education on
mortality for both women and men. The results of the three Danish studies are consistent with these findings
for men, but inconclusive for women and generally statistically insignificant (except in Van den Berg et al.
20

Within twin pairs, some studies find large declines of education on overweight for men (Webbink et al. 2010) but not for

women (Webbink et al. 2010, Amin et al. 2013). Lundborg (2013) finds large but statistically insignificant effects of education on
BMI.

19

2012). Thus, some evidence of effects of education on mortality exists for men, subject to the important
caveat of all twin studies, that within-twin differences in education are not necessarily random. There is
some hint, that these effects vary by birth cohort and that they might apply to females as well, though
potentially effects are smaller for females. For both males and females, the evidence suggests no effects of
education on smoking, but these findings are less conclusive since they come from small samples.

3.3

Quasi-experimental evidence

Rather than investigating populations with similar characteristics, as in twin studies, one can seek to identify
circumstances where differences in education in a certain population did not result from individual and
family choices, but are due to external factors outside of the control of the individual and family. These are
often referred to as quasi-experiments, since they attempt to mimic the ideal experiment where an outside
force causes some individuals to obtain more schooling and others not.
Many studies have investigated the effect of compulsory schooling legislation (CSL hereafter) as a
quasi-experiment. The intuition is that when the law is changed, typically to require individuals to stay
more years in school, the affected cohort is very similar to the unaffected cohort, at least within a given
state or geographic unit and close to the cutoff date specified by the legislation. Many countries around the
world have implemented compulsory schooling legislation. If the legislation is shown to be binding – that
is, it indeed forced individuals to attend school for longer, then one can compare individuals forced to go to
school for X years with those forced to go to school for X + ∆X years, and assess whether those that are
forced to attend school longer live longer lives, have better health and improved health behaviors.
Quasi-experimental studies typically start by reporting the OLS association with education and then
report the 2SLS estimates of education, using minimum school-leaving ages as instrumental variables. As
discussed in section 2.4.1, the estimated effect of increasing the minimum school-leaving age should be
interpreted as treatment effects among the group of compliers, often referred to as a local average treatment
effect (LATE, see Imbens and Angrist, 1994). If different individuals have different returns to school,
then this LATE estimate will not coincide with the average treatment effect that OLS seeks to estimate.
Therefore, apart from selection bias, another reason why OLS estimates may differ from estimates derived
from quasi-experiments (supply side reforms) is that the affected population is different.
The type of individual that is induced to go to school longer by supply-side reforms could also differ
across quasi-experiments. Therefore 2SLS estimates across settings could differ as well. These LATE
estimates do inform policy regarding the effects of compulsory schooling in a given setting, but not
necessarily in other settings, and are not necessarily informative about the effects of other policies that
would also raise educational attainment.21
21

This has led to a substantial amount of criticism of quasi-experiments because LATE estimates are often uninformative about

other settings and other policies (Heckman and Urzua 2010; Deaton 2010).

20

Table 3 documents the findings. It documents substantial divergence across studies, with some studies
finding large causal effects while others find no effects. We review the mortality studies in detail, after which
we more briefly comment on the smoking and obesity studies.
3.3.1

Mortality

The first paper to investigate the causal effect of education on mortality, using compulsory schooling laws
as instruments for education, was Lleras-Muney (2005)’s study of white cohorts born in the U.S. between
1900 and 1925. It found large effects of education on adult mortality, which was measured by tracking
cohort sizes across successive censuses. The instrumental variables (IV hereafter) estimates were negative
and large, though not statistically different form their OLS counterparts. No substantive differences across
gender were found.
Several studies have investigated these results in the U.S. using the same approach. These studies have
pointed out many limitations of the original data, methodology and findings. Mazumder (2008) documented
that the results are not robust to including state-specific trends. Black et al. (2015) use more precise
aggregate mortality data from vital statistics and document that almost all of the variation in mortality is
explained by cohort and state fixed effects. Finally, a recent study by Fletcher (2015) shows that despite
large samples and precise individual measures of age at death, the effects of education are not precisely
estimated, though they appear to be large.22
The fundamental limitation of the U.S.-based studies is that CSLs in the U.S. had small effects on the
average education of the population (e.g., in Lleras-Muney’s study one more year of compulsory schooling
resulted in 0.05 years of additional schooling on average, or equivalently. only 1 in 20 individuals obtained
one more year of schooling). Small effects are difficult to separate from the large secular improvements in
education and mortality that occurred over the 20th century. This results in weak instruments, particularly
when a large number of fixed effects (cohort, state) and trends (state-specific) are included. Additionally,
only a small, and selected, number of people were treated (effectively forced to go to school longer). In
the U.S., these are typically individuals at the low end of the education distribution that likely come from
particular backgrounds. Even with sufficient power, the CSL approach cannot estimate the average treatment
effect in the population, but rather the LATE.
Other papers have therefore investigated settings where the reforms had larger impacts on education –
a larger first stage improves the statistical properties of the estimators and makes them more likely to be
representative of average population effects. The country with the largest effects of compulsory schooling
reforms on education is Great Britain, where years of education increased by 0.45 (0.35) years when the
school-leaving ages were increased from 14 to 15 (15 to 16) in 1947 (1972). Yet, in an excellent study of
22

Mazumder (2008) uses similar data as Lleras-Muney (2005), and Black et al. (2015) argue that once fixed effects are added

there is no variation left to estimate the additional impact of CSL. Therefore we do not report these findings in the table.

21

the effects of these reforms, Clark and Royer (2013) find no decrease in mortality.
Clark and Royer’s results are based on large representative aggregate mortality rates from vital statistics,
and are estimated using a regression discontinuity approach, which compares individuals born right before
and right after the cut-off birth dates specified by the law. This approach is therefore less susceptible to the
issue of cohort trends that IV studies face, since the RDD compares individuals very close to a well-specified
month of birth cut-off. A limitation of this study is that, due to data limitations, it cannot estimate the OLS
effect of education on mortality, so one cannot fully assess the extent of the bias for this population.
A recent re-examination of the British 1972 CSL reform by Davies et al. (2016), finds that it resulted
in statistically significant declines in mortality. Methodological issues may explain the discrepancy in the
estimates between Clark and Royer (2003) and Davies et al. (2016). Davies et al. use UK Biobank data
that only includes people that volunteered to participate. Importantly, they only observe a small number of
deaths between 2006 and 2014 (only 191 out of 22,138 die), whereas Clark and Royer use vital statistics.
Not surprisingly given the very low prevalence of mortality, results in Davies et al. (2016) appear to be
sensitive to the choice of bandwidth and the degree of the polynomials fitted to account for trends. The main
issue is that the cohorts affected by the 1972 reform are still relatively young and have low mortality rates.
So, ultimately, Clark and Royer’s results based on the 1947 experiment are most informative, and these are
precisely estimated zeroes.
Many other papers use CSLs in other contexts. Some suffer from weak instruments, e.g., Albouy and
Lequien (2009) who investigate compulsory schooling reforms in France. But in most other studies, the first
stage is large and the instruments do not appear to be weak.23 These studies find a range of effects.
Three studies look at Sweden. Lager and Torssander (2012) and Meghir et al. (2017) investigated
Swedish reforms that affected cohorts born between 1940 and 1960 and increased their education by
0.25-0.30 years. They both find very small and statistically insignificant declines in mortality. Fischer
et al. (2013) investigated reforms that affected earlier cohorts in Sweden (born in 1924-1931) and had a
substantially larger effect on educational attainment (about twice as large as the the more recent study by
Meghir et al). They do find larger and statistically significant (at the 10% level) declines in mortality.
Van Kippersluis et al. (2011) use a Dutch reform in the early 20th Century (1928) that raised the
compulsory years of schooling from 6 to 7, which for many implied having to attend at least one year of
secondary school. Mortality is observed between ages 81 and 87, which is a limitation since the sample is
heavily selected by mortality before age 81. The upside is that the mortality rate in this cohort is rather high
(around 50% for the pivotal cohort born in 1917), providing power to detect an effect, should one exist, in
this population. Using administrative data in a two-sample two-stage least squares (TS2SLS) setting, the
study finds a 2.5 percentage point reduction in the mortality rate for an additional year of schooling, an effect
23

Though of course, as discussed above, the strength of the instrument is a function of the covariates that are included and in

particular the number of aggregate controls for cohort, age, location and trends.

22

that is statistically significant among men at the 1% level. The Swedish and Dutch findings are consistent
with the twin findings: effects seem larger in magnitude for older cohorts.
It is not clear whether the differences in findings across studies are due to methodology or reflect true
heterogeneity in the effects of schooling. Gathmann et al. (2015) conduct a useful systematic investigation
of heterogeneity by pooling data from 19 European countries and exploiting CSL reforms at various times
during the 20th century. Because the same methods are applied to all countries, the difference in the findings
across countries are not methodological. The downside of the exercise is that it is difficult to account
correctly for all the institutional details across countries. And the samples in this study are not as large as
those used in some of the individual-country studies. They find significant effects of education on mortality
for men, but not for women. Among men, effects appear sizable in some countries, such as Belgium and
the Netherlands, but there are no effects in other countries, such as Spain or Italy. This paper also finds
that older cohorts tend to have larger effects, and the effects are also larger for poorer countries or those
with initially higher mortality baselines. But they are not larger for countries that start with lower levels of
compulsory schooling.
One study uses a different quasi-experiment. Buckles et al. (2016) uses the Vietnam war to generate
experimental variation in college attendance. The main difficulty with this approach is that those who were
drafted ended up serving, so that one must separate the effect of going to college from the effect of serving
in Vietnam, both of which were affected by drafting procedures. The authors use variation in the risk of
induction (the risk of being called to serve) during the War to generate two instruments that independently
predict college attendance and veteran status–both of which are endogeneous. This is the only study that
investigates the causal effect of college and it finds that college education reduces the mortality rate in
middle-age by 2.6 percentage points after accounting for both the endogeneity of education and veteran
status. Interestingly it also does not find much bias in the OLS estimates.
In sum, there appears to be evidence that education leads to lower mortality for men, but this is only true
for certain times and places. These effects appear to be larger for men born at the turn of the century – when
GDP per capita was substantially lower and mortality was higher – and smaller more recently. Findings for
women are substantially less robust, and statistically insignificant or small when significant.
3.3.2

Smoking and obesity

The results for smoking and obesity also vary across studies, as shown in Table 3, Panels B and C. A few
issues are worth mentioning from the outset. We review only studies that focused on whether an individual is
a current smoker, and whether an individual is currently obese. There are undoubtedly important differences
between such studies and those that focus on the initiation and cessation of smoking, or BMI and overweight,
respectively. Smoking and obesity information come from survey data, rather than from vital statistics or
censuses. This results in several problems. First, these outcomes are typically (though not always) self
23

reported, and have known reporting biases,24 though not much is known about whether education levels
predict misreporting. Secondly, some survey data are not representative of the population. Finally, some
of these studies have much smaller sample sizes than the vital statistics and censuses used in the mortality
studies – this poses a problem for studies that rely on aggregate reforms such as CSLs, particularly if one
wants to flexibly control for trends.
We start with studies that focus on smoking. British schooling reforms did not significantly affect
smoking prevalence: Clark and Royer (2013) and Davies et al. (2016) both find that laws raising the
minimum school-leaving age did not significantly affect smoking prevalence. Their point estimates are
significantly smaller than the corresponding OLS estimates, and are relatively precisely estimated zeroes.
Braakmann (2011), exploiting a slightly different feature of schooling laws in England, where children born
in February are 3 percent more likely to obtain a qualification than those born in January due to the timing
of exams, also finds no statistically significant effect on smoking prevalence. Here, the 2SLS estimates are
of similar magnitude as the OLS results, but imprecisely estimated. Finally, although James (2015) uses
a slightly less convincing design — education effects are identified by checking whether deviations from
long-term trends of education for specific cohorts are associated with similar deviations in smoking — he
reaches the same conclusion: educational expansions in Great Britain have not led to reduced smoking
prevalence. Interestingly, Silles (2015) reports that education lowers smoking for males in Northern Ireland,
a much poorer country.
In Germany, a group of authors (Reinhold and Jürges, 2010; Jürges, Reinhold and Salm, 2011;
Kemptner, Reinhold and Jürges, 2011) used various sources of exogenous variation that increased years of
education (the abolition of fees in academic track schools; academic track school construction that differed
across German provinces; and compulsory-schooling laws, respectively) in conjunction with the sizable
German Microcensus (between 70,000 and 120,000 observations). Interestingly, their papers reach different
conclusions. Reinhold and Jürges (2010) and Kemptner et al. (2011) show, in line with the British evidence,
no statistically significant effect of an extra year of secondary schooling on smoking behavior. Jürges et al.
(2011), however, investigate the construction of new academic track schools, which, apart from increasing
years of schooling, also changed the composition of students within the different school tracks. The induced
changes, in both the quantity and quality of schooling, led to a 40 and 21 percent decrease in smoking
prevalence for men and women, respectively, although the authors acknowledge that the results for men are
not robust.
Etilé and Jones (2011) use a French expansion of secondary schooling in a Difference-in-Difference
(DiD) design, using those with the highest level of education as a control group. They find sizable, 6-8%,
effects of an extra year of education on current smoking. Heckman et al. (2016) compare college graduates
24

Smoking is typically under-reported, reporting biases for height and weight are more complex and differ by gender. See for

example Gorber (2007).

24

with high-school graduates and use a structural equation framework with largely plausible exclusion
restrictions. They also find sizable effects on smoking prevalence.25
In sum, very convincing regression discontinuity designs in Great Britain and Germany suggest that
another year in secondary school does not affect smoking prevalence. A similar conclusion is drawn by Li
and Powdthavee (2015) for Australia, albeit using a smaller sample (N < 10, 000).26 However, it seems
that exposure to a completely different type of schooling (e.g., completing high school as in Kenkel et al.
2006; college versus high-school as in Grimard and Parent, 2007; De Walque, 2007; Heckman et al. 2016,
or academic track versus regular track as in Jürges et al. 2011) can lead to sizable reductions in smoking
prevalence. This suggests that the schooling track and the associated peer group may be more important
in smoking decisions than spending a certain number of years in secondary school. This interpretation
would be consistent with the RCT results reported above: schooling affects smoking if it changes one’s
peers but not otherwise. However, the IV strategies used for these comparisons typically involve stronger
assumptions compared with the RDD approaches that study a raise in the compulsory years of schooling,
and the IV assumptions cannot be directly assessed for their validity.
Next we consider studies of the effects of schooling on obesity. Only a few studies met our criteria,
in part because we limited attention to obesity, rather than including BMI or overweight as outcomes. The
OLS results, without exception, indicate a negative correlation between education and obesity, of the order
of a two percentage point reduction in the probability to be obese for every year of schooling. These results
hold even though the studies cover substantially different birth cohorts and time periods.
Evidence for a causal protective effect of education on obesity is, however, at best very weak. In part
because of the relatively small sample sizes, the standard errors of the 2SLS estimates are often large,
rendering the effects insignificant. Only Kemptner et al. (2011) and James (2015) find a protective effect
of an extra year of schooling in Germany and the UK, respectively. However, James’ effect sizes seem
implausibly large (68% reduction in the probability to be obese for an extra year of schooling), and the
effects in Kemptner et al. are only present for men and not robust to including a higher-order polynomial
in state-specific trends. Further, Jürges et al. (2011) obtain a statistically significant result (at the 1% level)
that an additional year of education increases, not decreases, obesity. In all other cases, the point estimates
are insignificant, close to zero (e.g., Kenkel et al. 2006; Brunello et al. 2013), and in some cases positive
though not significantly different from zero, (e.g., Reinhold and Jürges, 2010; Li and Powdthavee, 2015).
Hence, there seems to be no convincing evidence to date that education causally reduces the likelihood of
being obese.
25

Park and Kang (2008) also use a structural modelling approach, combined with exclusion restrictions. They obtain sizable

point estimates, but their small sample size results in very imprecisely estimated coefficients.
26
In a recent working paper, Huang (2016) presents evidence that an extra year of education in China led to a 5 percent reduction
in smoking prevalence, although this estimate is only marginally significant at 10%.

25

4

Understanding heterogeneity and mechanisms

Why do the quasi-experimental estimates differ so much from the OLS estimates and from each other? Some
differences can be due to methodology. OLS estimates indicate a strong association between education
and health outcomes, which declines somewhat but remains strong even with an extensive set of control
variables. In some cases, the point estimates obtained through 2SLS using educational reforms as IV are
larger than the corresponding OLS estimate, which is counterintuitive if we believe the selection bias of OLS
estimates is positive. This apparent contradiction could be explained by larger returns for the compliers of
reforms than for the average individual (see the discussion about LATE in section 3.3). Alternatively, it
could reflect a publication bias or weak instruments. In two cases, the 2SLS estimates of education on
mortality estimate precise zeroes (Clark and Royer, 2013; Meghir et al. 2017). In most cases, in line with
the OLS results, the 2SLS estimates suggest positive effects of education on health outcomes, but have wide
confidence intervals that cannot rule out the OLS estimates.
At a more substantial level, what the findings suggest is that there is substantial true heterogeneity in
these effects across time, space and population. Our reading of the evidence is that there is an effect of
education on mortality, but not for all populations. Evidence for women is somewhat more limited, but
suggests there is no, or a much smaller, effect on mortality for females than for males. Effects appear to
be larger for earlier schooling reforms and smaller for later ones. The effects of education on smoking are
frequently statistically insignificant, but not in RCTs and not in a few IV studies. There seems to be no
convincing evidence that education causally reduces the likelihood of obesity.
How, in light of the theory, might we interpret the finding that education reduces mortality or smoking
sometimes? As section 2.4.2 illustrated, in our theory education can affect unhealthy consumption and
mortality through two prominent channels. First, additional schooling may raise life-time earnings and
wealth (∂qA (t)/∂A(t) ≤ 0). This wealth (or permanent income) effect raises the relative marginal value
of health (∂qh/a (t)/∂A(t) ≥ 0) and thereby the health benefit of health investment and the health cost of
unhealthy consumption (see section 2.4.2), both improving healthy behavior. A second important channel
through which schooling may affect health behavior and longevity is through skill formation improving the
efficiency of health production gH (.) (see 10, e.g., health knowledge, access to high-quality medical care,
connections, etc.). We discuss each of these pathways, and some others that do not directly follow from the
theory, in turn.

4.1

The role of income and access to resources

One first reason why education may lead to better health is that it increases lifetime earnings (in our model,
higher earnings Y (t), smaller marginal value of wealth qA (t)), which in turn can be used to purchase health
inputs. The monetary returns to education in the labor market vary. In the U.S. they were very high in the

26

beginning of the 20th century, plummeted to their lowest level in the early 1970s and have been rising rapidly
since then (Goldin and Katz 2009). Our model suggests the effect of education on health should follow a
similar pattern, if the permanent income pathway to health is of relative importance. Indeed, our review
of the literature found larger effects on mortality for earlier schooling reforms. In line with this reasoning,
Cutler et al. (2015) find that the health returns to education are larger for cohorts graduating in bad economic
conditions, partly because those without education suffer large employment and wage declines if they enter
the labor market during bad times (Oreopolous et al. 2012).
Some papers investigate directly whether increases in education due to CSL raised incomes. For
instance, Devereux and Hart (2010) find that the British CSL reforms of 1947 (studied also by Clark and
Royer, 2013) did not result in an increase in wages for women but did increase wages by 3-4 percent for
men. Other papers document small or no returns to education on earnings using CSLs. Meghir and Palme
(2005) and Fischer et al. (2016) find rather small income increases for men in Sweden (2 percent), and no
effects for women, as a result of the 1948 CSL reforms. Perhaps not surprisingly, the corresponding effects
on mortality in Sweden are small or not significantly different from zero. The effects of schooling on income
are substantially lower in Great Britain and Sweden than those found in the U.S. for older cohorts. Clay
et al. (2016) find wage returns for white males born between 1885-1912 to be between 6.5 and 8 percent,
perhaps explaining why Lleras-Muney (2005) and Fletcher (2015) cannot rule out relatively large effects on
mortality.
These results suggest one possible explanation for the observed heterogeneity in effects: perhaps the
returns to education in the labor market are small for some cohorts and some populations. Low income
returns to education in Great Britain, for example, are consistent with a high fraction of individuals dropping
out of school exactly at the minimum school-leaving age – this is indeed what the model predicts individuals
would do if perceived returns were low but enforcement penalties for non-compliance are high. This
suggests that, while settings where a lot of people are affected by CSL are likely to estimate average
treatment effects, they could also precisely be the settings where returns are expected to be small.27 It
also suggests that the effects of education on health are small for cohorts for whom the monetary returns
to an additional year of education are small because of institutional and labor-market conditions (e.g.,
high barriers, such as discrimination, corruption, crime, low labor-market returns such as low wages, high
unemployment, low quality of schools, etc.). In contrast, it could be that in the U.S. returns were high and
enforcement penalties low. Thus, the small group of compliers were individuals who were credit constrained
and had higher returns.
Another reason education might not have large health returns in Great Britain and other European
countries is that it is not associated with other (non-wage) benefits in the labor market. In most European
27

Of course, a high fraction of individuals at the margin could also be consistent with other explanations, such as, high opportunity

costs of schooling, or a large fraction of parents that do not appreciate the returns to schooling for their kids.

27

countries, health and disability insurance is publicly provided, making income differences potentially less
important. In the U.S., e.g., the college educated have better health insurance, but in most European countries
health care access is universal.
Related to the discussion about the LATE, the discrepancy across studies could also stem from the
fact that different populations are affected by the reforms. Many studies find that the monetary returns to
education, estimated using CSL reforms, is much larger for low socioeconomic status (SES) men. This is
true in Sweden (Meghir and Palme, 2005) and in the U.S. (Clay et al. 2016). It also appears to be the case in
the UK. A recent paper by Barcellos et al. (2017) finds that while the average effect of the UK 1972 reform
on BMI is zero – consistent with Clark and Royer (2013), the effects of the reform are larger at the bottom
of the BMI distribution, where it resulted in reductions in obesity. Davies et al. (2016) also report that the
same 1972 UK reform increased incomes at the bottom of the income distribution but not at the top. In the
U.S., Lleras-Muney and Shretzer (2015) find that reforms that limited work in adolescence had greater wage
returns for immigrant children than for natives, and immigrants tend to be of lower SES.
The discussion so far assumes that resources, such as income and health insurance, are the main
mechanisms whereby education causes health. The theory and the empirical literature suggest that this is
however not the only, or even most important, channel. As already discussed, RCTs find effects on incomes
but also document that education interventions are associated with improvements in non-cognitive skills and
in peers. These could easily affect health. Further, there are many health behaviors that are not immediately
determined by income, such as wearing a seat belt. This suggests that factors other than resources could be
at play. In what follows, we consider alternative explanations for the differences between studies.

4.2

The role of quality of education, skills and the difference between time in school and
skills.

Effects of education on health could also differ because of variation in the quality of schools across time,
place and population. When CSL reforms are implemented, and when they affect a lot of individuals, it is
possible that they lower the quality of instruction and therefore the skills associated with time in school.
Evidence from large expansions of education in Italy suggests this can occur. Bianchi (2015) investigates
an Italian reform in 1961 that dramatically increased university enrollment in science fields. But wages of
affected individuals did not increase because congestion (higher pupil/teacher ratios and overall lower per
pupil resources) and peer effects lowered overall learning rates (measured by grades). Many scholars have
pointed out that the returns to education (on any outcome) must depend on the quality of education and the
skills it imparts (e.g., Bold et al. 2017). But measuring school quality (separate from the characteristics of
students that attend school) is extremely difficult.28
28

Nevertheless wage returns to schooling are much larger once quality is accounted for (Hanushek and Zhang, 2009).

28

A related question is whether more or different education leads to different occupations, which depends
on the type of skills that are acquired in school – some occupations are much more beneficial to health than
others. Secondary schooling increased access to white-collar jobs at the beginning of the 20th century, but
not so much at the end. These jobs were substantially safer than were jobs in agriculture and manufacturing.
This could also explain why older cohorts saw larger returns from staying in school.
A related issue is whether we are measuring the effect of what happens in school or the effects of
what happens outside of school. When children left school in the past, they worked in agriculture and
in manufacturing – occupations that were detrimental to children’s health and growth. Or they roamed the
streets. As compulsory schooling expanded, so did health-related nutrition, vaccination and health programs
provided in school. As in the ABC program, schools and school policies evolved to guarantee and improve
the health of its students in an attempt to better their learning capacities. It is possible, that school leads to
better health in some periods because it kept kids in safe and healthy environments relative to the alternative.
It is also possible, that in some contexts, compulsory schooling extended time in school without
increasing the skills individuals benefit from. For example, Pischke and Von Wachter (2008) study the
effect of compulsory schooling changes in Germany in the post-WWI period and find they had no impact
on wages. They hypothesize this is because “the basic skills most relevant for the labor market are learned
earlier in Germany than in other countries". This is consistent with the distinction in our model between
skills and schooling. Schooling is in essence time and if time is not used productively then additional
schooling may not increase skills.
This provides a segue into a related, but more disturbing, possibility that compulsory schooling is in
fact a bad experiment to assess the causal effect of education because these laws force individuals, who
are not interested in staying in school longer, to do exactly that. In the absence of market failures, such
as financial constraints, and if individuals are rational, informed and forward looking, as in our theory, the
variation in schooling in the population is driven by voluntary attendance decisions – that is, individuals
want to attend school because its benefits exceeds its costs. In terms of equation (8), when there is no
disutility of schooling and/or skill investment is productive, individuals spend all available time in school
on skill production τS (t) = τθ (t). Hence, when empirical researchers compare individuals with different
levels of schooling in an OLS setting, implicitly they are comparing individuals with different “effective"
schooling durations and skills. In contrast, most IV studies use compulsory schooling reforms, which is an
increase in S. The complier population consists of individuals who would have liked to drop out of school
in the absence of the reform. It is not clear whether the production of skill is equally productive for this
group, compared to those who voluntarily remain in school. They may invest less (or not at all) in their
skill during this additional year than do others: τθ (t) < τS (t). Hence, in compulsory schooling settings,
schooling duration and skill capital are potentially weakly connected, and the skill capital gained may be
lower in school than in other settings (e.g., they might be better off learning on the job).

29

The broader question is whether compulsory schooling solves a market failure: why are individuals not
attending school to begin with? If they are not attending because they are credit constrained, because they
are poorly informed about its returns, or because they have different objectives than their parents or legal
guardians (e.g., children want to go to school but their parents don’t want them to), then CSL could be
beneficial. There could also be externalities that rationalize increasing education beyond what appears to be
optimal for the individual (societal benefits). But in the absence of such failures, economic theory predicts
that CSL would have negative returns.

4.3

The role of period effects: disease, technology, and information

Only two studies investigate sources of heterogeneity beyond gender. Gathmann et al. (2015) report that
earlier reforms appear to have had larger effects than did later reforms, but not necessarily at lower levels
of schooling. Earlier cohorts had larger mortality rates – this suggests that for more recent cohorts, effects
might not materialize or become statistically detectable until older ages. This might explain why studies that
investigate pre-WWII cohorts are more likely to find effects. Also, effects appear larger in poorer countries.
Glied and Lleras-Muney (2008) suggest another reason why the effects of education may differ across time
periods: they find that CSLs lowered mortality in the U.S., but these effects were much larger for diseases
for which there was more medical innovation.
Scholars have documented that the health returns to education measured by OLS are also quite
heterogeneous, particularly if one investigates these effects over long spans of time and across different
populations. For example, the association between education and BMI varies with the level of development.
Among poor countries, education is associated with higher weight, but the relationship becomes negative
as countries get richer and fatter (Cutler and Lleras-Muney 2014). Thus the effect of education depends on
the stage of the “nutrition transition": in countries where nutrition levels are low and infectious disease is
prevalent, being overweight is an advantage, so the more educated and those with more resources will be
overweight. But as nutrition levels improve and infectious diseases disappear, being overweight becomes
costly as it leads to chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular disease. Those with knowledge and resources
avoid being overweight. Indeed, a recent meta analysis by Smith et al. (2015) finds that the OLS effect
of education on chronic disease is, on average, negative, but it varies systematically from 0 to a negative
number depending on the stage of the epidemiological transition. Our theory suggests an alternative (but
not necessarily competing) hypothesis, operating solely through wealth, rather than knowledge or chronic
disease. As countries are poor, due to diminishing returns to wealth, improvements in wealth raise the
demand for unhealthy consumption more than the health costs decreases it. At higher levels of wealth
(in more developed countries) the opposite happens: gains in wealth raise the demand for unhealthy
consumption by less than the health costs decreases it.
Similarly, the effect of education on smoking has evolved over time. In the U.S. in the 1950s, more
30

educated individuals were more likely to smoke, but this reversed as knowledge of the harms of smoking
disseminated. What these examples suggest is that wealth, and the availability of information, play an
important role in determining whether individuals undertake healthy behaviors.

4.4

Multiple inputs into health

Clearly, smoking is determined by several factors, including knowledge but also income, wealth, cigarette
taxes and prices, prices of complementary (or substitute) goods, peers and possibly many other factors,
including genetic risk. A different set of factors might affect (over)eating and exercise and therefore obesity.
Thus, at a particular point in time, one could observe educated individuals undertaking one but not the other
behavior because different factors are at play.
Indeed, the bias in OLS estimates of the effect of schooling seems to differ across outcomes, even
within studies. Almost all studies considered here, find statistically insignificant effects of education on
smoking, and the IV estimates are generally smaller than their OLS counterparts. By contrast, many studies
investigating mortality find IV effects that are larger than (or statistically identical to) OLS effects.
Several papers report IV estimates for more than one outcome, using the same sample and identification
strategy. The pattern that emerges from these studies is somewhat puzzling, but consistent with the idea that
different outcomes have different inputs. Consider the results by Kempter et al. (2011). They find that for
men OLS estimates of the effect of education on smoking are upwards biased, whereas OLS estimates for
obesity are downwards biased. Jürges et al. (2011) find that for women the OLS estimate of the effect of
education on smoking is downward biased but obesity estimates are upward biased.
This suggests that the relevant omitted variables are different for different outcomes (peers may matter
for smoking but maybe less for exercise), or that the same omitted variable has different effects on different
outcomes (e.g., income may increase smoking but also increase exercise and thus lower obesity). Thus,
simple stories that suggest that a single factor, such as IQ, generates upwards bias in the effect of education
is too simplistic.29 Advances in the genetics and biology of health behaviors may improve understanding of
why certain, otherwise identical, individuals engage more or less in specific unhealthy behaviors.

4.5

Gender, culture and peers

Across the studies we consider, many find substantial differences across gender, with the evidence typically
weaker for women. Why this is the case is not clear. One reason could be that more educated women
are more likely to delay births, have fewer children, and are more likely to use modern hormone-based
contraceptives. These behaviors are thought to increase the chance of cancers of the reproductive system,
29

Cutler and Glaeser (2005) also point out that the correlation between healthy behaviors within individuals is small, so a single

factor is unlikely to explain differences across individuals.

31

because these cancers are a function of lifetime exposure to hormones.30
Pregnancy, which only women experience, is related to important changes in weight, health-seeking
behaviors, and labor force participation. In many developed countries pregnant women and women with
small children make more use of the health care system, regardless of their level of education – this may
somewhat attenuate differences between more and less educated women. For instance, all women today are
strongly discouraged from smoking during pregnancy. Moreover, pregnancy causes persistent decreases in
hourly earnings and labor supply (e.g., Lundborg et al. 2017), potentially rendering the relationship between
education and lifetime earnings, and in turn health, weaker among women versus men.
Another possibility is that the returns to education for women operated through the marriage market,
rather than through their own labor income, since labor-force participation of women was low until recently.
Finally, it is worth noting that some behaviors, such as smoking or drinking, were considered taboo for
females at the turn of the 20th century – but as women entered the labor force they became acceptable,
and in some cases, where adopted by the most successful women as symbols of independence (Amos
and Haglund, 2000). Thus, for more recent cohorts of women, it is possible that more successful women
undertake more unhealthy behaviors, despite their health cost. This discussion suggests that for women it
is key to incorporate the marriage and fertility effects of education, in addition to other behaviors that are
partially culturally determined, to understand the net effect of education on women’s health.
More broadly, economic theories largely ignore social ties and norms as determinants of health. Many
empirical papers suggest that peers are a key determinant of some behaviors, such as eating, smoking and
drinking (e.g., Cawley and Ruhm, 2012). And, as we already discussed, the evidence from RCTs and IV
studies suggests that one reason why schooling may affect smoking is that, in some instances, it alters
the peer group. But research rarely considers the effects of isolation and networks on health directly,
independently of these behaviors. Many empirical studies find strong associations between social and
community ties and mortality (starting with Berkman and Syme 1979, see Kawachi et al. 2008; Holt-Lunstad
et al. 2010 for reviews). Education, and the type of education individuals receive, affect the size and quality
of their social connections and their integration into the communities in which they live. There are important
differences across gender in how ties are formed and in the type of ties they have. Women also appear to be
differently affected by social connections. For example, the effect of marriage on mortality is very different
by gender: marriage lowers mortality more among men than among women, and widowhood increases
mortality more for men than for women (Smith and Christakis, 2008).
30

Indeed Glied and Lleras-Muney (2008) and Meghir et al. (2012) document that CSLs increase mortality rates from reproductive

cancers.

32

5

Some concluding thoughts and directions for future research

In this review, we have attempted to provide some insight into the findings of a large literature seeking to
understand the effect of education on health outcomes. While there are some discrepancies across studies
that appear to be driven by methodological differences, there appears to be substantial true heterogeneity in
the effect of education on health outcomes. This heterogeneity varies depending on the outcome studied,
the country and the time period. We have attempted to understand this heterogeneity by investigating
the theoretical determinants of health. We have also attempted to gain insight into this heterogeneity by
hypothesizing ex-post about the factors that might explain observed differences across empirical studies.
Our conclusion, based on reviewing twin studies and IV studies, is that education lowers mortality
among men, but only for some populations and time periods. However, we caution that the results based
on IV are often very imprecise so it remains possible that differences in the findings across studies are
spurious. A second conclusion is that education does not appear to affect smoking in a causal sense, except
for disadvantaged populations, or for those whose peer group changes with the amount or type of schooling
they obtain. Third, the evidence on the effect of education on obesity is weak. Finally, across all studies,
methods and outcomes, there are substantial differences between men and women, with men’s outcomes
depending more strongly on education than women’s.
Next, we summarize a few broader conclusions. There is an important difference between time spent in
school, which is an input, and the actual skills that are developed during that time. As our theory highlights,
it may very well be that additional schooling does not lead to additional skills, i.e. the complier affected by
a particular reform does not learn much from schooling (but more from, e.g., hands-on work on the job), or
that the skills learned are not useful to the complier given her labor-market prospects. Research should seek
to move towards a better understanding of observed heterogeneity in the effects of education by evaluating
the benefits of reforms to those affected.
Related, the quasi-experiments used to estimate the effects of education on health outcomes almost
exclusively derive from changes in the minimum school-leaving age. Whereas these reforms often provide
convincing, random-like variation in attended years of schooling for cohorts born (in some cases) only a
few months apart, they only affect a specific group of compliers at a particular margin – those for whom
the minimum school-leaving age happened to coincide with the end of their educational career. The theory
suggests there are various other policy instruments encouraging skill formation that are plausibly exogenous
to the individual, for example prices pS and pθ and subsidies λS , or the term length τS . It would be
informative to see how these other type of reforms – with different types of compliers, and at different
margins – affect later-life health outcomes.31
31

Fischer et al. (2016), for example, show that increases in the total time spent in school, as a result of increases in the term length,

affect later-life income much more than do comparable increases in time spent in school due to raising the minimum school-leaving
age.

33

Future work should also link short, medium and long term outcomes. Most studies of mortality do
not observe important determinants of mortality, such as health behaviors or income across the life cycle,
and few studies include measures of what occurred in school in terms of nutrition, and cognitive and
non-cognitive skill development. Studies must move beyond asking whether or not “there is an effect”,
to tracing the pathways by which particular reforms impact individuals in a comprehensive manner. This
deeper investigation, linking short and long term outcomes, can shed light on why there is, what we believe
to be, true heterogeneity across studies in the effects of education on health.
Studies could also benefit from investigating the returns to the skills that are learned in school – these
returns depend greatly on economic and social circumstances and institutions. Greater attention should be
paid to the fact that different health behaviors or health outcomes have different determinants: the simple
notion that education has the same (beneficial or detrimental) effect across outcomes does not seem to be
supported by the data.
The current availability of measures in, and sample sizes of, existing data sources are probably too
limited to undertake these kinds of detailed studies, particularly if one wants to use quasi-experiments for
identification. Thus, a possible future direction for research would be to combine results from studies using
large scale administrative databases with wide population coverage but a small number of outcomes, with
analyses using data with smaller sample sizes but that are richer in their survey measures.
In general, heterogeneity is investigated without much theoretical guidance. Even the simple theory
we presented here makes rich predictions as to how and why effects of education may differ. A greater
integration of theoretical and experimental work would be useful.32 In particular, a promising avenue seems
to be the exploration, guided by theory, of “interactions” between determinants of education and health.
For instance, education might make more of a difference when there is information about the dangers of
smoking, but less so when there are smoking bans.
Both our theory and our review of the empirical evidence fall short in some specific areas. One important
area is the modeling and documenting of the role of peer effects and social factors in the determination
of health gaps by education. Our model operates at the individual level, and important factors, such as
the influence of spouses and friends are not incorporated. We also do not model, and did not discuss,
genetic factors. A new, important, and exciting area of research investigates the role of genetic risk,
and more specifically the interaction between genes and the environment. Genetic make-up is treated
typically as a potential omitted variable, and is implicitly taken into account when using within-twins
designs or carefully conducted IV studies. But this approach assumes genetic factors are additive and do
32

Many recent authors have moved in this direction. For instance, Todd and Wolpin (2006) estimate a structural model using

experimental variation from Progresa, an experiment in Mexico. Work in other fields is also increasingly using this combined
approach (e.g., Heckman et al. 2013; Finkelstein et al. 2015). Another approach that tries to combine both is the work by Chetty
(2009) on the use of sufficient statistics.

34

not interact with the environment. This view of the effect of genetic endowments has proven to be overly
simplistic: it is increasingly appreciated that complex interactions exist between genes and environment
(Turkheimer, 2000; Heckman, 2007). Lastly, many common health behaviors, such as smoking and eating,
have important addictive characteristics – our theory and analysis of the empirical evidence is based on a set
of strong assumptions that include perfect information and rational decision making. Greater incorporation
of bounded rationality into health decision making, and a greater understanding of how education affects
imperfect decision making would be useful.
We also reach some methodological conclusions. A key difficulty with quasi-experiments is that they
rely on variation over time or across cohorts. Health and mortality vary substantially with age. As Davies et
al. (2016) explain: “. . . people affected by the reform, are one year younger than our control group, those
unaffected by the reform. (...) Many of the outcomes we investigated increase linearly or log-linearly over
time. This means it is difficult to determine if any differences we observed are due to an additional year
of aging or the reform. . . ” Similarly, there have been large secular improvements in health resulting in
much lower mortality and much better health at any age among recent cohorts. It is very difficult to identify
the effects of reforms separately from age effects and from secular trends across cohorts, particularly if
one wants to account for these trends flexibly, in a non-parametric fashion. This suggests that exploiting
cross-sectional variation, i.e. comparing individuals born around the same time but who obtain different
levels of schooling through a randomized or natural experiment, could be very informative since it alleviates
the need to control for secular trends over cohorts and time.
Finally, we note that in compiling our tables we found it difficult to compare across studies – the
information empirical researchers report varies greatly across studies. Not all studies report the number
of observations, or basic summary statistics, such as the the mean and standard deviation of the dependent
variable or of education. Some quasi-experimental studies do not report OLS results, and some papers do not
report results separately by gender. The choice of the dependent variable and the functional form used across
studies also varies widely. Studies do not systematically report whether results are sensitive to these choices
or compare their estimates to existing estimates in the literature. Neither do studies report how results vary
when one includes covariates that were included in other existing studies. This lack of uniformity makes it
very challenging to summarize and compare findings, particularly the magnitudes of their effects. Future
work should try to systematically report basic information, and include results of models that are identical
to those previously estimated, for greater transparency and so that comparisons can be made more easily.

35

Bibliography
Aizer, A., & Cunha, F. (2012). The production of human capital: Endowments, investments and fertility.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. w18429.
Albouy, V. & Lequien, L. (2009). Does compulsory education lower mortality? Journal of Health
Economics 28 (2009) 155-168.
Almond, D., Currie, J. & Duque, V. (2017). Childhood Circumstances and Adult Outcomes: Act II (No.
w23017). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Amin, V., Behrman, J. R. & Spector, T. D. (2013). Does more schooling improve health outcomes and
health related behavior? Evidence from U.K. twins. Economics of Education Review. 35 (2013) 134-148.
Amos, A., & Haglund, M. (2000). From social taboo to “torch of freedom”: the marketing of cigarettes to
women. Tobacco Control, 9(1), 3-8.
Arrow, K. J. (1973). Higher education as a filter. Journal of Public Economics, 2(3), pp. 193-216.
Barcellos, S.H., Carvalho, L.S. & Turley, P. (2017). Distributional effects of education on health. Mimeo.
Becker, G.S. (1964). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference to
Education. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Becker, G. S. (2007). Health as human capital: synthesis and extensions. Oxford Economic Papers, 59(3),
379-410.
Bedard, K. (2001). Human capital versus signaling models: university access and high school dropouts.
Journal of Political Economy, 109(4), 749-775.
Behrman, J. R., Kohler, H. P., Jensen, V. M., Pedersen, D., Petersen, I., Bingley, P. & Christensen, K.
(2011). Does more schooling reduce hospitalization and delay mortality? New evidence based on Danish
twins. Demography, (2011) 48:1347-1375.
Ben-Porath, Y. (1967). The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings. Journal of Political

36

Economy, 75(4, Part 1), 352-365.
Berkman, L. F., & Syme, S. L. (1979). Social networks, host resistance, and mortality: a nine-year
follow-up study of Alameda County residents. American Journal of Epidemiology, 109(2), 186-204.
Bianchi, N. (2016). The Indirect Effects of Educational Expansions: Evidence from a Large Enrollment
Increase in STEM Majors. Working paper.
Bijwaard, G. E., Van Kippersluis, H. & Veenman, J. (2015). Education and health: the role of cognitive
ability. Journal of Health Economics, 42, 29-43.
Black, D. A., Hsu, Y. C. & Taylor, L. J. (2015). The effect of early-life education on later-life mortality.
Journal of Health Economics, 44, 1-9.
Black, S. E., Devereux, P. J. & Salvanes, K. G. (2008). Staying in the classroom and out of the maternity
ward? The effect of compulsory schooling laws on teenage births. The Economic Journal, 118(530),
1025-1054.
Bold, T., Filmer, D., Martin, G., Molina, E., Stacy, B., Rockmore, C., Svensson, J. & Wane, W. (2017).
Enrollment without Learning: Teacher Effort, Knowledge, and Skill in Primary Schools in Africa. Journal
of Economic Perspectives 31(4): 185-204.
Bound, J. & Solon, G. (1999). Double trouble: on the value of twins-based estimation of the return to
schooling. Economics of Education Review, 18(2), 169-182.
Buckles, K., Hagemann, A., Malamud, O., Morrill, M. & Wozniak, A. (2016). The effect of college
education or mortality. Journal of Health Economics, 50 (2016), 99-144.
Braakmann, N. (2011). The causal relationship between education, health and health related behavior:
Evidence from a natural experiment in England. Journal of Health Economics 30 (2011) 753-763.
Brunello, G., Fabbri, D. & Fort, M. (2013). The causal effect of education on body mass: evidence from
Europe. Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 31. No. 1. 195-223.
Campbell, F., Conti, G., Heckman, J. J., Moon, S. H., Pinto, R., Pungello, E. & Pan, Y. (2014). Early

37

childhood investments substantially boost adult health. Science, vol. 343. 1478-1485.
Card, D. (2001). Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent econometric problems.
Econometrica, 69(5), 1127-1160.
Case, A., & Deaton, A. S. (2005). Broken down by work and sex: How our health declines. In Analyses in
the Economics of Aging (pp. 185-212). University of Chicago Press.
Cawley, J., & Ruhm, C. J. (2012). The Economics of Risky Health Behaviors. In: Handbook of Health
Economics, Mark V. Pauly, Thomas G. McGuire, Pedro Pita Barros (eds.); Chapter 3, p. 95-199.
Chetty, R. (2009). Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: a bridge between structural and reduced-form
methods. Annual Review of Economics 1:451-488.
Conti, G., Heckman, J.J & Urzua, S. (2010). The Education-Health Gradient. American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings 100: 234-238.
Conti, G., Heckman, J. J. & Pinto, R. (2016). The effects of two influential early childhood interventions on
health and healthy behaviour. The Economic Journal, 126, F28-F65.
Contoyannis, P., Jones, A. M. & Rice, N. (2004), The dynamics of health in the British Household Panel
Survey, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 19(4): pp. 473-503.
Clark, D. & Royer, H. (2013). The effect of education on adult mortality and health: Evidence from Britain.
The American Economic Review, 103 (6), 2087-2120.
Clay, K., Lingwall, J. & Stephens Jr, M. (2016). Laws, Educational Outcomes, and Returns to Schooling:
Evidence from the Full Count 1940 Census (No. w22855). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cunha, F. & Heckman, J. (2007). The Technology of Skill Formation. The American Economic Review,
97(2), 31.
Cutler, D. M., & Glaeser, E. (2005). What Explains Differences in Smoking, Drinking, and Other
Health-Related Behaviors?. The American Economic Review, 95(2), 238-242.

38

Cutler, D.M. & Lleras-Muney, A. (2010), Understanding Differences in Health behaviors by Education,
Journal of Health Economics, 29(1): pp. 1-28.
Cutler, D.M., Lleras-Muney, A. & Vogl, T. (2011), Socioeconomic Status and Health: Dimensions and
Mechanisms. In: the Oxford Handbook of Health Economics.
Cutler, D. M., Huang, W., & Lleras-Muney, A. (2015). When does education matter? The protective effect
of education for cohorts graduating in bad times. Social Science & Medicine, 127, 63-73.
Dalgaard, C. J., & Strulik, H. (2014). Optimal aging and death: understanding the Preston curve. Journal
of the European Economic Association, 12(3), 672-701.
Davies, N. M., Dickson, M., Smith, G. D., Van den Berg, G. & Windmeijer, F. (2016) The causal effects of
education on health, mortality, cognition, well-being, and income in the UK Biobank. Preprint.
Deaton, A. (2010). Instruments, randomization, and learning about development. Journal of Economic
Literature, 48(2), 424-455.
Devereux, P. J., & Hart, R. A. (2010). Forced to be rich? Returns to compulsory schooling in Britain. The
Economic Journal, 120(549), 1345-1364.
Ehrlich, I., & Chuma, H. (1990). A Model of the Demand for Longevity and the Value of Life Extension.
Journal of Political economy, 98(4), 761-782.
Etilé, F. & Jones, A. M. (2011). Schooling and smoking among the baby boomers – An evaluation of the
impact of educational expansion in France. Journal of Health Economics 30 (2011) 811-831.
Finkelstein, A., Hendren, N. & Luttmer, E.F.P. (2015). The Value of Medicaid: Interpreting Results from
the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. NBER Working Paper 21308.
Fischer, M., Karlsson, M. & Nilsson, T. (2013). Effects of compulsory schooling on mortality: Evidence
from Sweden. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 2013, 10 3596-3618.
Flegal, K.M., Kit, B.K., Orpana, H. & Graubard, B.I. (2013) Association of all-cause mortality with
overweight and obesity using standard body mass index categories: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

39

Journal of the American Medical Association 309:71-82.
Fletcher, J. M. (2015). New evidence of the effects of education on health in the US: Compulsory schooling
laws revisited. Social Science & Medicine, 127 (2015), 101-107.
Gathmann, C., Jürges, H. & Reinhold, S. (2015). Compulsory schooling reforms, education and mortality
in twentieth century Europe. Social Science & Medicine, 127 (2015), 74-82.
Galama, T.J. (2015). A Contribution to Health-Capital Theory. CESR Working Paper #2015-004.
Galama, T.J. & Van Kippersluis, H. (2015a). A Theory of Education and Health. CESR Working Paper
#2015-001.
Galama, T.J. & Van Kippersluis, H. (2015b). A Theory of Socioeconomic Disparities in Health Over the
Life Cycle CESR Working Paper #2015-016.
Glied, S. & Lleras-Muney, A. (2008). Technological innovation and inequality in health. Demography,
45(3), 741-761.
Goldin, C. D. & Katz, L. F. (2009). The race between education and technology. Harvard University Press.
Gorber, S. C., Tremblay, M., Moher, D. & Gorber, B. (2007) A comparison of direct vs. self-report
measures for assessing height, weight and body mass index: a systematic review. Obesity Reviews, 8:
307–326. doi:10.1111/j.1467-789X.2007.00347.
Grimard, F. & Parent, D. (2007). Education and smoking: Were Vietnam war draft avoiders also more
likely to avoid smoking? Journal of Health Economics 26 (2007) 896-926.
Grossman, M. (1972). On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of Political
economy, 80(2), 223-255.
Grossman, M. (2015). The Relationship between Health and Schooling: What’s New? Nordic Journal of
Health Economics, 3(1), pp-7-17.
Hall, R. E. & Jones, C. I. (2007). The value of life and the rise in health spending. The Quarterly Journal of

40

Economics, 122(1), 39-72.
Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T. B. & Layton, J. B. (2010).

Social relationships and mortality risk: a

meta-analytic review. PLoS Medicine, 7(7), e1000316.
Fujiwara, T. & Kawachi, I. (2009). Is education causally related to better health? A twin fixed-effects study
in the USA. International Journal of Epidemiology, 2009 38:1310-1322.
Hanushek, E. A. & Zhang, L. (2009). Quality-consistent estimates of international schooling and skill
gradients. Journal of Human Capital, 3(2), 107-143.
Heckman, J. J., Stixrud, J. & Urzua, S. (2006). The effects of cognitive and noncognitive abilities on labor
market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3), 411-482.
Heckman, J. J. (2007). The economics, technology, and neuroscience of human capability formation.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(33), 13250-13255.
Heckman J. J., Humpries, J. E. & Veramendi, G. (2016). Returns to education: The causal effects of
education on earnings, health, and smoking. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
22291.
Heckman J., Pinto, R. & Savelyev, P. (2013). Understanding the mechanisms through which an influential
early childhood program boosted adult outcomes. American Economic Review, 103(6): 2052-2086.
Heckman, J. J., & Urzua, S. (2010). Comparing IV with structural models: What simple IV can and cannot
identify. Journal of Econometrics, 156(1), 27-37.
Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T.B. & Layton, J.B. (2010) Social Relationships and Mortality Risk: A
Meta-analytic Review. PLoS Medicine 7(7): e1000316. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000316
Huang, W. (2016). Understanding the effects of education on health: evidence from China. Mimeo.
Hummer, R. A., & Hernandez, E. M. (2013). The effect of educational attainment on adult mortality in the
United States. Population Bulletin, 68(1), 1.

41

Imbens, G. W., & Angrist, J. D. (1994). Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effects.
Econometrica, 62(2), 467-475.
Imbens, G. W. (2010). Better LATE than nothing: Some comments on Deaton (2009) and Heckman and
Urzua (2009). Journal of Economic Literature, 48(2), 399-423.
James, J. (2015). Health and education expansion. Economics of Education Review 49 (2015) 193-215.
Jensen, R. & Lleras-Muney, A. (2012). Does staying in school (and not working) prevent teen smoking and
drinking? Journal of Health Economics, 31 (2012) 644-657.
Jürges, H., Reinhold, S. & Salm, M. (2011). Does schooling affect health behavior? Evidence from
educational expansion in Western Germany. Economics of Education Review, 30 (2011) 862-872.
Fischer, M., Karlsson, M., Nilsson, T., & Schwarz, N. (2016). The Sooner the Better? Compulsory
Schooling Reforms in Sweden. IZA Working Paper No. 10430.
Kawachi, I., Subramanian, S. V., & Kim, D. (2008). Social capital and health. Social capital and health,
1-26.
Kemptner, D., Jürges, H. & Reinhold, S. (2011). Changes in compulsory schooling and the causal effect of
education on health: Evidence from Germany. Journal of Health Economics, 30 (2011) 340-354.
Kenkel, D., Lillard, D. & Mathios, A. (2006). The roles of high school completion and GED receipt in
smoking and obesity. Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 24, no. 3.
Khang, Y.H., Lynch, J.W., Yang, S., Harper, S., Yun, S.C., Jung-Choi, K., et al. (2009), The contribution
of material, psychosocial, and behavioral factors in explaining educational and occupational mortality
inequalities in a nationally representative sample of South Koreans: relative and absolute perspectives,
Social Science & Medicine, 68(5): pp. 858-866.
Lager, A. C. J. & Torssander, J. (2012). Causal effect of education on mortality in a quasi-experiment on
1.2 million Swedes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2012 109 (22) 8461-8466.
Lang, K. & Kropp, D. (1986). Human capital versus sorting: the effects of compulsory attendance laws.

42

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(3), pp. 609-624.
Lemieux, T. (2006). The “Mincer equation” thirty years after schooling, experience, and earnings. In Jacob
Mincer A Pioneer of Modern Labor Economics (pp. 127-145). Springer US.
Leuven, E., Plug, E. & Rønning, M. (2016). Education and cancer risk. Labour Economics, 43, 106-121.
Lleras-Muney, A. (2005). The relationship between education and adult mortality in the United States. The
Review of Economic Studies, 72 1 189-221.
Lleras-Muney, A. & Shertzer, A. (2015). Did the Americanization movement succeed? An evaluation of
the effect of english-only and compulsory schooling laws on immigrants. American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 7(3), 258-290.
Li, J. & Powdthavee, N. (2015). Does more education lead to better health habits? Evidence from the
school reforms in Australia. Social Science & Medicine, 127 (2015) 83-91.
Lochner, L. & Moretti, E. (2004). The effect of education on crime: Evidence from prison inmates, arrests,
and self-reports. The American Economic Review, 94(1), 155-189.
Lochner, L. (2011). Nonproduction Benefits of Education: Crime, Health, and Good Citizenship. Handbook
of the Economics of Education, 4, 183.
Lundborg, P. (2013). The health returns to schooling–what can we learn from twins? Journal of Population
Economics, (2013) 26:673-701.
Lundborg, P., Lyttkens, C. H. & Nystedt, P. (2016). The effect of schooling on mortality: New evidence
from 50,000 Swedish Twins. Demography, (2016) 53:1135-1168.
Lundborg, P., Plug, E., & Rasmussen, A. W. (2017). Can Women Have Children and a Career? IV Evidence
from IVF Treatments. American Economic Review, 107(6), 1611-1637.
Mackenbach, J.P., Huisman, M., Andersen, O., Bopp, M., Borgan, J.K., Borrell, C. et al. (2004), Inequalities
in lung cancer mortality by the educational level in 10 European populations, European Journal of Cancer,
40(1): pp. 126-135.

43

Madsen, M., Andersen, A. M. N., Christensen, K., Andersen, P. K. & Osler, M. (2010). Does educational
status impact adult mortality in Denmark? A twin approach. American Journal of Epidemiology, vol. 172,
no. 2. 225-234.
Mazumder, B. (2008).

Does Education Improve Health?

A Reexamination of the Evidence from

Compulsory Schooling Laws. Economic Perspectives, 32(2), 2.
Meara, E. R., Richards, S. & Cutler, D. M. (2008). The gap gets bigger: changes in mortality and life
expectancy, by education, 1981–2000. Health Affairs, 27(2), 350-360.
Meghir, C. & Palme, M. (2005). Educational reform, ability, and family background. The American
Economic Review, 95(1), 414-424.
Meghir, C., Palme, M. & Simeonova, E. (2017). Education and mortality: Evidence from a social
experiment. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.
Mincer, J. (1974). Schooling, Experience and Earnings. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Mokdad, A. H., Marks, J. S., Stroup, D. F. & Gerberding, J.L. (2004), Actual causes of death in the United
States, Journal of the American Medical Association, 291(10): pp. 1238-45.
Oreopoulos, P., Von Wachter, T., & Heisz, A. (2012). The short-and long-term career effects of graduating
in a recession. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1), 1-29.
Palme, M. & Simeonova, E. (2015). Does women’s education affect breast cancer risk and survival?
Evidence from a population based social experiment in education. Journal of Health Economics, 42,
115-124.
Park, C. & Kang, C. (2008). Does education induce health lifestyle? Journal of Health Economics, 27
(2008) 1516-1531.
Reinhold, S., Jürges, H. (2010). Secondary school fees and the causal effect of schooling on health behavior.
Health Economics, 19: 994-1001 (2010).

44

Pappas, G., Queen, S., Hadden, W. & Fisher, G. (1993). The increasing disparity in mortality between
socioeconomic groups in the United States, 1960 and 1986. New England Journal of Medicine, 329(2),
103-109.
Savelyev, Peter A. (2014), Conscientiousness, Education, and Longevity of High-Ability Individuals,
Unpublished manuscript, Vanderbilt University, Department of Economics.
Silles, M. (2015). The causal effect of schooling on smoking behavior. Economics of Education Review, 48
(2015) 102-116.
Smith, W. C., Anderson, E., Salinas, D., Horvatek, R., & Baker, D. P. (2015). A meta-analysis of education
effects on chronic disease: the causal dynamics of the Population Education Transition Curve. Social
Science & Medicine, 127, 29-40.
Smith, K. P., & Christakis, N. A. (2008). Social networks and health. Annual Review of Sociology, 34:1,
405-429.
Spence, M. (1973). Job market signaling. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87(3), 355-374.
Strulik, H. (2016). The Return to Education in Terms of Wealth and Health. Cege Discussion Paper 293.
Todd, P. E., & Wolpin, K. I. (2006). Assessing the Impact of a School Subsidy Program in Mexico: Using a
Social Experiment to Validate a Dynamic Behavioral Model of Child Schooling and Fertility. The American
Economic Review, 1384-1417.
Turkheimer, E. (2000). Three laws of behavior genetics and what they mean. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 9(5), 160-164.
Van den Berg, G., Janys, L. & Christensen, K. (2012). The causal effect of education on mortality. Mimeo.
Van Kippersluis, H., O’Donnell, O. & Van Doorslaer, E. (2011). Long-run returns to education: Does
schooling lead to an extended old age? The Journal of Human Resources 46 4 695-721.
Van Kippersluis, H. & Galama, T. J. (2014). Wealth and health behavior: Testing the concept of a health
cost. European Economic Review, 72, 197-220.

45

Pischke, J. S. & Von Wachter, T. (2008). Zero returns to compulsory schooling in Germany: Evidence and
interpretation. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3), 592-598.
de Walque, D. (2007). Does education affect smoking behaviors? Evidence using the Vietnam draft as an
instrument for college education. Journal of Health Economics, 26 (2007) 877-895.
Webbink, D., Martin, N. G. & Visscher, P. M. (2010). Does education reduce the probability of being
overweight?. Journal of Health Economics, 29(1), 29-38.
Weiss, A. (1995). Human capital vs. signalling explanations of wages. The Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 9(4), pp. 133-154.

Further Reading (selected papers)
Almond, D., Currie, J. & Duque, V. (2017). Childhood Circumstances and Adult Outcomes: Act II (No.
w23017). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cawley, J., & Ruhm, C. J. (2012). The Economics of Risky Health Behaviors. In: Handbook of Health
Economics, Mark V. Pauly, Thomas G. McGuire, Pedro Pita Barros (eds.); Chapter 3, p. 95-199.
Cutler, D. M., & Glaeser, E. (2005). What Explains Differences in Smoking, Drinking, and Other
Health-Related Behaviors? The American Economic Review, 95(2), 238-242.
Cutler, D.M. & Lleras-Muney, A. (2014), Education and Health: Insights from International Comparisons.
In: Encyclopedia of Health Economics, Anthony J. Culyer (ed.), Vol 1. San Diego: Elsevier; 2014. pp.
232-245.
Galama, T.J. & Van Kippersluis, H. (2015). A Theory of Education and Health. CESR Working Paper
#2015-001.
Grossman, M. (2015). The Relationship between Health and Schooling: What’s New? Nordic Journal of
Health Economics, 3(1), pp-7-17.
Heckman J. J., Humpries, J. E. & Veramendi, G. (2016). Returns to education: The causal effects of

46

education on earnings, health, and smoking. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
22291.
Lochner, L. (2011). Nonproduction Benefits of Education: Crime, Health, and Good Citizenship, in E.
Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Woessmann (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 4, Ch. 2,
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 2011.

47

48

Tables
Table 1: Effect of Randomized Education Interventions on Smoking and Obesity
Paper

Data & Sample

Outcomes (overall means)

Program

Treatment Effect
(M=Males, F=Females, P=Pooled)

A. Smoking
Conti et al. (2016)

Perry Preschool Program

Not a daily smoker at age 40

Follow-up at age 40

(0.56)

Perry Preschool Program

Ma
0.194∗∗
[0.01]b

Male children age 3-5
Birth cohorts early 1960s

[Table 4, Column 6]

N = 66
Heckman et al. (2013)

Perry Preschool Program

Tobacco use at age 27 (0.48)

Perry Preschool Program

Ma

Follow-up at age 27

-0.119∗

Male children age 3-5

[0.09]b

Birth cohorts early 1960s

[Table 1, Column 1]

N = 51

49

Jensen and Lleras-Muney (2012)

Dominican Republic

Currently smoking around

Survey data (2001-2005)

age 18 (0.05)

Providing information on the returns

M

to education to Dominican youths

-0.039∗∗

Male students around age 14

(0.018)

Birth cohort 1986-1987

[Table 4, Column 4]

N = 2,011
B. Obesity
Conti et al. (2016)

Carolina Abecedarian Project

Obesity at age 35 (0.56)

Carolina Abecedarian Project

Male children age 0-5

-0.069

Birth cohorts 1972-1977

[0.23]

N = 26
Campbell et al. (2014)

Carolina Abecedarian Project
Children age 0-5
Birth cohorts 1972-1977
N = 26/40c

a

Female estimates are not significant and not reported in the paper
Square brackets are p-values, parentheses are standard errors
c
Men/Women, respectively

b

Ma

[Table 5, Column 6]
Obesity at age 35 (0.56/0.73)

Carolina Abecedarian Project

M/F
-0.069/-0.061
[0.233]/[0.790]
[Table 1/2, Column 3]

Table

2:

Health

Paper

Effects

of

Education

a

Data & Sample

from

Twin

Studies

Variables (mean)

Estimates (M=Males, F=Females, P=Pooled)b
OLS

Fixed Effects

A. Mortality
Lundborg et al. (2016)

Van den Berg et al. (2012)e

Swedish Twin Registry

H = Mortality by 2007, hazard ratio

Birth cohorts 1886-1958

(0.60/0.65)c

N = 8,602/10,084d

E = Years of education (9.74/9.59)

Danish Twin Registry

H = Mortality (0.62)

(0.017)/(0.019)
[Table 3, Column 4]

M/F

M/F

∗∗

-0.194 /-0.063

-0.183∗∗ /-0.054f

N = 2,839/2,856

expanded voluntary education

(0.086)/(0.080)

(0.088)/(0.087)

[Table 11/12, Column 1]

[Table 11/12, Column 3]

M/F

M/F

Danish Twin Registry

H = Mortality by 2003 (0.16)

Birth cohorts 1921-1950

E = Years of education (10.8)

50
Sample size is for monozygotic twins, if available
Report for monozygotic twins, if available
c
Means for Male/Female, respectively
d
Men/Women, respectively
e
Working paper
f
Correlated frailty model, where unobservables within twins are assumed correlated
b

(0.006)/(0.007)
[Table 3, Column 3]

E = Eligible for reform that

N = 3,234/2,060

a

M/F
0.948∗∗∗ /0.962∗∗∗

Birth cohorts 1888-1897

(0.5/0.5)
Behrman et al. (2011)

M/F
0.963∗∗∗ /0.951∗∗∗

Cohort 1921-1935

Cohort 1921-1935

-0.011∗∗∗ /-0.010∗∗∗

0.005/0.013

(0.005)/(0.004)

(0.008)/(0.008)

Cohort 1936-1950

Cohort 1936-1950

-0.006∗∗ /-0.003

-0.001/-0.001

(0.002)/(0.002)

(0.004)/(0.004)

[Table 6, Column 2]

[Table 6, Column 4]

Madsen et al. (2010)

Danish Twin Registry

H = Mortality 1980-2008 (Hazard

Statistics Denmark

ratio)

Census of Death Registry

E = Less than 7 years of education

1.17∗ /1.41∗∗∗

1.32/0.92

Birth cohorts 1921-1950

(0.60)

(0.10)/(0.11)

(0.25)/(0.29)

Cohort 1936-1950

Cohort 1936-1950

1.36∗∗ /1.51∗∗∗

1.05/0.94

(0.15)/(0.18)

(0.31)/(0.36)

[Table 3, Column 4]

[Table 3, Column 7]

N = 5,260

M/F

M/F

Cohort 1921-1935

Cohort 1921-1935

B. Smoking
Amin et al. (2013)

TwinsUK Database

H = Currently smoking (0.12)

F

F

Women, birth cohorts 1924-1974

E = Years of education (13.44)

-0.021∗∗∗a

-0.003

(0.004)

(0.014)

[Table 4, Column 2]

[Table 4, Column 6]

P

P

N = 1,482
Lundborg (2013)

Midlife in the U.S. Survey
Birth cohorts 1921-1970

H = Currently smoking (0.213)
E = Years of education (13.68)

51

N = 664
Fujiwara and Kawachi (2009)

Midlife in the U.S. Survey

H = Currently smoking (odds ratio)

Birth cohorts 1920-1970

E = Years of education

N = 168/183

a

Own education instrumented by twin’s report

-0.046

∗∗∗

-0.014

(0.007)

(0.012)

[Table 3, Column 1]

[Table 3, Column 2]

M/F

M/F

0.75∗∗∗ /0.75∗∗∗

0.60/1.00

(0.05)/(0.05)

(0.34)/(0.24)

[Table 3, Column 1/3]

[Table 4, Column 1/3]

Table

3:

Health

Paper

Effects

of

Education

Data & Sample

from

Quasi-Experiments

Variables (mean, full sample if

Identification, first stagea

available)

Estimates (M=Males, F=Females, P=Pooled)
OLS

2SLS

P

M/F

A. Mortality
Meghir et al. (2017)

Swedish Education Register

H = Mortality, hazard ratio

National Cause of Death Register

in 1973-2015 (0.200)

in 1948

Birth cohorts 1940-1957

E = Years of education (11.4)

First stage: 0.313/0.177

N = 812,719/749,702
Buckles et al. (2016)

CLS 7 or 8 to 9b

(0.023)/(0.031)

U.S. Vital Statistics Mortality

H = Mortality rate per 1,000,

Vietnam War

U.S. Census and NHISc

1981-2007 (138.58)

Draft Avoidance

White men, Cohorts 1942-53

E = Years of college (1.99)

First stage: 11.41 (2.40)

G = 600 (birth state-cohort)

0.929

∗∗∗

0.994/1.007

(0.001)

((0.018)/(0.018)

[Table 2, Column 1]

[Table 4, Column 1]

M

M

-22.92∗∗∗

-25.86∗∗∗

(3.60)

(4.66)

[Table 3, Column 1]

[Table 3, Column 5]

N = 1,994,459
Davies et al. (2016)d

UK Biobank

H = Mortality rate 2006-2014,

National Death Statistics

risk difference (0.9%)

Birth cohorts 1935-1971

E = Leaving school after age 15

CSLe 15 to 16 (1972)
F-stat: 629/689

52

N = 9,699/12,439f
Fletcher (2015)

US Diet & Health Study

H = 10-year Mortality rate (0.18)

Various CSL by state

1995-96, Low Education

E = Self-reported education

F-stat: 16.36

Birth cohorts 1925-1945

categories (12 years)

N = 127,550
a

The F-statistic is reported in cases of multiple instruments or unreported first-stage
Extension of compulsory schooling from 7 or 8 depending on municipality to 9 nationally
c
National Health Interview Survey
d
Working Paper
e
Compulsory Schooling Laws
f
Men/Women, respectively
b

M/F
0.850/1.501

M/F
∗∗∗

∗∗∗

-0.044

/-0.016∗

(0.461)/(0.124)

(0.010)/(0.010)

[Table S6/S7, Column 8]

[Table S6/S7, Column 2]

P

P

-0.019∗∗∗

-0.069

(0.002)

(0.078)

[Table 3, Column 8]

[Table 3, Column 9]

Gathmann et al. (2015)

European Social Survey
a

SHARE

H = 20-year mortality (odds ratio)
E = Years of education

Various CSL by country

M/F

M/F

(1903-1976)

∗∗∗

0.983∗∗ /0.991

Human Mortality Database

First stage: 0.50/0.54

Birth cohorts 1880-1986

(0.22)/(0.18)

0.971

/0.986

(0.01)/(0.01)

(0.007)/(0.01)

[Table 2/3, Column 2]

[Table 5, Column 2/7]

N = 21,979/27,237
Clark and Royer (2013)

UK National Death Statistics

H = Mortality 1970-2007

CSL 14 to 15 in 1947

P

Health Survey for England

(log odds of death)

First stage: 0.45 (0.04)

0.01/-0.11b,c

General Household Survey

E = Years of education

CSL 15 to 16 in 1972

(0.01)/(0.73)

First stage: 0.35 (0.06)

[Table 3, Column 1]

Census in 2001

(15.11/16.55)

b

Birth cohorts 1926-40, 1950-65
Fischer et al. (2013)

Sweden National School Authority

H = 10-year mortality rate

Differential CSL (1936)

Census in 1935

in region (0.007)

adoption

Swedish Death Index

E = Share of schools

Birth cohorts 1924-1931

adopting CSL in region (0.4)

M/F
-0.010∗ /0.002d
(0.005)/(0.006)
[Table 5, Column 1]

G = 400 (Region-cohort-gender)

53

N = 731,791
Lager and Torssander (2012)

Swedish Census of 2007
Birth cohorts 1943-1955
N = 639,473/608,394

H = Mortality after 40
(hazard ratio)

CSL 8 to 9, differential

M/F
0.98/0.97∗

roll-out (1949-1962)

E = Having been through

(0.02)/(0.02)

the reform 1949-1962
Van Kippersluis et al. (2011)

Statistics Netherlands

H = Mortality rate 81-87

CSL 6 to 7 in 1928

Survey and administrative data

E = Years of education

First stage: 1.039 (0.05)

Men, Birth cohorts 1912-1922
N = 66,891
a

Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe
1947/1972 reform, respectively
c
Calculated by dividing reduced-form estimate by the first stage estimate.
d
Reduced form estimate
b

[Table 2, Column 1/2]
M

M

-0.011∗∗∗

-0.026∗∗∗

(0.002)

(0.004)

[Table 1, Column 3]

[Table 4, Column 2]

Albouy and Lequien (2009)

Glied and Lleras-Muney (2008)

French EDPa

H = Survival at 50

P
∗∗∗

First stage: 0.28 (0.06)

N = 47,337

H = Survival at 80

CSL 13 to 14, Zay

Cohorts 1920-25 for Zay

for the Zay reform

First stage: 0.11 (0.06)

N = 35,828

E = Min school leaving age

U.S. Census, 1980 and 1990

H = 4-year mortality rate

Various CSL by state

Mortality Detail Files

(0.0067)

1915-1940

-0.0013∗ /-0.0002

White US-born cohorts 1901-25

E = Years of education

First stage: 0.054/0.041

(0.0007)/(0.0007)

H = 10-year mortality rate

Various CSL by state

NHEFS

c

/0.028

0.13/-0.24b

for the Berthoin reform

U.S. Census 1960, 1970, 1980

0.049

P
∗∗∗b

Cohorts 1950-55 for Berthoin

N = 119,975
Lleras-Muney (2005)

CSL 14 to 16, Berthoin

(0.0035)/(0.0024)

(0.11)/(0.32)

[Table 2, Column 2/1]

[Table 6, Column 3/2]
M/F

(0.012)/(0.012)

[Table 4, Column 3]
P

P
∗∗

-0.061∗

1960-70 & 1970-80 (0.11)

1915-1939

-0.017

Birth cohorts 1901-1925

E = Years of education

First stage: 0.05 (0.008)

(0.004)

(0.025)

G = 4,792 (cohort-gender-state)

(10.67)

[Table 3, Column 1]

[Table 4, Column 4]

M/F

M/F

N = 814,806
B. Smoking

54

Davies et al. (2016)d

UK Biobank

H = Currently smoking

Office of National Statistics

(11.8%)

Birth cohorts 1935-1971

E = Leaving school after 15

CSL 15 to 16 (1972)
F-stat: 625/702

N = 9,681/12,405
d

Heckman et al. (2016)

National Longitudinal Survey

H = Currently smoking

Unemployment rate,

of Youth 1979

E = college graduate

college presence,

Men, Birth cohort 1979

(vs high school dropout)

college tuition

N = 2,242
a

Echantillon Démographique Permanent
Estimates for the Berthoin/Zay reform, respectively.
c
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey Epidemiologic Follow-up Study
d
Working Paper
b

-0.171

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

/-0.116

0.012/0.025

(0.012)/(0.012)

(0.023)/(0.022)

[Table S6/S7, Column 8]

[Table S6/S7, Column 2]

M

M

-0.209∗∗∗

-0.172∗∗∗

(0.032)

(0.043)

[Table 3, Column 1]

[Table 3, Column 7]

Huang (2016)a

Chinese Family Panel Studies
Health and Nutrition Survey

H = Currently smoking (0.26)
E = Years of education (8.86)

Birth cohorts 1955-1993
N = 104,634
James (2015)

Health Survey of England
Birth cohorts 1962-1980

E = Age left school

Silles (2015)

55
Clark and Royer (2013)

b

P
∗∗∗

-0.0134∗

-0.004

province

(0.0004)

(0.007)

[Table 5, Column 3]

[Table 5, Column 3]

P

P

Expansion of postcompulsory education

-0.069

∗∗∗

0.001

during 1980s

(0.002)

(0.034)

F-stat: 19.02

[Table 5, Column 2]

[Table 5, Column 2]

Household, Income and Labour

H = Currently smoking (0.204)

CSL age 14 to 15

Dynamics in Australia (HILDA)

E = Years of education (12.171)

differential adoption by

P

P

-0.033∗∗∗

-0.006

Birth cohorts 1939-1972

state in 1970s

(0.000)

(0.009)

N = 9,099

F-stat: 71,601

[Table 3, Column 1]

[Table 3, Column 1]

M/F

M/F

General Household Survey

H = Currently smoking

CSL 1940s and 1970s

for Great Britain, 1978-2004

(0.32/0.32)

schooling age from 14

Continuous Household Survey

E = Years of education

to 16

for Northern Ireland, 1983-2004

(11.57/11.45)

GB:

Birth cohorts 1923-1981

F-stat: 61.22/109.95

N = GB: 79,271/90,666

NI:

NI: 15,298/19,629

F-stat: 21.91/23.39

UK Office of National Statistics

H = Currently smoking
b

Great Britain
-0.034∗∗∗ /-0.039∗∗∗
(0.001)/(0.001)

(0.023)/(0.017)

[Table 5, Column 1]

[Table 5, Column 1]

Northern Ireland
-0.036∗∗∗ /-0.043∗∗∗

-0.090∗∗ /0.041

(0.002)/(0.001)

(0.035)/(0.034)

[Table 6, Column 1]

[Table 6, Column 1]

P

P

CSL 14 to 15 in 1947
-0.06

∗∗∗

/-0.140

∗∗∗b

-0.022/-0.001b

(0.23/0.30)

General Household Survey

E = Years of education

CSL 15 to 16 in 1972

(0.009)/(0.008)

(0.018)/(0.038)

Cohorts 1926-40 & 1950-65

(15.11/16.55)

First stage: 0.35 (0.06)

[Table 5A, Column 2]

[Table 5A, Column 4]

Working paper
1947/1972 reform, respectively

First stage: 0.45 (0.04)

0.012/-0.023

Health Survey for England

N = 49,421 / 47,177b
a

P

differential adoption by
F-stat: 25.78

H = Currently smoking

N = 27,927
Li and Powdthavee (2015)

CSL to 9 in 1986,

Braakmann (2011)

British Labour Force Survey

H = Currently smoking (0.3)

Health Survey in England

E = Having any degree

Birth cohorts 1957-1970

(CSE/O-level or above) (0.84)

CSL and birth-month
First stage: 0.021 (0.006)

N = 15,822
Etilé and Jones (2011)

EPCV and ES in Francea
Birth cohorts 1945-1965

H = Currently smoking (0.31)
E = Years of education (9.68)

N = 18,785/20,335
Jürges et al. (2011)

P
-0.176

F-stat: 502/283

German Micro-census

H = Currently smoking

Differential expansion of

for 1999 and 2003

(0.38/0.29)

education in Germany

Birth cohorts 1940-1980

E = Years of education

1960s-1970s

N = 71,388/71,353

(10.15/10.02)

First stage: 41.2/51.8

-0.207

(0.011)

(0.375)

[Table 8, Column 1]

[Table 8, Column 1]

Post-war expansion
of education in France

P
∗∗∗

M/F
-0.010

∗∗∗

M/F
∗∗∗

/-0.003

∗∗∗

-0.027

/-0.019∗∗∗

(0.001)/(0.001)

(0.003)/(0.004)

[Table 1, Column 7/3]

[Table 1, Column 8/4]

M/F

M/F

-0.045∗∗∗ /-0.037∗∗∗

-0.150∗∗∗ /-0.061∗

(0.002)/(0.002)

(0.056)/(0.036)

[Table 2, Column 1]

[Table 3, Column 1]

(9.95)/(9.49)
Kemptner et al. (2011)

German Micro-census

H = Currently smoking (0.36/0.24)

Differentiall roll-out

M/F

M/F

in 1989-2003

E = Years of education (9.42/9.17)

of CSL 8 to 9 from

-0.032∗∗∗ /-0.021∗∗∗

-0.005/-0.001

56

Birth cohorts 1930-1960

1949-1969

N = 121,318/124,314

First stage: 0.616/0.654

(0.001)/(0.002)

(0.010)/(0.009)

[Table 4, Column 1]

[Table 5, Column 2]

Abolition of secondary

M/F

M/F

school fees in 1950s

∗∗

(0.03)/(0.02)
Reinhold and Jürges (2010)

German Microcensus
for 1999 and 2003

Park and Kang (2008)

a

H = Currently smoking (0.37/0.28)
E = Years of education (10.16/10.00)

Birth cohorts 1934-1982

First stage: -0.11/-0.10

N = 85,698/86,405

F-stat: 13.91/14.69

-0.043 /-0.036

0.016/-0.027

(0.001)/(0.001)

(0.068)/(0.069)

[Table 2, Column 1]

[Table 3, Column 1]

Labor & Income Panel

H = Refrains from smoking (0.304)

Expansion of secondary

M

M

Korean Men

E = Years of education (12.479)

education and birth order

0.076∗∗

0.088

High school cohorts 1965-85

1970s

N = 1,611

F-stat: 6.65

EPCV: Permanent Survey on the Conditions of Living of French Households 1996-2003; ES:

Health Surveys 1992 and 2003

∗∗

(0.017)

(0.169)

[Table 2, Column 2]

[Table 4, Column 2]

Grimard and Parent (2007)

U.S. CPSa Tobacco Supplements
Birth cohorts 1935-1974

H = Smoking regularly
E = Years of education

N = 227,027
De Walque (2007)

Kenkel et al. (2006)

U.S. National Health Interview Survey

H = Currently smoking

Vietnam war draft
avoidance (dummy for

M
-0.043

M
∗∗∗

-0.0826∗

male cohorts, 1945-1950)

(0.001)

(0.0429)

First stage: 0.161 (0.045)

[Table 2, Column 2]

[Table 2, Column 2]

M

M

Vietnam War draft

Birth cohorts 1937-1956

E = Years of education

avoidance (induction risk)

N = 73,952

past high school

First stage: 1.779 (0.23)

NLSY 1979

H = Currently smoking

State education policies

Birth cohort 1979

(0.27/0.26)

F-stat: 35.84/19.22

N = 3,205/3,286

E = High school graduate
(0.72/0.76)b

-0.040

∗∗∗

-0.038∗

(0.004)

(0.020)

[Table 1, Column 5]

[Table 2, Column 5]

M/F

M/F

-0.226∗∗∗ /-0.194∗∗∗

-0.229∗∗∗ /-0.102

(0.029)/(0.030)

(0.088)/(0.124)

[Table 3, Column 2/6]

[Table 3, Column 3/7]

P

P

C. Obesity
James (2015)

Health Survey of England (HSE)
Birth cohorts 1962-1980

H = Obese (0.147)
E = Age left school

57

N = 25,888
Li and Powdthavee (2015)

Household, Income and Labour

H = Obese (0.279)

Dynamics in Australia (HILDA)

E = Years of education

Birth cohorts 1939-1972

(12.171)

(0.030)

F-stat 16.50

[Table 3, Column 3]

[Table 3, Column 3]

P

P

CSL age 14 to 15 in 1970s
differential adoption by
state

H = Obese (0.14/0.13)

Various CSL by country

E = Years of education

(1949-1972)

ELSAe

(12.2/11.1)

First stage: 0.42/0.57

Current Population Survey
Separate dummies for high school graduates and GED. We focus on high school graduates.
c
European Community Household Panel
d
Survey for Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe
e
English Longitudinal Study of Ageing
b

-0.100∗∗∗

(0.002)

SHAREd

N = 9,013/11,872

-0.020

∗∗∗

during 1980s

ECHPc

Birth cohorts 1927-1970

a

compulsory education

F-stat: 1.5x107

N = 8,873
Brunello et al. (2013)

Expansion of post-

(0.059)/(0.065)

-0.020

∗∗∗

0.025∗

(0.001)

(0.014)

[Table 5, Column 4]

[Table 5, Column 4]

M/F

M/F

-0.006∗∗ /-0.012∗∗∗

-0.002/-0.014

(0.001)/(0.001)

(0.018)/(0.016)

[Table 5, Column 7/3]

[Table 5, Column 8/4]

Jürges et al. (2011)

German Micro-census
for 1991 and 2003

H = Obese (0.12/0.09)

Differential expansion of

E = Years of education (10.15/10.02)

Birth cohorts 1940-1980

First stage: 35.2/52.73

N = 61,892/60,139
Kemptner et al. (2011)

German Micro-census
in 1989-2003

education in Germany
(9.80)/(9.79)

H = Obese (0.16/0.13)
E = Years of education (9.42/9.20)

First stage: 0.595/0.663
(0.04)/(0.03)

N = 48,640/49,225

Kenkel et al. (2006)

German Microcensus

H = Obese (0.10/0.12)

Abolition of secondary

years 1999, 2003

E = Years of education (10.16/10.00)

school fees in 1950s

Birth cohorts 1934-1982

First stage: -0.11/-0.010

N = 74,638/73,233

F-stat: 11.67/12.61

NLSY 1979
Birth cohort 1979

H = Obese (0.25/0.27)

State education policies
a

E = High school graduate (0.72)

N = 3,248/3,274

58
a

-0.018

Separate dummies for high school graduates and GED. We focus on high school graduates.

F-stat: 36.87/21.33

M/F
∗∗∗

/-0.019

0.133∗∗∗ /0.012

(0.001)/(0.001)

(0.051)/(0.024)

[Table 2, Column 5]

[Table 3, Column 5]

M/F

M/F

CSL 8 to 9 1949-1969

Birth cohorts 1934-1960
Reinhold and Jürges (2010)

M/F
∗∗∗

-0.018

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

/-0.020

-0.030∗∗∗ /-0.004

(0.001)/(0.001)

(0.014)/(0.010)

[Table 4, Column 1]

[Table 5, Column 2]

M/F

M/F

-0.018∗∗ /-0.019∗∗

0.030/0.120

(0.001)/(0.001)

(0.059)/(0.070)

[Table 2, Column 5]

[Table 3, Column 5]

M/F

M/F

-0.014/-0.039

-0.008/-0.021

(0.024)/(0.028)

(0.082)/(0.139)

[Table 6, Column 1/5]

[Table 6, Column 3/7]

A

Derivations

A.1

Optimality conditions

Optimal schooling age S:

The condition for the optimal length of schooling S follows from the dynamic

envelope theorem (e.g., Caputo 2005, p. 293):
∂
L (S) ≡
∂S

Z

T

Z
=(t)dt = =(S− ) − =(S+ ) +

0

0

T

∂=(t)
dt = 0,
∂S

(20)

where S− indicates the limit in which S is approached from below, and S+ when approached from above.
Noting that state and co-state functions are continuous in S, and λL (S)[τS (S) − τθ (S) − τL (S)] = 0, we
obtain
Y (S+ ) − Y (S− ) + qA (S)−1 cS [S− , τL (S− )]e−ρS + pS (S− )
Z T
∂Y (t)
∗
dt
= λS (S− )pS (S− ) + f (S)I(S − S) +
∂S
S
h
i
h
i
+ qθ/a (S) gθ (S− ) − gθ (S+ ) + qh/a (S) gH (S− ) − gH (S+ )
h
i
h
i
+ pθ (S+ )Xθ (S+ ) − pθ (S− )Xθ (S− ) + pH (S) XH (S+ ) − XH (S− ) ,

(21)

where we have replaced the limits S− and S+ with S for functions that are continuous in S. The LHS of (21)
represents the benefits of entering the labor market consisting of gains in labor income Y (S+ )−Y (S− ) (e.g.,
no longer does time need to be devoted to schooling τS (t) and / or wages may be higher after graduation than
while in school), the monetary value of no longer suffering disutility from being in school cS (t)0, and not
having to pay tuition pS (t). The RHS represents the benefit of staying in school, consisting of the schooling
subsidy λS (S− )pS (S− ) (first term), not having to pay a fine if younger than the minimum school-leaving
age S (second term), higher lifetime earnings from additional schooling (third term), and the value of higher
levels of skill investment and of health investment while in school due to the possibly lower opportunity cost
of time resulting from lower wages (e.g., if laws constrain labor before the school-leaving age) and from
less time that can be devoted to work during schooling years (fourth and fifth term). The sixth term reflects
the possibility that the cost of skill investment pθ (t)Xθ (t) is subsidized when in school (t < S), providing
another benefit of schooling. Finally, if time substitutes for goods and services XH (t) in the production of
health investment, then the final term on the RHS represents the benefit of schooling in terms of reduced
expenditures on health investment if the opportunity cost of time is lower during schooling.
Condition (21) weighs multiple costs and benefits of schooling that factor into the decision of the optimal
age at which to leave school and enter the labor market. Some of these costs and benefits are arguably not as
important as others for most individuals. For example, school-age individuals are generally in good health,
resulting in a relatively low marginal value of health qh/a (t) and few medical expenditures pH (t)XH (t)

59

(e.g., Galama and Van Kippersluis, 2015b). Therefore, it seems safe to assume that terms involving health
production are small.
Optimal skill investment: The first order condition for skill investment is given by
qθ/a (t) = πθ (t),

(22)

where πθ (t) is the marginal cost of skill investment
πθ (t) =

pθ (t)
w(t)
=
,
∂gθ /∂Xθ
∂gθ /∂τθ

(23)

and qθ/a (t) is the relative marginal value of skill, which evolves according to


∂qθ/a
∂dθ
∂gθ
∂gH
∂Y
= qθ/a (t) r +
−
−
.
− qh/a (t)
∂t
∂θ
∂θ
∂θ
∂θ

(24)

Optimal health investment: The first-order condition for health investment is given by
qh/a (t) = πH (t),

(25)

where πH (t) is the marginal cost of health investment
πH (t) =

w(t)
pH (t)
=
,
∂gH /∂XH
∂gH /∂τH

(26)

and qh/a (t) is the relative marginal value of health, which evolves according to


∂qh/a
∂dH
∂gH
∂gθ
1 ∂U (ρ−r)t ∂Y
= qh/a (t) r +
−
− qθ/a (t)
−
e
−
.
∂t
∂H
∂H
∂H
qA (0) ∂H
∂H
Optimal consumption

(27)

The condition for optimal consumption is obtained by taking the derivate of the

Lagrange function (11) with respect to XC . This leads to equation (15).
Optimal length of life T : The condition for the optimal length of life T follows from the dynamic
envelope theorem (e.g., Caputo 2005, p. 293):
∂
∂T

Z

T

=(t)dt = =(T ) = 0.
0

This leads to equation (16).

60

(28)

A.2

Comparative dynamic analyses

Optimal length of schooling S:

Using condition (20), we can explore variations in model parameters Z0

on the optimal schooling decision. Note that L (S) = 0 implies that
∂L (S)
∂Z0

∂Z0 +
T,S

∂L (S)
∂S

∂S +
T,Z0

∂L (S)
∂T

∂T = 0

(29)

Z0 ,S

This can be rewritten as
∂S
∂Z0

−
=

∂L (S)
∂L (S)
∂T
∂Z0 T,S −
∂T
Z0 ,S ∂Z0
∂L (S)
∂S
T,Z

.

(30)

0

We can further develop (30) into
"
#
∂L (S)
dS
∂L (S)
∂L (S)
−
=
−
∂S Z0 ,T dZ0
∂Z0 T,S
∂T


1
∂qA (S)
=
cS [S, τL (S)]e−ρS ×
2
qA (S)
∂Z0 T,S
+ [gθ (S− ) − gθ (S+ )] ×
+
−
+
−
+
−

∂qθ/a (S)
∂Z0

Z0 ,S

∂T
∂Z0

T,S

∂qh/a (S)
[gH (S− ) − gH (S+ )] ×
∂Z0
T,S


∂w(S− )
∂θ(S)
∂w(S+ )
τw (S+ ) −
τw (S− ) ×
∂θ
∂θ
∂Z0 T,S





∂gθ (S− ) ∂gθ (S+ )
∂gH (S− ) ∂gH (S+ )
∂θ(S)
qθ/a (S)
−
+ qh/a (S)
−
×
∂θ
∂θ
∂θ
∂θ
∂Z0 T,S


∂H(S)
∂s(S)
×
[w(S+ ) − w(S− )] −
∂H
∂Z0 T,S





∂gθ (S− ) ∂gθ (S+ )
∂gH (S− ) ∂gH (S+ )
∂H(S)
−
+ qh/a (S)
−
×
qθ/a (S)
∂H
∂H
∂H
∂H
∂Z0 T,S
∂Y (T )
∂T
×
∂S
∂Z0

∂pH (S)
∂pθ (S)
+ [Xθ (S+ ) − Xθ (S− )] ×
+ [XH (S+ ) − XH (S− )] ×
∂Z0
∂Z0


∂w(S+ )
∂w(S− )
∂S
−
τw (S+ ) −
τw (S− ) ×
∂S
∂S
∂Z0
∂λS (S)
∂pS (S) ∂f ∗ (S)
+ pS (S) ×
− (1 − λS (S)) ×
+
I[S − S],
∂Z0
∂Z0
∂Z0

(31)

where the last three rows represent the direct effect of specific variations with respect to prices pθ (S),
pH (S), pS (S) and institutional characteristics S, λS (S), and f ∗ (S). By contrast, the other terms in the
61

expression apply more generally to all types of variations δZ0 . These reflect indirect effects on the marginal
value of wealth qA (S), the relative marginal value of skill qθ/a and of health qh/a (S), and the stocks of skill
θ(S) and of health H(S).
Further, by substituting Z0 = S, and assuming that individuals value skill qθ/a (t) more than health
qh/a (t) early in life, we obtain the comparative dynamic effect of the minimum school-leaving age on
schooling:
"

#
∂L (S)
dS
−
∂S S,T dS


1
∂qA (S)
−ρS
≈
×
cS [S, τL (S)]e
2
qA (S)
∂S

T,S

∂qθ/a (S)
+ [gθ (S− ) − gθ (S+ )] ×
∂S
T,S




∂w(S+ )
∂w(S− )
∂gθ (S− ) ∂gθ (S+ )
∂θ(S)
−
τw (S+ ) −
τw (S− ) − qθ/a (S)
−
×
∂θ
∂θ
∂θ
∂θ
∂S





∂gθ (S− ) ∂gθ (S+ )
∂H(S)
∂s(S)
− qθ/a (S)
−
×
−
[w(S+ ) − w(S− )] −
∂H
∂H
∂H
∂S T,S
∂Y (T ) ∂T
×
∂S
∂S


∂w(S+ )
∂w(S− )
−
τw (S+ ) −
τw (S− ) ,
∂S
∂S

T,S

+

(32)

where the first term on the LHS −∂L (S)/∂S|S,T is positive under the assumption of diminishing returns
to schooling. Note that ∂T /∂S is also a function of ∂qA (S)/∂S, ∂qθ/a (S)/∂S, etc. However, when fully
substituting ∂T /∂S using the information in (37) and (38), the expression becomes too cumbersome to work
with. We therefore choose to informally discuss the full effect using (17) in the main text.
Consumption The comparative dynamic effect of the minimum school-leaving age S on the optimal
consumption path XC (t) is given by


∂ 2 dH ∂XC (t)
1 ∂ 2 U −ρt
e
− qh/a (t)
−
qA (t) ∂XC2
∂S
∂XC2


1
∂U −ρt
∂qA (t)
= −
e
×
qA (t)2 ∂XC
∂S


∂qh/a (t)
∂dH
−
×
∂XC
∂S


2
1
∂ U
∂ 2 dH
∂H(t)
+
− qh/a (t)
×
qA (t) ∂XC ∂H
∂H∂XC
∂S

(33)

where the term on the LHS of equation (33) is positive under the plausible assumptions of diminishing
marginal utility of consumption and constant or increasing returns to scale in the health cost of unhealthy
62

consumption (see Van Kippersluis and Galama, 2014). The term β1,C in (18) is given by the coefficient in
front of ∂qA (t)/∂S and the term β2,C is given by the coefficient in front of ∂qh/a (t)/∂S, respectively. The
sign of both ∂ 2 U/∂XC ∂H and ∂ 2 dH /∂H∂XC are unknown and hence β3,C is hard to sign.
Optimal length of life T : Varying an initial condition, end condition, or model parameter Z0 in equation
(28), we have
∂=(T )
∂Z0

∂Z0 +
S,T

∂=(T )
∂S

∂=(T )
∂T

∂S +
T,Z0

(34)

∂T = 0.
S,Z0

From (34) we have
−

∂T
∂Z0

=

∂=(T )
∂Z0

−
S,T

∂=(T )
∂S

∂=(T )
∂T

T,Z0

∂S
∂Z0

(35)

.

S,Z0

Consistent with diminishing returns to life extension (Ehrlich and Chuma, 1990), we assume
∂=(T )
∂T

(36)

< 0,
S,Z0

(see Galama and Van Kippersluis 2015a, 2015b), in which case we can identify the sign of the variation in
life expectancy from

sign

∂T
∂Z0


= sign

∂=(T )
∂Z0

S,T

∂=(T )
+
∂S

T,Z0

∂S
∂Z0

!
.

(37)

Taking the first derivative of the optimality condition =(T ) = 0 (see 11 and 28) with respect to an initial
condition, end condition, or model parameter Z0 , and holding length of life T and schooling S fixed, we
obtain
∂=(T )
∂Z0

=−
S,T

∂qθ (t)
∂t

+

S,T,t=T

∂qH (T )
∂Z0

S,T

∂θ(T )
∂Z0
∂H(t)
∂t

+
S,T

∂qA (T )
∂Z0

S,T

∂A(t)
∂t

S,T,t=T

,

(38)

S,T,t=T

where ∂=(T )/∂θ = − ∂qθ (t)/∂t|t=T , ∂A(T )/∂Z0 = ∂H(T )/∂Z0 = 0 since A(T ) and H(T ) are fixed,
and ∂qθ (T )/∂Z0 |T = 0 since qθ (T ) = 0, regardless of Z0 . Further, ∂=(T )/∂ξ(t)|S,T = 0 for any control
function ξ(t), since these are the necessary first-order conditions.33
The condition for the effect of the minimum school-leaving age S on optimal length of life T can be
written as (see 37)

sign
33

∂T
∂S


= sign

∂=(T )
∂S

S,T

∂=(T )
+
∂S

T,S

∂S
∂S

!
.

(39)

Note that we distinguish in notation between ∂f (t)/∂t|t=T , which represents the derivative with respect to time t at time

t = T , and ∂f (t)/∂T |t=T , which represents variation with respect to the parameter T at time t = T .

63

Hence we can infer the sign of ∂T /∂S by studying
∂=(T )
∂S

+
S,T

∂qθ (t)
= −
∂t

t=T

∂=(T )
∂S
∂θ(T )
∂S

T,S

∂S
∂S

+
T,S

∂A(t)
∂t

t=T

∂qA (T )
∂S

T,S

∂H(t)
∂qH (T )
∂Y (T )
∂S
+
+ qA (T )
∂t t=T
∂S
∂S T,S ∂S
T,S


∂A(t)
∂qA (T )
∂H(t)
=
×
+ qH (T )
∂t t=T
∂t t=T
∂S T,S
−

∂qθ (t)
∂t

+ qA (T )
+ qA (T )

×
t=T

∂H(t)
∂t
∂Y (T )
∂S

∂θ(T )
∂S

t=T

T,S

∂qh/a (T )
×
∂S
×

T,S

∂S
∂S

T,S

(40)

where β1,T in (19) is given by the coefficient front of ∂qA (T )/∂S, β2,T is given by the coefficient in
front of ∂θ/∂S, etc. Since health H(t) declines by definition near the end of life (approaching Hmin from
above) and assets A(t) do too (since individuals tend to build wealth early in life and spent it later in life),
the first term is positive if increasing the minimum schooling age S increases schooling S and schooling in
turn generates wealth, extending life (wealth effect). The second term is positive since the marginal value
of skills declines near the end of life (skill effect). The third term is positive (marginal value of health
effect) since ∂H(t)/∂t|t=T < 0 and ∂qh/a (T )/∂S

T,S

< 0 (see Galama and Van Kippersluis, 2015b). The

last term is negligible, since individuals tend to reduce working hours in old-age (a retirement phase), and
earnings at the point of death are zero Y (T ) = 0.

64

