NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RAMSEY STRIKES BACK:
OPTIMAL COMMODITY TAXES AND REDISTRIBUTION IN
THE PRESENCE OF SALIENCE EFFECTS
Hunt Allcott
Benjamin Lockwood
Dmitry Taubinsky
Working Paper 24233
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24233

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018, Revised February 2018

We thank Keith Ericson for comments. We are grateful to the Sloan Foundation for grant
funding. The model and derivations of the results follow Lockwood and Taubinsky (2017); see
that paper for a generalization of the results to the case in which there is correlated preference
heterogeneity. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Hunt Allcott, Benjamin Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Ramsey Strikes Back: Optimal Commodity Taxes and Redistribution in the Presence of Salience
Effects
Hunt Allcott, Benjamin Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 24233
January 2018, Revised February 2018
JEL No. H21,H23
ABSTRACT
An influential result in modern optimal tax theory, the Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) theorem,
holds that for a broad class of utility functions, all redistribution should be carried out through
labor income taxation, rather than differential taxes on commodities or capital. An important
requirement for that result is that commodity taxes are known and fully salient when consumers
make income-determining choices. This paper allows for the possibility consumers may be
inattentive to (or unaware of) some commodity taxes when making choices about income. We
show that commodity taxes are useful for redistribution in this setting. In fact, the optimal
commodity taxes essentially follow the classic “many person Ramsey rule” (Diamond 1975),
scaled by the degree of inattention. As a result, to the extent that commodity taxes are not (fully)
salient, goods should be taxed when they are less elastically consumed, and when they are
consumed primarily by richer consumers. We extend this result to the setting of corrective taxes,
and show how nonsalient corrective taxes should be adjusted for distributional reasons.
Hunt Allcott
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
hunt.allcott@nyu.edu
Benjamin Lockwood
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1400 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
ben.lockwood@wharton.upenn.edu

Dmitry Taubinsky
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
dmitry.taubinsky@berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

The Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) theorem—a pillar of modern tax theory—demonstrates that for a broad class
of utility functions, all redistribution should be carried out through labor income taxation. That is, differential
commodity taxes are suboptimal means of redistributing from rich to poor. This canonical result, which has
become conventional wisdom in many modern public finance circles, stands in contrast to the widespread use
of differential commodity taxes for redistributive purposes in practice. To cite a few examples, most states
exempt groceries from sales tax, health insurance and education are heavily subsidized (often in an incomedependent manner), and capital income is subject to a progressive marginal rate schedule. This raises an
obvious question: is the current tax system rife with suboptimal commodity taxes? Or alternatively, is there
some feature of reality that the Atkinson-Stiglitz model misses, but that policy makers (and perhaps common
intuitions) take into account?
This paper relaxes a key assumption underlying the Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem: that all commodity taxes
are fully salient when people make income-determining decisions, such as whether to attend college, what
career to pursue, or how many hours to work each week.1 According to the logic of the Atkinson-Stiglitz
theorem, a tax on (say) some luxury good reduces the appeal of attaining high earnings—since one cannot
purchase as much of that good—and thereby distorts labor supply in the same fashion as an income tax
targeted at the high earners who consume that good. It is better to employ an income tax directly, which at
least avoids distorting consumption choices. Key to this reasoning is the assumption that the commodity tax
is fully salient when income-determining decisions are made.
A wave of recent empirical evidence suggests this full salience assumption may be too strong. Chetty,
Looney and Kroft (2009) and Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (forthcoming) find that taxes which aren’t included
in posted prices are not fully salient even at the time of purchase—calling into question whether they could
be fully salient at the time of income-determining decisions such as choice of profession. Moreover, various
subsidies often appear to generate more muted behavioral responses than direct income tax reforms.2 These
results fit more broadly into a growing literature that demonstrates that individuals often do not re-optimize
their choices in response to even substantial indirect changes in policy—see, for example, Chetty et al. (2014)
on the insensitivity of savings decisions to subsidies.
In exploring the possibility that non-income taxes lack salience when income-determining decisions are
made, this paper builds a perhaps unexpected bridge to an earlier optimal taxation literature in the tradition
of Ramsey (1927). The canonical Ramsey framework prescribes the well-known “inverse elasticity rule,” that
commodity taxes should be inversely proportional of the price-elasticity of demand of the good in question.
The Diamond (1975) extension to heterogeneous income-earners shows that commodity taxes should also
be focused more heavily on goods consumed primarily by the rich. Although this literature had once had
a profound impact, its results have now largely been dismissed due to its add-hoc assumptions about the
non-existence of nonlinear income taxation.
A key result of this paper, however, is that the canonical Ramsey-style formulas turn out to be relevant
1 This paper is one of many which relax various assumptions underlying the Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) model. Saez (2002)
demonstrates that commodity taxes are useful to the extent that due to correlated preference heterogeneity, certain kinds of
consumption patterns provide additional information about individuals’ earnings ability. Jacobs and Boadway (2014) shows that
if labor supply and commodity consumption are non-separable in the utility function, then commodities which boost labor supply
should be taxed. To our knowledge, this is the first paper, together with Rees-Jones and Taubinsky (2018) who study a simple
two-type model, which maintains the utility function restrictions of Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) while relaxing the assumption
of fully salient commodity taxes.
2 See Strumpf (2011) for evidence that the introduction of Medicaid had little impact on labor supply, Monks (2004) for a
discussion of the impact of income-dependent financial aid for college on household savings, and Gallagher and Muehlegger (2011)
for the effect energy efficiency subsidies.

2

in the context of non-salient commodity taxes. Specifically, we show that the optimal commodity tax follows
the Diamond-Ramsey formula, but scaled down by the degree of inattention.
We then extend this result to corrective commodity taxes which target externalities or “internalities” (e.g.,
due to present bias or poor information). In the absence of salience effects, a simple extension of the AtkinsonStiglitz theorem in this setting shows that the optimal commodity tax is Pigovian: it should be set to the
marginal externality (or internality), regardless of whether consumption of the sin good is concentrated on
rich or poor consumers. In the presence of salience effects, however, we show that the tax should be lower if
the good is consumed by the poor, and higher if it is consumed by the rich.

2

Model

We consider individuals differentiated by earnings ability w ∈ R, distributed according to a distribution F .
Individuals choose a level of labor l, which generates earnings z = wl, and which is taxed according to the
nonlinear income tax T (z).3 Consumers use their net income to choose a consumption bundle (c1 , c2 ), which is
sold at before-tax prices (p1 , p2 ) and are subject to additional linear (ad valorem) commodity taxes t = (t1 , t2 ).
Each individual’s budget constraint is p1 (1+t1 )c1 +p2 (1+t2 )c2 ≤ z−T (z). Individuals maximize U (c1 , c2 , l; w).
In the classical formulation, the policymaker’s problem is to maximize aggregate utility:
Z
max
T,t

U (c1 (w), c2 (w), l(w); w)dF (w),

subject to the government’s budget constraint
Z
(p1 t1 c1 (w) + p2 t2 c2 (w) + T (z(w)))dF (w) ≥ R,
where R is an exogenous revenue requirement, and to individual optimization:
(c1 (w), c2 (w), l(w)) = arg max {U (c1 , c2 , l; w)},
{c1 ,c2 ,l}

subject to the budget constraint
p1 (1 + t1 )c1 (w) + p2 (1 + t2 )c2 (w) ≤ wl(w) − T (wl(w)).
Implicit in this optimization is a strong assumption: when choosing labor supply l, individuals fully account
for the effect of commodity taxes on the returns to labor. We relax that assumption to allow for the possibility
that some commodity taxes may be under-internalized, or even ignored entirely, when labor supply decisions
are made. A possible micro-foundation is motivated by the sparsity-based bounded rationality model of Gabaix
(2014). The framework of Gabaix (2014) would predict that people pay relatively less attention to changes in
taxes or prices on commodities which constitute a small budget share.
Consistent with that reasoning, we suppose consumers correctly perceive the tax-inclusive price of c1 —perhaps
because c1 is a composite good that constitutes a large share of expenditures—but misperceive the tax-inclusive
price of c2 when making labor supply decisions. Specifically, consumers mistakenly believe that the ratio of
2)
the (total) price of c2 to the price of c1 will be (1 − θ)r̂ + θ pp21 (1+t
(1+t1 ) , where r̂ is a “mental default” for the
price ratio. The attention parameter θ captures the extent to which consumers’ labor supply is sensitive to
3 Throughout the paper, labor supply decisions should be interpreted broadly to include decisions about human capital acquisition, career choice, and extensive margin decisions such as retirement.

3

variations in prices generated by the commodity tax on c2 .
To focus our attention on the implications of commodity tax salience for labor supply decisions, we assume
consumers correctly perceive commodity taxes at the time the bundle (c1 , c2 ) is chosen. This contrasts with
the form of non-salience studied in Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009) and Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (forthcoming), wherein consumers are inattentive to commodity taxes at the time of purchase. Our framework thus
accommodates settings where, e.g., taxes are not included in posted prices, but consumers research them prior
to commodity purchases.4 More generally, this setup can represent any situation where t2 is fully salient at the
time of purchase because it is included in the posted price, but some other mental default anchors attention
at the time labor supply decisions are made.

3

Optimal revenue-raising taxes

To simplify exposition, we assume that U (c1 , c2 , l; w) = u(c1 , c2 ) − ψ(l), where u and ψ are increasing, smooth,
and (respectively) concave and convex. This representation satisfies the two conditions—weak separability
of consumption (taken together) and labor in the utility function, and homogeneous subutility of consumption—which give rise to the Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem. In particular, this formulation implies that individuals’
earnings ability w is not related to their preferences for consumption. Thus, any variation in c2 consumption
across the income distribution is due to income/wealth effects, rather than consumption preferences varying with earnings ability w. The Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem holds that under this condition, the optimal tax
structure must levy a uniform tax rate on all commodities. In the absence of this assumption, the uniform
commodity taxation result need not hold, as shown by Saez (2002) and Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky
(2018).5 This assumption sharpens the consequences of salience effects, as it implies that any deviation from
uniform commodity taxation is due to salience effects.
We assume the income tax does not generate bunching (in which multiple ability levels earn the same
income), so that there is a one-to-one mapping between ability and income. As a result, we can write choice
variables as a function of (endogenous) income z at the optimum, rather than unobservable w.
Following Diamond (1975), we let α(z) denote the social marginal utility from giving a z-earner one more
unit of after-tax income. (See the online appendix for a formal definition.) We define λ to be the social
marginal value of public funds, which is equal to the multiplier on the government budget constraint at the
dc̄2
optimum. We let c̄2 denote the average consumption of c2 , and we let ξ = − dp
· pc̄22 denote the (aggregate)
2
price elasticity of demand for c2 , and let ξ c denote the compensated elasticity. Finally, we let ĉ2 (z) denote
(z)
the level of c2 consumption that a z-earner anticipates when setting labor supply. We let θ̂(z) = θ cĉ22 (z)
denote
the income-effect salience of changes in t2 ; that is, θ̂ is the ratio of percieved to actual effects on a consumers’
wealth. (The term ĉ2 (z) can be written in terms of actual c2 consumption and the inattention parameters θ
and p̂2 —see the Appendix for that derivation.)
We now generalize the Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem to characterize the optimal commodity tax structure as
a function of salience θ.
Proposition 1. Any optimal tax system must satisfy
t2
t1
1 E[(1 − θ̂(z))(λ − α(z))c2 (z)]
−
= c
,
1 + t2
1 + t1
λξ
c̄2
p (1+t )

4 In

this case, a natural mental default is the mistaken believe that the tax t1 applies to commodity c2 . In this case, r̂ = p2 (1+t1 ) ,
1
1
and the tax on c2 is misperceived to be (1 − θ)t1 + θt2 .
5 Lockwood and Taubinsky (2017) further show that for the case in which all variation in c consumption is driven by preference
2
heterogeneity rather than income effects, the formula for the optimal t2 is identical to full nonsalience (θ = 0) in this model.

4

and, in particular, the social optimum can be implemented with t1 and t2 satisfying

t1 = 0
t2
1 E[(1 − θ̂(z))(λ − α(z))c2 (z)]
= c
.
1 + t2
λξ
c̄2
When agents are fully rational (θ = 1), Proposition 1 reproduces the Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem, giving the
uniform commodity taxation result that t2 = t1 in any optimal tax system, and that the social optimum can
be implemented with no commodity taxes.
However, the uniform commodity taxation result breaks down when consumers are not fully attentive to
the commodity tax t2 . In this case, the social optimum is implemented with a tax t2 that follows the “manyperson Ramsey tax rule” of Diamond (1975), scaled by the degree of inattention (1 − θ̂). When θ = 0, the
Diamond (1975) Ramsey tax rule is exactly replicated.
The optimal t2 can be written as a simpler approximation if two additional conditions hold: (1) income
effects on labor supply are negligible (in which case λ ≈ E[α(z)]), and (2) θ̂(z) is constant across the population.
In this case, we can use the fact that E[(1 − θ̂(z))(λ − α(z))c2 (z)] ≈ −(1 − θ̂)Cov[α(z), c2 (z)] to rewrite the
expresion for t2 above as:
!
α(z)
t2
1 − θ̂ −Cov[ λ , c2 (z)]
.
=
1 + t2
ξc
c̄2
Recalling that α(z) corresponds to the social marginal value of net income for a z-earner, in the conventional
case α(·) declines with z. This means that in the presence of income taxation and salience effects, the optimal
commodity tax on c2 satisfies a simple principle: it should be positive if c2 is consumed more heavily by the
rich (i.e., when t2 is progressive) and it should be negative—a subsidy—if c2 is consumed more heavily by the
poor.
We now consider a useful extension to Proposition 1, which deals with the case of corrective commodity
taxes. That is, we consider the case in which the government taxes c2 because it generates an externality
∂u
is consumers’
or “internality” (e.g., due to behavioral factors like present bias).6 We assume that while ∂c
2
(perceived) marginal utility from consuming c2 , the social marginal utility from consumption of c2 is actually
∂u
7
∂c2 − χ, for some χ ∈ R. For simplicity, we consider the special case where χ is homogeneous and constant.
χ
The optimal Pigovian tax rate on c2 is simply t2 = λp2 . In the presence of income inequality, however, a
common intuition is that the tax on c2 should be adjusted away from this Pigovian benchmark depending on
whether the tax is progressive or regressive. Yet a natural extension of the Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem states
that this intuition is incorrect. Under our assumptions about U , even if high earners consume more c2 than
low earners, the optimal tax on c2 is still t2 = λpχ2 , because the regressive burden of the commodity tax can
be perfectly offset by making the income tax more progressive in a way that exactly preserves labor-supply
decisions.
In the presence of salience effects, however, we show that the above logic breaks down. Because individuals
react less to the labor supply incentives induced by t2 than to the income tax, a change in the income tax that
exactly offsets the burden of t2 will nevertheless generate changes in labor supply. We formalize our result in
the proposition below.
6 See Farhi and Gabaix (2015) and Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky (2018) for implications of internalities in the AtkinsonStiglitz model when commodity taxes are fully salient.
7 Lockwood and Taubinsky (2017) analyze the case in which χ may be heterogeneous across consumers and nonlinear in c .
2

5

Proposition 2. The social optimum can be implemented with t1 = 0 and t2 satisfying
t2 =

χ
1 + t2 E[(1 − θ̂(z))(λ − α(z))ĉ2 (z)]
−
λp2
λξ c
c̄2

The term λpχ2 is the “Pigovian correction”—it is simply the value that the tax would take on in the
absence of any redistributive concerns. The second term in the formula represents regressivity costs, and
comes from redistributive concerns. These concerns are immaterial when consumers are fully rational (θ = 1).
In the presence of salience effects, however, if the tax is regressive and θ < 1, then the optimal t2 lies below
the Pigovian benchmark. When the tax is progressive and θ < 1, the optimal t2 lies above the Pigovian
benchmark.

4

Conclusion

Together, the results in this paper serve as an exploration of the robustness of optimal tax results derived
in the prevailing Mirrlees framework, which assumes that distortions from taxation arise from asymmetric
information about individuals’ ability levels. These frameworks are appealing because they allow for nontrivial (and intellectually gratifying) optimal tax derivations that do not rely on ad-hoc assumptions such as
the absence of nonlinear income taxes. Consequently, they have largely displaced earlier results about optimal
tax structures in the Ramsey tradition.
This paper underscores, however, that the implicit assumption of perfect rationality is a strong one,
perhaps especially so when tax instruments affect labor-supply incentives in opaque or nuanced ways. Plausible
relaxations of the perfect rationality assumption can lead to optimal tax results that are strikingly similar
to earlier results in the Ramsey literature, and which are in line with non-economists’ intuitions about the
distributional role of commodity taxes. Our paper shows that differential commodity taxes are useful when
they are not fully salient, and that their optimal size follows two intuitive principles: taxes should decrease in
the price-elasticity of the taxed good, and they should increase in the extent to which they target goods more
heavily consumed by the rich.
In addition to standard measures of elasticities and regressivity, our formulas highlight the need to measure
salience bias for implementing the optimal tax system. These results provide quantitative and qualitative
guidance for a range of fiscal policies including capital income taxation, consumption taxes, and in-kind
transfers.

References
Allcott, Hunt, Benjamin B. Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2018. “Regressive Sin Taxes, with
Applications to the Optimal Soda Tax.” Working Paper.
Atkinson, Anthony B, and J.E. Stiglitz. 1976. “Design of Tax Structure - Direct Versus Indirect Taxation.” Journal of Public Economics, 6: 55–75.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence.”
American Economic Review, 99(4): 1145–1177.
Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Soren Leth-Petersen, Torben Nielsen, and Tore Olsen. 2014.
“Active vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from Denmark.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 139(3): 1141–1219.
6

Diamond, Peter. 1975. “A Many-Person Ramsey Tax Rule.” Journal of Public Economics, 4: 335–342.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Xavier Gabaix. 2015. “Optimal Taxation with Behavioral Agents.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21524.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2014. “A Sparsity Based Model of Bounded Rationality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
129: 1661–1710.
Gallagher, Kelly Sims, and Erich Muehlegger. 2011. “Giving green to get green? Incentives and
consumer adoption of hybrid vehicle technology.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
61(1): 1–15.
Jacobs, Bas, and Robin Boadway. 2014. “Optimal linear commodity taxation under optimal non-linear
income taxation.” Journal of Public Economics, 117: 201–210.
Lockwood, Benjamin B., and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2017. “Regressive Sin Taxes.” Working Paper.
Monks, James. 2004. “An empirical examination of the impact of college financial aid on family savings.”
National Tax Journal, 189–207.
Ramsey, Frank P. 1927. “A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation.” The Economic Journal, 37(145): 47–61.
Rees-Jones, Alex, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2018. “Taxing Humans: Pitfalls of the Mechanism Design
Approach and Potential Resolutions.” Tax Policy and the Economy, 1.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2002. “The desirability of commodity taxation under non-linear income taxation and
heterogeneous tastes.” Journal of Public Economics, 83(2): 217–230.
Strumpf, Erin. 2011. “Medicaid’s effect on single women’s labor supply: Evidence from the introduction of
Medicaid.” Journal of Health Economics, 30(3): 531–548.
Taubinsky, Dmitry, and Alex Rees-Jones. forthcoming. “Attention Variation and Welfare: Theory and
Evidence from a Tax Salience Experiment.” Review of Economic Studies.

A

Mathematical Appendix

Formal definition of α(z)
An increase dy in a consumer’s (after-tax) income has the following three effects:
(c1 ,c2 )
1. By the envelope theorem, the utility impact of an increase in net income equal to dy is dy · up11 (1+t
. (We
1)
∂u
denote partial derivatives using the notation u1 := ∂c1 , etc., throughout.)
dc2
1
2. This generates fiscal externalities equal to dy dc
dy p1 t1 + dy dy p2 t2 .

3. By changing consumption of c2 , this also alters the quantity of externalities (or internalities) produced,
2
by −dy dc
dy χ.
The net effect is thus
α(z) =

u1
dc1
dc2
+
p1 t1 +
(p2 t2 − χ) .
p1 (1 + t1 )
dy
dy
7

Proof of Propositions 1 and 2
Let (ĉ1 (z), ĉ2 (z)) denote the consumption bundle that a z-earner anticipates consuming when setting labor
supply, while (c1 (z), c2 (z)) denotes the bundle they will actually choose.
For this proof, we consider the following joint perturbation of commodity and income taxes, which preserves
labor supply choices: the commodity tax t2 is raised by dt while the income tax is reduced by dt · θĉ2 (z)p2
at each income z. At the time of labor supply choice, consumers perceive the commodity tax increase to
be θdt, a reform which, on its own, reduces their anticipated utility from each possible choice of z by dt ·
θp2 ĉ2 (z)u1 (ĉ1 (z), ĉ2 (z)). By construction, the income tax reduction also raises anticipated utility by dt ·
θp2 ĉ2 (z)u1 (ĉ1 (z), ĉ2 (z)). Together, these reforms have offsetting effects on consumers’ anticipated utility from
each possible choice of z, so the joint reform does not alter earnings decisions. This design therefore simplifies
the characterization of the total welfare effect of this reform, which can be decomposed into the following
effects for each z-earner.
1. The reform mechanically raises revenue
dt · (c2 (z) − θĉ2 (z))p2 = dt · (1 − θ̂)c2 (z)
from each consumer, at a marginal value of public funds equal to λ.
2. The social value of the resulting mechanical change in income for each consumer (including the resulting
fiscal externalities through changes in c1 and c2 due to income effects) is
−dt · α(z)(c2 (z) − θĉ2 (z))p2 = −dtα(z)(1 − θ̂(z))c2 (z)p2
.
3. The commodity tax change also generates a substitution effect from c2 to c1 . Since the resulting change
in income has mostly been compensated through the income tax reform (and the remaining true income
change has been handled through the income effects in (2)) we can write this effect in terms of the compensated elasticity of demand for c2 . Specifically, the change in c2 consumption due to a compensated
c̄2
tax change of dt is dc̄2 = −dt · ξ c 1+t
. Correspondingly, the change in c1 consumption from this read2
p2 (1+t2 )
justment is dc̄1 = −dc̄2 p1 (1+t1 ) . Therefore the total impact of fiscal externalities from this adjustment
is equal to
c

dc̄1 p1 t1 + dc̄2 p2 t2 = dt · ξ c̄2 p2



t1
t2
−
1 + t1
1 + t2


,

weighted by the marginal value of public funds λ.
4. Finally, this substitution from c2 to c1 also alters externalities. This generates a welfare change of
c̄2
−dc̄2 χ = dt · ξ c 1+t
χ.
2
Under the optimal policy, the sum of first-order effects (1)–(4) must equal zero:
λξ c c̄2 p2



t1
t2
−
1 + t1
1 + t2


+

c̄2 ξ c
χ + (1 − θ)p2 E[(1 − θ̂(z))(λ − α(z))c2 (z)] = 0
(1 + t2 )

and thus

8


t2 − t1

1 + t2
1 + t1


=

χ
1 + t2 E[(1 − θ̂(z))(λ − α(z))c2 (z)]
+
λp2
λξ c
c̄2

at the optimal policy.
To complete the proof, we show that if an optimum can be implemented with some pair of commodity tax
∗∗
∗∗
rates (t∗1 , t∗2 ), then it can also be implemented with the pair of tax rates (t∗∗
1 , t2 ) satisfying t1 = 0 . To that
∗
t∗
∗∗
2 −t1
end, let T ∗ be the optimal income tax given the tax rates (t∗1 , t∗2 ). Now consider t∗∗
1 = 0, t2 = 1+t∗ , and
t∗ z

2

∗

T (z)
∗∗
∗
∗
∗∗
1
T ∗∗ (z) = 1+t
(z))(1 + t∗1 ) = z − T ∗ (z). Thus,
∗ + 1+t∗ . Note that p2 (1 + t2 )(1 + t1 ) = p2 (1 + t2 ) and (z − T
1
1
∗∗
∗∗
compared to the (t∗1 , t∗2 , T ∗ ) regime, the (t∗∗
1 , t2 , T ) regime simply multiplies both the after-tax prices and
1
consumers’ after-tax incomes by 1+t
∗ . Because both of the after-tax prices are multiplied by the constant
1
1
A = 1+t∗ , the perceived after-tax price of c2 is multipled by this constant as well, as the perceived price will
1
be given by

θAp2 (1 + t2 ) + (1 − θ)Ap1 (1 + t‘ )r̂ = A [θp2 (1 + t2 ) + (1 − θ)p1 (1 + t1 )r̂]
Thus, the set of consumption bundles available to a z-earner is identical under the two different tax regimes,
and thus the equilibrium allocation will be identical under the two tax regimes.

Writing anticipated consumption in terms of actual consumption
The optimal tax depends on (mistaken) anticipated consumption ĉ2 (z), as is evident in the preceding proof.
However, since the difference between anticipated consumption ĉ2 (z) and actual consumption c2 (z) is effectively
driven by an unanticipated price change from (1 − θ)p̂2 + θp2 (1 + t2 ) to p2 (1 + t2 )—a difference of (1 − θ)(p2 (1 +
t2 ) − p̂2 ). Thus the resulting change in c2 consumption (written in terms of the demand elasticity) as a share
of actual c2 consumption, satisfies the following expression:


p̂2
c2 (z) − ĉ2 (z)
≈ (1 − θ) 1 −
ξ(z),
c2 (z)
p2 (1 + t2 )
where ξ(z) is the income-conditional (uncompensated) demand elasticity for c2 . (This is an approximation
because this effective price change need not be infinitesimal change.) Thus

1 − θ̂(z) ≈ (1 − θ) + θ(1 − θ) 1 −

9

p̂2
p2 (1 + t2 )


ξ(z).

