                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE MACROECONOMICS OF RATIONAL BUBBLES:
                               A USER'S GUIDE

                                         Alberto Martin
                                         Jaume Ventura

                                      Working Paper 24234
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24234


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2018




We are grateful to Oscar Arce, Vladimir Asriyan, Gadi Barlevy, Sergi Basco, Gene Grossman,
Jian Jun Miao and Toan Phan for their comments on an earlier draft. We thank Janko Heineken
and Ilja Kantorovitch for superb research assistance. Martin acknowledges support from the
Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness (grant ECO2016-79823-P) and
from the ERC (Consolidator Grant FP7-615651-MacroColl). Ventura acknowledges support from
the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (grant ECO2014-54430-P) and from the
ERC Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme (grant agreement 693512). In addition,
both authors acknowledge support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness,
through the Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D (SEV-2015-0563), from
the CERCA Programme/Generalitat de Catalunya, from the Generalitat de Catalunya (grant
2014SGR-830 AGAUR), and from the Barcelona GSE Research Network. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Alberto Martin and Jaume Ventura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Macroeconomics of Rational Bubbles: A User's Guide
Alberto Martin and Jaume Ventura
NBER Working Paper No. 24234
January 2018
JEL No. E32,E44,O40

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper provides a guide to macroeconomic applications of the theory of rational bubbles. It
shows that rational bubbles can be easily incorporated into standard macroeconomic models, and
illustrates how they can be used to account for important macroeconomic phenomena. It also
discusses the welfare implications of rational bubbles and the role of policy in managing them.
Finally, it provides a detailed review of the literature.


Alberto Martin
CREI
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
Spain
and Barcelona GSE
amartin@crei.cat

Jaume Ventura
CREI
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005-Barcelona
SPAIN
and Barcelona GSE
and also NBER
jventura@crei.cat
   Recent decades have been characterized by large swings in asset prices. To illustrate this, the
top panels of Figures 1-4 depict the ratio of household net worth to GDP in Japan, the United
States, Spain and Ireland at different times over the last three decades. Loosely speaking, this ratio
captures the value of all assets in an economy and its evolution largely mirrors the behavior of real
estate and stock prices. As the figures shows, all of these countries have experienced episodes of
large increases in asset prices – entailing a creation of wealth of one GDP or more – followed by
sharp declines.
   Besides their direct effect on household wealth, these fluctuations in asset prices have had
profound macroeconomic implications. This is illustrated in the middle and bottom panels of
Figures 1-4, which respectively depict the current account balance and the growth rates of output,
consumption, and the capital stock. There are two main messages from these panels. First, large
asset price booms were in most instances accompanied by large capital inflows, and their collapse
by sharp reversals in capital flows. Second, asset price booms were often accompanied by large
upswings in real activity – as measured by the growth rates of output, consumption and the capital
stock – and their collapse by economic busts. Indeed, most boom-bust episodes ended in economic
recessions, as depicted by the shaded bars in Figures 1-4.
   In light of these developments, macroeconomists have felt the need to develop new models to
understand what drives these large swings in asset prices and how do they affect the macroeconomy.
We review here one class of models that rely on two simple premises or working hypotheses. The
first one is that asset prices are not only driven by fundamentals, but also by bubbles that respond to
random and capricious shifts in market psychology. The second hypothesis is that these bubbles are
consistent with individual rationality. In fact, shifts in market psychology can be easily incorporated
into standard macroeconomic models that rely on rational expectations, individual maximization,
and market clearing.
   These two hypotheses define the research on the macroeconomics of rational bubbles. The
key words are macroeconomic and rational. Macroeconomic in the sense that this research is not
interested in explaining the causes and effects of pricing anomalies or pathologies in some specific
market, e.g. tulips, but rather in understanding large, widespread fluctuations in asset prices in
modern economies. Rational in the sense that one of its key insights is that there are multiple
market psychologies that are consistent with individual rationality. Whereas macroeconomists
typically focus on one such psychology, i.e., asset prices are equal to the fundamental, there is no
compelling reason to do so. Other psychologies may provide a more natural account of important


                                                  1
macroeconomic phenomena.
    Two caveats are in order. The first is that this is a user’s guide, which is defined by the Oxford
English Dictionary as “a handbook containing instructions on how to use a device”. As such, it is
more technical than the usual survey or literature review. We want to tell readers what bubbles
do, but we also want to show them how and why. We do so through a series of simple models and
examples.
    A second caveat is that this guide reflects our personal views, which have evolved over more than
a decade of working on the topic. Because of this, it draws heavily from our own research and reflects
our general narrative. Needless to say, many other researchers have contributed substantially to the
topic. We acknowledge this in a detailed literature review that explains how this line of research
has evolved and how the different contributions relate to each other.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 uses a small open economy model to show
how bubbles generate fluctuations in capital flows, investment, and output. This partial-equilibrium
framework allows us to identify and analyze some of the most important macroeconomic effects
of bubbles. Section 2 extends the analysis to a world economy model. This general-equilibrium
setting enables us to analyze the conditions for the existence of bubbles. It also allows us to explore
the interaction between financial globalization and bubbles, and to derive the welfare and policy
implications of bubbles. Section 3 contains the literature review. Finally, section 4 provides a brief
discussion of the main challenges that this research program is facing.


1    Bubbly boom-bust cycles

The popular notion of a bubble or bubbly episode refers to a situation in which, for no really good
reason, asset values and credit start growing rapidly. This marks the beginning of a period in which
investment expands sharply, typically financed by large capital inflows. Output and consumption
growth accelerate. Some of the new investments might seem unproductive, especially if they are
made in low productivity sectors such as real estate. But this is not perceived to be a major problem
contemporaneously. After all, the population enjoys a high level of consumption and well-being.
    Eventually, again for no really good reason, asset values and credit drop, often quite dramati-
cally. This leads to a sudden collapse in investment and a reversal of capital flows. Output and
consumption growth stop abruptly and might even turn negative. Some of the investments made
during the expansionary phase turn out to have little value, and they might even be abandoned or



                                                  2
dismantled. The population now suffers a low level of consumption and well-being.
       This is the stylized view of bubbly boom-bust cycles held by many economic analysts and
policymakers around the world, and it is based on experiences such as those shown in Figures 1-4.
Perhaps the most defining aspect of this view is that movements in asset values and credit do not
seem to be justified by major changes in economic conditions. Instead, they seem to be driven by
random and capricious shifts in market psychology. Another important aspect of this view is that
even in those cases in which investments are mostly unproductive or even useless, they still seem to
create value and raise wealth during the expansionary period. These aspects of bubbly episodes are
hard to generate in conventional macroeconomic models. But they are a central feature of models
of rational bubbles. Thus, a major selling point of the theory is that it can formalize this popular
view and make sense of it.
       There is much more to the theory of rational bubbles than its ability to formalize this view, of
course. We shall show this amply here. But we have to start somewhere, and this constitutes an
excellent entry point to the macroeconomics of rational bubbles. Next, we construct this popular
view step by step, showing how each of the elements fits into a progressively more sophisticated and
nuanced story. To do this, we begin with a simple “lab economy” that provides a useful starting
point to explore the macroeconomic role of bubbles.


1.1       A simple lab economy

Imagine an economy that is only a very small part of a large world. This economy contains equal-
sized overlapping generations that live for two periods. All generations are endowed with one unit
of labor when young and their goal is to maximize expected consumption when old.1 Domestic
residents and foreigners interact in the credit market, where they exchange consumption goods
today for promises to deliver consumption goods in the future. Foreigners are willing to buy or
sell any credit contract that offers a gross expected return equal to R. We refer to R as the world
interest rate.
    Production of consumption goods requires capital and labor, using a standard Cobb-Douglas
                                    1−α
technology: Yt = A · Ktα · γ t · Lt      ; with A > 0, γ > 0 and α ∈ (0, 1); where Yt , Kt and Lt
denote output, the capital stock and the labor force, respectively. To produce one unit of capital for
period t + 1, one unit of the final good is needed in period t. Capital depreciates at rate δ ∈ (0, 1),
   1
       This assumption simplifies the analysis substantially since it implies that the young save all their income and use
it to construct portfolios with the highest possible expected return.



                                                             3
and it is reversible. The labor force is constant and equal to one. But labor productivity grows at
the rate γ ≥ 1. As usual we work with quantity variables expressed in efficiency units and denote
them with lowercase letters. For instance, we refer to kt as the capital stock, and we define it as
kt ≡ γ −t · Kt .
       Factor markets are competitive and factors earn their marginal product:

                                                 wt = (1 − α) · A · ktα                                             (1)

                                                   rt = α · A · ktα−1                                               (2)

where wt and rt are the wage per effective worker and the rental per effective unit of capital,
respectively.
       We make two assumptions throughout. All capital is owned by domestic firms, which receive
the capital income. All domestic firms are owned by domestic residents, who buy old firms and
create new ones at zero cost.2 Let vt be the market value of all firms after the rental has been
distributed to firm owners, but before new investments have been made. These firms own all the
undepreciated capital left after production, i.e. (1 − δ) · kt . We think of vt as the value of all assets
contained in the country, that is, the theoretical counterpart of the net worth data shown in Figures
1-4.
       Domestic residents may want to borrow from foreigners to purchase firms and to invest. We
introduce a friction that limits borrowing, though. Domestic courts can only seize the assets of
domestic residents, i.e., their firms, but not the rental income of capital. One interpretation of this
assumption is that the rental income can be “hidden” by domestic residents from the courts. As
a result, the young can only promise a payment of vt+1 to their creditors. Let ft be borrowing
or credit. Since contingent contracts are possible, young firm owners face the following borrowing
limit:3
                                                  R · ft ≤ γ · Et vt+1                                              (3)

where E denotes the expectation operator and we include it here because, as we shall see, v can
be stochastic. This borrowing limit links credit and asset values, and it is a key element of many
conventional macroeconomic models nowadays.
   2
       This is an assumption about effective or ultimate control of assets. It does not preclude domestic firms to issue
and sell contingent credit contracts such as equity.
   3
     To implement this borrowing limit, entrepreneurs sell credit contracts that promise a contingent return equal to
          vt+1
Rt+1 =           · R. This contract maximizes promised payments in all possible histories.
         Et vt+1


                                                            4
      Some readers might be wondering why our notation distinguishes between the price of firms and
the value of their capital. The reason, of course, is that bubbles create a wedge between these two
concepts, as we shall see shortly. But the overwhelming choice in current macroeconomic research
is to disregard this wedge and focus on equilibria in which these two quantities coincide:

                                                        vt = (1 − δ) · kt                                  (4)

If Equation (4) holds, we can write the maximization problem of the young as follows:

                               max γ · Et ct+1 = (rt+1 + 1 − δ) · γ · kt+1 − R · ft                        (5)

                                          s. t.              γ · kt+1 = wt + ft

                                                             R · ft ≤ (1 − δ) · γ · kt+1

The young take the wage and rental as given and maximize expected old age consumption. The
latter equals the rental, i.e. rt+1 ·kt+1 ; plus the price obtained by selling their firms, i.e. (1 − δ)·kt+1 ;
minus interest payments. This maximization is subject to two constraints. The first one is the
budget constraint, and it says that investment, i.e. γ·kt+1 −(1 − δ)·kt ; plus the purchase of old firms,
i.e. (1 − δ) · kt ; must equal labor income plus borrowing. The second constraint is the borrowing
limit and it says that interest payments cannot exceed the value of firms, i.e. (1 − δ) · γ · kt+1 .
      The choice variables in the maximization problem (5) are borrowing (ft ) and the capital stock
(kt+1 ). If firms can costlessly merge or separate, or if they can buy and sell used capital, the concept
of firm becomes a veil. Choosing which specific firms to buy and create does not really matter.
The only thing that matters is how much capital is ultimately being held.
      Maximization and market clearing imply that:
                                (                                             1 )
                                     R                                  α · A  1−α
                 γ · kt+1 = min            · (1 − α) · A · ktα , γ ·                                       (6)
                                  R+δ−1                                R+δ−1

Equation (6) is the law of motion of the capital stock and it contains two distinct regions. The
key variable that determines these regions is wealth, which here equals the wage of the young. If
kt weakly excceds a threshold k̄, wealth is high enough to ensure that the borrowing limit is not
binding.4 The young invest up to the point at which the return to capital equals the world interest
rate: rt+1 + 1 − δ = R. If kt < k̄, wealth is too low and the borrowing limit is binding. The return
to capital exceeds the world interest rate: rt+1 + 1 − δ > R. As it is customary in models of the
                       "                α              #1
                                                        α
  4                          α·A        1−α     γ   α
      Formally, k̄ =                          ·   ·          .
                            R+δ−1               R 1−α


                                                                  5
financial accelerator type (of which this one is an example), when the borrowing limit binds the
capital stock is a multiple of wealth. This multiple is known as the financial multiplier since it
measures how many units of capital can be purchased for each unit of wealth. The intuition behind
this multiplier is well known. One additional unit of wealth allows the young to purchase one unit
                                                                             1−δ
of capital. This allows the young to borrow and raise the capital stock by         additional units.
                                                                      2     R
                                                                  1−δ
And this allows them to borrow and raise the capital stock by              additional units. And so
                                                                   R
                                                                          1−δ 2
                                                                              
                                                                1−δ                           R
on. Thus, one unit of wealth allows the young to purchase 1 +        +            + ... =
                                                                 R         R              R+δ−1
units of capital.
      From any initial condition the capital stock monotonically converges to a unique steady state
kF . This convergence is fast if kt > k̄, but slow if kt < k̄. The borrowing limit is binding in the
steady state if the interest rate is low enough.5 These are definitely quiet dynamics. It might seem
that we have chosen the wrong economy to study the sort of messy and often dramatic events
that are associated with the popular view of bubbles. But events of this sort are lurking in the
background. To bring them to the fore, we just need to relax the assumption that firms are worth
the capital they own. There is no theoretical reason to keep this assumption, and there is much to
gain from relaxing it.


1.2      Building a theory of bubbly episodes

The theory of rational bubbles expands the set of equilibria under consideration. In particular, it
also considers equilibria in which the price of firms does not coincide with that of their capital:

                                            vt = (1 − δ) · kt + bt                                (7)

where bt is the bubble or bubble component of firm values. It is useful to think about this bubble
as the sum of bubbles attached to specific firms in the economy. Thus, the bubble has two sources
of dynamics: the growth of bubbles attached to old firms and the creation of new bubbles attached
to new firms. We can express this idea with the following notation:

                                          γ · bt+1 = gt+1 · (bt + nt )                            (8)

Each period, the economy arrives with old bubbles bt attached to old firms. New firms are created
with new bubbles nt attached to them. Equation (8) recognizes that new bubbles in period t are
  5                                α
      In particular, if R < γ ·       .
                                  1−α


                                                       6
already old bubbles by period t + 1, and it implicitly defines gt+1 as the growth rate of bubbles (old
and new) from period t to period t + 1.
       It is almost universally assumed that bubbles cannot be negative. This restriction is motivated
by appealing to some notion of free disposal. If a firm were to contain a negative bubble, the
argument goes, the owner could always start a new firm without bubble, transfer all the capital
from the old firm to it, and close the old firm. Naturally, there might be costs of opening/closing
firms and transferring capital among them. Or it might not be possible to start a new firm without
a bubble. We abstract from these complications and follow standard practice by assuming free
disposal of bubbles, i.e. bt ≥ 0 and nt ≥ 0.
       Why do new bubbles pop up only in new firms? Is it possible that new bubbles pop up also in
old firms? Diba and Grossman (1988) argued that, if a firm contains a bubble, this bubble must
have started on the first date in which the firm was traded. Bubble creation after the first date of
trading would involve an innovation in the firm price. If markets are efficient, this innovation must
have had a zero expected value on the first date of trading. If there is free disposal of bubbles, this
innovation must be non-negative. Combining these two observations we reach the conclusion that
bubble creation must be exactly zero after the first date of trading. The Diba-Grossman argument
is sometimes invoked as a “proof” that bubbles cannot be created. This is obviously misleading,
since their argument does not impose any restriction on the size of new bubbles attached to new
firms. Moreover, one can also relax the assumptions of market efficiency and/or free disposal to
make it possible for new bubbles to pop up in old firms. To simplify the exposition, though, we
keep these two assumptions here.
       As this discussion highlights, a key concept of the theory of rational bubbles is that of market
psychology. By this we mean a set of assumptions that define the bubble and its evolution. The
theory of rational bubbles is interested in the set of market psychologies that are consistent with
maximization and market clearing. Indeed, it is precisely the focus on this particular set that gives
the name to the theory. Sometimes, this set contains a unique market psychology.6 But usually the
set contains many market psychologies, and the modeler is forced to make a choice. This is the case
here. By choosing the specific market psychology that rules out bubbles, we obtained Equation (6)
and the quiet dynamics associated with it. What happens if we make another choice?
   6
       If there is a unique rational market psychology, it is typically the one that rules out bubbles. But we know since
Tirole (1985) that there exist environments in which the unique rational market psychology must feature a bubble.
This case has been used recently by Allen, Barlevy and Gale (2017).




                                                             7
1.3       The wealth effect of new bubbles

We begin by considering a market psychology according to which the economy transits between
two states: zt ∈ {B, F }. During the bubbly state, new bubbles pop up with a combined size η > 0.
During the fundamental state, no new bubbles pop up. Let ϕ and ψ be the transition probabilities
from the bubbly to the fundamental state and vice-versa, respectively. With these assumptions,
we have that:                                       
                                                     η if zt = B
                                               nt =                                                                 (9)
                                                     0 if z = F
                                                            t

This is a stylized model of market psychology. Some periods investor sentiment is such that markets
are willing to finance investment on the basis of new bubbles. Some other periods, investor sentiment
is such that markets are unwilling to do so. The transition between these states is random and
unrelated to economic conditions.
       Replacing Equation (4) with Equations (7) and (8), we can write the maximization problem of
the young as follows:

                 max γ · Et ct+1 = (rt+1 + 1 − δ) · γ · kt+1 + Et gt+1 · (xt · bt + nt ) − R · ft                  (10)

                         s. t.          γ · kt+1 + xt · bt = wt + ft

                                        R · ft ≤ (1 − δ) · γ · kt+1 + Et gt+1 · (xt · bt + nt ) ,

where xt denotes bubble demand by the young as a share of the aggregate bubble. Now the
choice variables are borrowing (ft ), the capital stock (kt+1 ) and the bubble demanded (xt ). Bubble
creation nt is not a choice variable because, according to the market psychology of Equation (9),
it is exogenous. Once again, if firms can costlessly merge or separate, or if they can buy and sell
used capital, the concept of a firm becomes a veil. Choosing which specific firms to buy and create
does not really matter. The only thing that matters is how much capital and bubble are ultimately
being held.7
       Individual maximization plus market clearing (xt = 1) implies,

                                                     Et gt+1 = R,                                                  (11)
   7
       We are assuming here that mergers/separations and purchases/sales of capital do no affect the bubble component.
If they do, then firms are no longer a veil and we cannot take this shortcut. Note that the same assumption applies
to the capital stock. If its value or productivity is affected by mergers/acquisitions and purchases/sales, firms are no
longer a veil either.




                                                           8
i.e., expected bubble growth equals the world interest rate. The return to holding a bubble is its
growth since the bubble does not produce a rental or dividend. If expected bubble growth exceeded
the interest rate, the young would make a riskless profit by purchasing bubbles and borrowing to
finance these purchases.8 The demand for bubbles would be unbounded (i.e., xt → ∞). If expected
bubble growth fell short of the interest rate, the young would make a riskless profit by lending
and shortselling bubbles to finance this lending.9 The demand for bubbles would be negative (i.e.,
xt → −∞). Thus, expected bubble growth must equal the interest rate.10
       One of the most attractive features of the theory of rational bubbles is that market psychology
affects capital accumulation and growth, which are now given by:
                             (                                                  1 )
                                 R                       α                 α·A   1−α
              γ · kt+1 = min           · [(1 − α) · A · kt + nt ] , γ ·                                           (12)
                               R+δ−1                                      R+δ−1

Equation (12) is the law of motion of the capital stock under the new market psychology. Its shape
depends on the size of new bubbles, but it does not depend on the size of old bubbles. In the
fundamental state, nt = 0 and the law of motion is the same as before. In the bubbly state, nt = η
and the law of motion is shifted up for values of kt ≤ k̄. This means that, if the borrowing limit is
binding, bubbly episodes foster capital accumulation and growth.
       Why do new bubbles foster capital accumulation? Why do old bubbles have no effect on capital
accumulation? The key difference is that new bubbles are free, whereas old bubbles need to be paid
for. When the young create firms with new bubbles, they anticipate that they will be wealthier
during old age when they sell these firms. Since they are constrained, they borrow against this
                                                Et gt+1 · nt
future wealth and use the funds to invest; i.e.              = nt . Thus, new bubbles raise wealth,
                                                     R
                                                                     R
and each additional unit of wealth can be leveraged to invest                units of capital. This is
                                                                R+δ−1
the wealth effect of new bubbles. When the young purchase firms with old bubbles, they borrow
                                                                Et gt+1 · bt
against these bubbles just enough to finance their purchase:                 = bt . Thus, old bubbles
                                                                     R
affect neither wealth nor the capital stock.
       Bubbles make the dynamics of our lab economy more interesting. From any initial condition,
the capital stock converges to the interval [kF , kB ]. Once the economy has reached this interval,
   8
       For instance, the young could sell credit contracts that offer a return Rt+1 = gt+1 + R − Et gt+1 , and use the
proceeds to purchase bubbles. This would yield a riskless profit equal to Et gt+1 − R per unit of credit contract sold.
   9
     In this case, the young would like to shortsell bubbles and use the proceeds to purchase the credit contracts
described in the previous note.
  10
     As for unexpected bubble growth, i.e. gt+1 − Et gt+1 , we leave it unspecified for now. Our justification is that
this growth does not play a role until section 1.5, and then we will be forced to make additional assumptions.


                                                           9
it fluctuates within it forever. We refer to the invariant or steady-state distribution of k as the
“steady state”. In this steady state, the economy perpetually transits between the bubbly and
fundamental states. In the bubbly state, asset values, foreign borrowing and investment are high
and the economy grows towards kB . Consumption and welfare also grow. In the fundamental
state, asset values, foreign borrowing and investment are low and the economy shrinks towards
kF . Consumption and welfare also shrink. Transitions between states are random and capricious,
without any really good reason. Figure 5 shows a simulated boom-bust cycle in our lab economy. As
the figure illustrates, these bubbly fluctuations capture quite closely the type of real-world episodes
shown in Figures 1-4.
   A bubble shock is quite similar to a natural resource shock. To see this, imagine that oil or
some other natural resource were suddenly discovered, extracted and exported abroad. This export
revenue (nt ) constitutes a windfall or wealth shock to domestic residents. If the borrowing limit is
not binding, this wealth shock does not affect capital accumulation. But if the borrowing limit is
binding, this shock leads to an increase in the capital stock and a surge in capital inflows. Net worth
increases more than proportionally with the change in the capital stock, to reflect the value of the
natural resource discovered. If eventually the natural resource is exhausted or a better synthetic
substitute is invented, export revenue stops and the wealth effect vanishes. All the effects of the
discovery are reversed, and the economy returns to its initial situation.
   This comparison of shocks provides a clean intuition for what is going on in the bubbly economy.
Instead of exporting natural resources, domestic residents are exporting bubbles to the rest of the
world. Obviously, a difference between natural resources and bubbles is the source of their value,
that is, the reason why the rest of the world demands them. A natural resource such as oil derives
its value from its use in production, and its demand depends on the specific technologies that are
used. A bubble derives its value from its use as an asset or store of value, and its demand depends
on the specific market psychology that prevails. Whatever the source of value, though, natural
resources and bubbles raise wealth. If the borrowing limit is binding, wealth raises investment and
foreign borrowing.


1.4   The subsidy effect of new bubbles

We have just seen that our lab economy can experience bubbly boom-bust cycles in investment. But
many observers have emphasized that it is not only the size of investment that fluctuates sharply




                                                  10
during boom-bust cycles, but also its quality.11 The expansionary phase is often characterized
by low-quality investments, most notably in real estate, that seem to be chasing the bubble with
little or no concern for productive efficiency. These low-quality investments are often abandoned
or dismantled during the recessionary phase. Interestingly, this is exactly what happens in our lab
economy if we introduce low-quality investments and then add a small wrinkle to our model of
market psychology.
       Let us assume that domestic residents can now invest in a low-quality capital ht that produces
output with a linear technology: yt = ρ · ht . This type of capital produces a rental equal to ρ.
Other than this, low-quality capital ht is similar to high-quality capital kt . To produce one unit of
any capital for period t + 1, one unit of the final good is needed in period t; both capitals depreciate
at rate δ; both capitals are reversible, and their rental incomes cannot be seized by domestic courts
and are therefore not pledgeable to creditors. We say that ht is “low quality” because it delivers a
return that is below the world interest rate, i.e. ρ + 1 − δ < R.
       Besides low-quality capital, we also add a new and realistic element to our model of market
psychology. Up to now, we have assumed that new bubbles are independent of the size and type of
investment undertaken by new firms. But often new bubbles seem to be associated or attached to
new firms in specific sectors or technologies, such as housing or high-tech industries. The larger is
the investment that goes to these sectors or technologies, the larger is the size of the new bubble. To
capture this feature of real-world market psychology, we now replace Equation (9) by the following
one:
                                                         1−θ
                                              
                                               η + σ · ht+1
                                              
                                                                    if zt = B
                                         nt =           1−θ                                                      (13)
                                              
                                               0                   if zt = F
where σ > 0 and θ ∈ (0, 1). Equation (13) says that a fraction of bubble creation is attached to
low-quality capital. The more the representative young individual invests in this type of capital,
the larger is the new bubble that she receives. We keep all the other assumptions as in section 1.3.
       With this additional investment option, the maximization problem of the young becomes:

 max γ · Et ct+1 = (rt+1 + 1 − δ) · γ · kt+1 + (ρ + 1 − δ) · γ · ht+1 + Et gt+1 · (xt · bt + nt ) − R (14)
                                                                                                      · ft

            s. t.          γ · (kt+1 + ht+1 ) + xt · bt = wt + ft

                           R · ft ≤ (1 − δ) · γ · (kt+1 + ht+1 ) + Et gt+1 · (xt · bt + nt ) ,
  11
       Gopinath et al. (2017), for instance, have recently argued that the Spanish boom was accompanied by a declining
efficiency in the allocation of resources.



                                                           11
There is now an additional choice variable: the amount of low-quality capital (ht+1 ). Adding this
choice does not affect the equilibria analyzed in sections 1.1 and 1.3, because there is no reason to
invest in this type of capital in those environments. Since ρ + 1 − δ < R ≤ rt+1 + 1 − δ, it does
not pay to produce low-quality capital when it is possible to lend abroad or, even better, produce
high-quality capital.
   Maximization together with clearing in the market for bubbles (i.e., xt = 1) implies that Equa-
tion (11) still holds. Under the market psychology of Equation (13), however, young individuals
have incentives to invest in low-quality capital to increase bubble creation. In this case, the demand
for high-quality capital becomes:
                      (                                                               1 )
                           R                        α                            α·A   1−α
       γ · kt+1 = min             · [(1 − α) · A · kt + nt ] − γ · ht+1 , γ ·                    (15)
                        R+δ−1                                                   R+δ−1

Equation (15) is a natural generalization of Equation (12). If the borrowing limit is not binding,
low-quality capital does not affect the demand for high-quality capital. If the borrowing limit is
binding, though, low-quality capital affects the demand for high-quality capital. For a given amount
of wealth, an increase in low-quality capital lowers the resources available for high-quality capital
one-for-one. In the bubbly state, though, low-quality capital “produces” new bubbles (see Equation
(13)) and this raises wealth and the resources available for overall investment. To determine the
net effect of these two forces, we need to know the equilibrium mix of capitals.
   In the bubbly state, this mix is determined as follows:

                                    R
                 ρ + σ · h−θ
                          t+1 ·
                                                   α−1
                                        · α · A · kt+1            α−1
                                                       = α · A · kt+1     if zt = B              (16)
                                  R+δ−1

Equation (16) says that investments in both types of capital are such that their marginal returns
                                                                                        α−1
are equalized. The marginal return to high-quality capital is its rental, i.e. α · A · kt+1 . The
marginal return to the low-quality capital has two components. The first one is also its rental, i.e.
ρ. The second one is the subsidy effect of new bubbles, and one can think of it as the return to
producing bubbles. At the margin, producing an additional unit of low-quality capital produces
                                                                                             R
σ · h−θ
     t+1 worth of new bubbles. One unit of new bubbles allows the young to purchase
                                                                                           R+δ−1
                                                                                     α−1
units of high-quality capital, and each of these delivers a rental equal to α · A · kt+1 .
   Somewhat paradoxically, the worse low-quality investments are, the more they facilitate high-
quality investments. The latter are maximized if ρ = 0. In this case, the only reason to invest




                                                  12
in low-quality capital is to produce new bubbles to finance high-quality investments.12 If ρ > 0,
investment in low-quality capital also yields a rental and this induces the young to invest beyond
the point that maximizes the resources available for high-quality investments. The larger is ρ, the
larger is this incentive. If ρ < θ · rt+1 , low-quality investments produce more bubbles than needed
to finance themselves, and this facilitates or crowds in high-quality investments. If ρ > θ · rt+1 ,
low-quality investments do not produce enough bubbles to finance themselves, and this obstructs
or crowds out high-quality ones.13
       In the fundamental state, low-quality capital is neither produced nor used:

                                               ht+1 = 0            if zt = F                                       (17)

Once low-quality capital is unable to “produce” bubbles, the subsidy effect disappears and its return
falls below the world interest rate. If there is any low-quality capital when the economy transitions
to the fundamental state, it is always preferable to dismantle it, convert it back into goods and use
these goods to lend abroad or to produce high-quality capital.14
       The dynamics of our lab economy are still very much the same as those described in the
previous section. The only novelty is that, during expansions, young agents devote resources to
the production of low-quality capital in order to chase the bubble. Once the economy enters a
recession there is no longer a bubble to chase, these investments stop and existing low-quality
capital is dismantled. These low-quality investments might appear wasteful if one looks exclusively
at their rental income and neglects the subsidy effect. But this would be misleading, because
  12
       Equations (13) and (15) can be used to show that the level of ht+1 that maximizes kt+1 is defined as follows:

                                                                R
                                                 σ · h−θ
                                                      t+1 ·         =1
                                                              R+δ−1

Equation (16) shows that this exactly defines the equilibrium level of ht+1 if ρ = 0.
  13
     To see this, combine Equations (13) and (15) to determine that increases in ht+1 raise kt+1 if and only if:
                                                                              1
                                                           R        1           θ
                                            ht+1 <             ·σ·
                                                         R+δ−1     1−θ

Then, use Equation (16) to find that
                                                                               1
                                                         R         rt+1             θ
                                          ht+1 =             ·σ·
                                                       R+δ−1     rt+1 − ρ

The result follows from these two observations.
 14
    Here the assumption that capital is reversible simplifies the discussion without affecting our arguments. If capital
were irreversible, it would not be possible to dismantle it and, instead, its price would drop below one and remain low
throughout the fundamental state. Investment in low-quality investment would be zero, and its stock would decline
at the rate of depreciation.


                                                              13
low-quality investments produce valuable bubbles.
       Stressing again the formal similarity between bubble and natural resource shocks, we note that
the formation of bubbles might have effects similar to those of the Dutch disease. To show this,
one simply needs to follow well-trodden paths and assume that the social return to high-quality
capital exceeds its private return due to external learning-by-doing and/or spillovers in knowledge
production. If low-quality capital crowds out high-quality capital during the expansionary phase
of the boom-bust cycle, this might inefficiently reduce growth in the long run. Knowing that there
is this option is useful for the modeler, since Dutch-disease effects are likely to be relevant in
applications. But we shall not pursue this thought further here.15 Instead, we turn our attention
to the old bubbles that have been conspicuously absent from the discussion so far.


1.5       The overhang effect of old bubbles

Up to now we have focused exclusively on the effects of new bubbles. Indeed, we have not even
specified how old bubbles behave, except for showing that their expected growth equals the world
interest rate in all periods. This may not seem like a realistic model of market psychology since, as
the episodes outlined in the introduction suggest, real-world bubbles appear to alternate between
periods of rapid growth and crashes.
       Let us then refine our model of market psychology by assuming that a fraction µ of the old
bubbles bursts in the transition from the bubbly to the fundamental state. Expected bubble growth
is still given by Equation (11), but now realized bubble growth during the bubbly state is given by:
                                      1
                              
                                          · Et gt+1 if zt+1 = B
                                    − ϕ·µ
                              
                       gt+1 =     1                                 if zt = B                   (18)
                                    1−µ
                              
                                          · Et gt+1 if zt+1 = F
                                  1−ϕ·µ
while in the fundamental state this realized growth is given by:

                                            gt+1 = Et gt+1     if zt = F                                         (19)

In both states, expected bubble growth equals the world interest rate. In the bubbly state, holding
bubbles is risky. If the economy remains in the bubbly state, the return to the bubble is above the
world interest rate. But this just compensates bubble owners for the loss of a fraction µ of their
  15
       Our lab economy offers an interesting insight that is reminiscent of the Dutch disease result. If low-quality
investments crowd out high-quality ones, the wage falls and so does savings. As a result, growth might slow down in
the future. Obviously, this result depends on our assumption that the low-quality sector is the capital-intensive one,
and it would be reversed if we were to assume that the low-quality sector is the labor-intensive one.


                                                          14
bubbles when the economy transitions to the fundamental state. Once there, holding bubbles is
safe. As a result, bubble growth equals the world interest rate.
       With this market psychology, owners of old bubbles also experience wealth shocks. The size
and time distribution of these shocks depends on our assumptions. If ϕ is small and µ is large, for
instance, we have that bubble owners receive (on average) a large sequence of small positive wealth
shocks during a bubbly episode. The episode ends however with a single very large negative wealth
shock. This does not seem too unrealistic a model of market psychology, by the way.
       Owners of old bubbles must come up with the resources to purchase them, and they receive the
wealth shocks associated with them. Where do these resources come from? How are they affected
by these shocks? Up to now, the owners of old bubbles have been the foreigners.16 Since we have
not modeled the rest of the world yet, we cannot really say where do foreigners find the resources
to purchase bubbles, or what do they do with the wealth shocks associated with them. A full and
satisfactory answer to these questions must wait until the next section, when we take a look at the
rest of the world and examine the general equilibrium implications of bubbles.
       We can obtain some preliminary answers, though, by “forcing” domestic residents to hold some
old bubbles. To do this, we add another small wrinkle to our model of market psychology.17
Whenever a firm owner defaults on her credit contracts and is taken to court, all of the bubbles
attached to her firms burst. It is well known that litigation is costly, but here it neither uses
resources nor distorts incentives. Instead, it is the market that punishes litigation with the loss
of the bubble. This does not seem too unrealistic and it shows that not even the most efficient
courts might be able to eliminate all litigation costs. We then make two assumptions about the
interaction between debtors and creditors. Ex-post bargaining is efficient and litigation never takes
place in equilibrium. Ex-post bargaining is such that creditors obtain a fraction φ of the surplus,
which in this case is the size of the bubble. Under these assumptions, the borrowing limit is now
given by:
                           R · ft ≤ (1 − δ) · γ · (kt+1 + ht+1 ) + φ · Et gt+1 · (bt + nt )                      (20)

Equation (20) simply says that the young cannot borrow against the whole value of their firm since
  16
       Some readers might find this terminology a bit puzzling. Are bubbles not a component of firm prices? And are
these firms not owned by domestic residents? What we mean, of course, is that credit contracts are such that all the
risk associated with changes in the value of old bubbles are held by foreigners. Since these contracts are rolled over
forever, one can say that foreigners effectively own the bubbles.
  17
     Another way to do this would be to limit the set of contracts that are available. For instance, we could impose
the popular but ad-hoc restriction that credit contracts cannot be contingent.


                                                         15
creditors know that during old age they would have to agree to a reduction in debt equal to a
fraction 1 − φ of the bubble to avoid litigation. Thus, the borrowing limit is the value of the firm,
i.e. γ · Et vt+1 minus a fraction of the bubble, i.e. (1 − φ) · γ · Et bt+1 . This forces the young to
effectively hold a fraction 1 − φ of the bubble.
       Expected bubble growth must now equal:
                                                                     α−1
                                                        R · α · A · kt+1
                                Et gt+1 =                α−1                                                  (21)
                                            φ · α · A · kt+1 + (1 − φ) · (R + δ − 1)
The best intuition for this result comes from examining the limiting cases. As φ → 1, we have that
Et gt+1 → R. Domestic residents can borrow to finance the bubble and the cost of this is the world
                                                     R                 α−1
interest rate. As φ → 0, we have that Et gt+1 =             · α · A · kt+1 . Domestic residents must
                                                  R+δ−1
reduce their holdings of capital to finance the bubble and the cost of this is the return to capital.
For intermediate values of φ, domestic residents can borrow part of the cost of the bubble, but must
finance the rest by reducing their holdings of capital. Thus, the return to the bubble is somewhere
in between the world interest rate and the return to capital. Whatever the case, though, realized
bubble growth is still given by Equations (18) and (19).
    We must replace Equation (15) by the following generalization:18
             (                                                                                 1 )
                  R                           φ · E g
                                                   t t+1                                   α · A   1−α
γ·kt+1 = min            · (1 − α) · A · ktα +            · (bt + nt ) − bt − ht+1 , γ ·
               R+δ−1                               R                                      R+δ−1
                                                                                                 (22)
Since φ · Et gt+1 ≤ R, old bubbles reduce the capital stock. The reason is that the young can no
longer pledge them fully to foreigners, so that they need to use some of their own resources to
purchase them. They do so expecting that the next generation of young entrepreneurs does the
same. And future generations keep doing so following this logic. Thus, the bubble is like a debt
that is passed across generations and absorbs part of the resources that would have been used to
invest in capital. This is the overhang effect of old bubbles, and it always crowds investment out,
reducing the capital stock.
       The overhang effect has important implications for the dynamics of our lab economy. Bubbly
episodes, for instance, need not be expansionary. To see this, note that wealth effect of new
bubbles is smaller if borrowing against them is restricted. As φ → 0, the wealth effect of new
bubbles vanishes and the overhang effect of old bubbles is maximized. In this limit, the shape of
the law of motion depends on old bubbles, but not on new bubbles. In this extreme case, bubbly
  18
       Equations (16)-(17) still hold. Whether bubbles are pledgeable or not, the marginal returns to both types of
capital must be equalized in equilibrium.


                                                         16
episodes are contractionary and reduce the capital stock. This case is just the opposite of the
limiting case φ → 1 that we have been focusing upon until now.
       New bubbles raise wealth and provide resources for investment and growth, but they eventually
turn into old bubbles that take away resources from investment and growth. The dynamic balance
of these effects is complex and can go either way. One can generate scenarios in which bubbly
episodes lead to a strong expansion initially, when the ratio of new to old bubbles is large. Over
time, the expansion weakens, as the ratio of new to old bubbles declines. It might be even possible
that the expansion turns into a contraction before the economy transits to the fundamental state.
Interestingly, the larger is the fraction of bubbles that burst when the latter happens, the milder is
the recession that follows. When bubbles burst, the overhang effect is dampened and this liberates
resources that can be used to invest and grow.
       To conclude our analysis of bubbly boom-bust cycles, we ask whether our model of market
psychology is indeed rational as claimed. To check this, we must ensure that two conditions are
met. The first one is that the bubble grows fast enough to be attractive to those that hold it.
Equation (21) already imposes this condition. The second condition is that this growth does not
lead the supply of bubbles to outgrow their demand. Up to now, we avoided this issue by assuming
that foreigners have unbounded resources. But this is not enough now, since part of the bubble is
held by domestic residents. How do we know that the young have enough resources to purchase
their part of the bubble? To ensure that our model of market psychology is rational we must now
check that it generates an equilibrium in which
                                                               
                                       α            φ · Et gt+1
                        (1 − α) · A · kt + nt > 1 −               · (bt + nt )                                         (23)
                                                         R

in all possible periods and histories. Condition (23) says that the wealth of the young, wage plus
new bubbles, must be large enough to purchase the fraction of the bubbles that cannot be sold to
foreigners.
       All models of rational bubbles must satisfy a feasibility condition like this one.19 Although the
details are specific to each environment, it always involves some sort of comparison between the
interest rate (or return to the relevant assets) and the growth rate of the economy. For instance,
assume that ϕ = 0 so that the bubbly state is absorbing, and let the economy start in it. If the
  19
       We did not check explicitly this condition before since it is always satisfied in the limit φ → 1 (recall that in this
limit Et gt+1 = R). But the condition was indeed there!




                                                              17
borrowing limit is not binding, the bubble grows at the world interest rate, so that:
                                          
                                           R · η if R < γ
                                          
                                  lim b =   γ−R                                                                           (24)
                                 t→∞
                                               ∞       if R ≥ γ
                                          
                                          

If R ≥ γ, the bubble grows without bound and eventually exceeds the wealth of the young. Standard
backward induction arguments rule this out, and this leads us to conclude that our assumed market
psychology is not rational in this case. If R < γ, the bubble converges to a finite value and Condition
(23) is satisfied if η is not too large.20 In this case, we conclude that our assumed market psychology
is rational. If the borrowing limit were not binding and/or the transition probability ϕ were positive,
the calculations would be more involved but the idea would be pretty much the same. The interest
rate must be low enough to ensure that the bubble does not outgrow the wealth of the young.
         The bottom line of this discussion is that, for bubbly boom-bust cycles to happen, our lab
economy must be inserted into a world economy that is capable of supplying plenty of financing
(so that a large part of the bubble is exported) at low interest rates (so that the part of the bubble
that remains at home does not grow too fast). Is this a plausible description of the world economy?
Can such an environment explain the type of boom-bust episodes discussed in the introduction?
To answer these questions, we need to move beyond the borders of our lab economy and explore
the rest of the world.


2          The bubbly world economy

Many observers refer to the last 45 years as the era (or new era) of financial globalization.21 It
all started in the early 1970s in industrial countries, with the abandonment of the Bretton Woods
system and the removal of capital controls and many other restrictions to cross-border transactions.
The effects of this policy reversal were amplified by new trends in the 1980s. Industrial countries de-
regulated their financial markets, and new technologies facilitated the development of sophisticated
financial products. But the major impulse to financial globalization came in a second wave during
the early 1990s, when many emerging markets joined the world financial system. Up to then,
the private sectors in these developing economies had been prevented from participating in global
markets, which was a privilege retained by their sovereigns. The painful sovereign debt crisis of the
    20
         If R ≤ φ · γ, Condition (23) is satisfied for any value of η. If φ · γ < R < γ, Condition (23) is satisfied if η is not
too large.
  21
     See, for instance Eichengreen and Bordo (2002), or Beck, Claessens and Schmukler (2013)



                                                                18
1980s uncovered the weakness of this model and led to its downfall. Capital controls were removed
and market-friendly policies were adopted throughout the emerging world.
      The entry of emerging markets into the world financial system has coincided with profound
changes in the world economic environment. The first of these is cheap credit. Interest rates have
declined steadily since the early 1990s, reaching zero or even turning negative. Low interest rates
are a feature of systems with financial repression where funds are limited and rationed. But the
world financial system could not be farther away from such systems. If anything, financial markets
have incorporated large pools of savings from the emerging world, which move rapidly around the
globe in search of assets or stores of value.22 This is what Ben Bernanke famously described as
a global savings glut. As our lab economy showed us, low interest rates and plenty of financing
create the sort of environment that is conducive to bubbly boom-bust cycles. It is therefore not
surprising to find that financial integration with the emerging world has also been accompanied by
a marked increase in the frequency of credit booms and busts. More surprising, though, are the
so-called global imbalances, which refer to large capital flows from emerging economies with fast
productivity growth like China to advanced economies with slower productivity growth like the
United States. Most observers expected financial integration with emerging markets to be followed
by large capital flows in the opposite direction.
      In this section, we use the theory of rational bubbles to explore the relationship between financial
globalization and bubbles. This relationship is complex and goes both ways, as we argue. Financial
globalization with emerging markets may well have created a bubble-friendly environment, but
bubbles have played a critical role shaping the effects of globalization as well. To show this, we
proceed again step by step, explaining first how to create bubbly environments, deriving then a
couple of important additional effects of old bubbles, and finally mixing all these ingredients to
develop a view of financial globalization with bubbles. We conclude the section by exploring the
implications for welfare and policy.


2.1      Creating bubbly environments

How do we create a bubbly environment? In the lab economy, it was just enough to assume that the
world interest rate, R, lies below the long-run growth rate, γ. Once we adopt a global perspective,
the world interest rate becomes an endogenous variable and it cannot be treated parametrically. A
bubbly environment is still a low interest rate environment. But to create one, we need to take a
 22
      See, for instance, Caballero et al. (2008) and Coeurdacier et al. (2015).


                                                           19
detailed look at the determinants of the world interest rate.
       Let us consider a world economy with many countries. All countries have the same population,
but they differ from the lab economy of the previous section in three respects. First, factor markets
are global and the wage and rental therefore depend on the world capital stock and not the country’s
capital stock. Thus, Equations (1)-(2) still apply, but now kt must be interpreted as the world
capital stock, and wt and rt as the common wage and rental.23 Second, only a fraction ε of each
country’s residents can manage and own capital. We refer to these individuals as entrepreneurs.
The rest cannot do so, and we refer to them as savers.24 Third, consumption goods are not
perishable and can be stored from one period to the next one. A literal way to think about storage
is as inventory accumulation. But there are other interpretations, as we shall show later. The rest
of our assumptions regarding preferences, technology, demography and domestic courts remain the
same as before.
       As is customary by now, we must specify a market psychology to complete the model. We adopt
again the familiar market psychology of section 1.3. Recall that in this market psychology there is
no subsidy effect of bubbles, so that Equation (9) holds, and bubbles are fully pledgeable, so that
Equation (11) also applies. What kind of environments make such a market psychology rational?
What does the modeler have to do to create them?
       The steady-state dynamics of the world capital stock are as follows:25
                                                                                              
                                    1
                   γ · kt+1 = min     · [ε · (1 − α) · A · ktα + nt ] , (1 − α) · A · ktα − bt                      (25)
                                    δ

The aggregate resource constraint of the economy says that the total wealth of the economy, which
consists of the wage, must be allocated to the three available assets: capital, bubbles, and storage.
  23
       Since moving capital and labor physically is costly, the assumption of global factor markets can only be justified
if technologies allow factors of production located in different countries to embed their contributions to production in
specialized intermediate inputs. Trading these inputs would then lead to the equalization of factor prices. Technologies
have certainly evolved in this direction, and trade in intermediates has exploded in the last couple of decades. But
we are still far away from having factor markets that are truly global. We adopt this assumption because it helps
tremendously to provide clean and instructive derivations of the theoretical results we are after. But it is admittedly
unrealistic, and we shall remove it in section 2.3.
  24
     Since not all countries need to have the same proportion of savers, one could think of our lab economy as a
country without savers. But nothing of substance would really change from our analysis in section 1 if we added
savers to the lab economy. The only change would be that, when we referred to wealth, we would now refer to
“entrepreneurial” wealth. And when we referred to borrowing, we would now refer to “entrepreneurial” borrowing.
  25                                         α·γ
     Here we are using the assumption that         + 1 − δ > 1. This condition implies that, in any steady state, the
                                            1−α
return to investment is higher than the return to storage.


                                                            20
Equation (25) says that there are two regimes. In one regime, the interest rate equals the return
to storage, i.e., Rt+1 = 1, and the three assets are used in equilibrium. We refer to this case as the
“partial intermediation” regime. The borrowing limit is binding and some savings remain in the
hands of savers, who store them. Investment is limited or determined by entrepreneurial wealth.
In the second regime, the interest rate is higher than the return to storage:
                                                                                      
                                γ · [(1 − δ) · kt+1 + Et bt+1 ]            α−1
                  Rt+1 = min                                    , α · A · kt+1 + 1 − δ            (26)
                                  (1 − ε) · (1 − α) · A · ktα

and only capital and bubbles are held in equilibrium. We refer to this case as the “full intermedi-
ation” regime. The borrowing limit might be binding or not, but all savings end up in the hands
of entrepreneurs. If the borrowing limit is binding, the interest rate is determined by “cash-in-the-
market”, i.e. the ratio of entrepreneurial collateral to savings of the savers. If the borrowing limit
is not binding, the interest rate equals the return to investment.
   The effects of bubbles depend on the regime. In the partial intermediation regime, the wealth
effect of new bubbles raises the capital stock at the expense of storage, with a constant interest
rate. Old bubbles have no effect on the capital stock. Thus, new and old bubbles have the same
effect as in the lab economy! But old bubbles are no longer held by foreigners with unbounded
resources. Instead, they are held by savers who reduce their holdings of stored goods. Interestingly,
this places a general-equilibrium limit to the effects of bubble creation: the complete elimination
of storage.
   In the full intermediation regime, this limit has been reached and new bubbles no longer affect
capital accumulation. Interestingly, old bubbles have an overhang effect now. New and old bubbles
have the same effect as they did in the lab economy when they were not pledgeable, i.e. φ = 0.
But here we have assumed that they are pledgeable, i.e. φ = 1. What is going on? In the
economy of section 1.5, the overhang effect was a partial-equilibrium effect. Our assumption that
the bubble was not pledgeable forced entrepreneurs to hold part of it. The remaining part was
held by foreigners, and the latter had unbounded resources. Now, the overhang effect is a general-
equilibrium effect. Entrepreneurs need not hold any part of the bubble. But the rest of the world
no longer has unbounded resources. The larger is the bubble, the smaller are the resources that
are available for capital accumulation.
   To create bubbly environments, note first that the equilibrium interest rate is (weakly) increasing
in the bubble. Calculate the steady-state interest rate in the absence of bubbles, i.e., in the history




                                                    21
in which the economy remains always in the fundamental state:
                             
                              1
                                                             if ε < δ
                       R∞ =         
                                      1−δ α·γ
                                                                                                                   (27)
                              min
                                           ,     +1−δ        if ε ≥ δ
                                      1−ε 1−α
Since the interest rate is weakly increasing in the bubble, any equilibrium bubble must grow at
least at rate R∞ . Thus, we need R∞ < γ for bubbles to be possible. Otherwise, any bubble would
eventually exceed the wealth of the economy. If R∞ < γ, a bubble can always exist and its size
will be limited by the need to keep the interest rate below the growth rate.26
       The traditional literature on rational bubbles considers economies in which the borrowing limit
is not binding and R∞ equals the return to investment. This approach has been criticized on two
grounds however. Under these conditions, bubbles are only possible if additional investments are
dynamically inefficient and reduce steady state consumption. Abel et al. (1989) argued that this
condition was not met in the data, and even though Geerolf (2013) has recently challenged this view,
it is fair to say that most macroeconomists still believe that investment is dynamically efficient.
The second critique is that, if the borrowing limit is not binding, bubbles are contractionary and
should be associated with reductions in the capital stock and output. This seems to be contrary to
empirical evidence that shows that asset prices tend to be pro-cyclical. Mostly for these two reasons,
recent research on rational bubbles has focused instead on environments in which the borrowing
limit is binding and R∞ is lower than the return to investment. In this case, bubbles exist in
environments in which average investment is dynamically efficient and bubbles are expansionary.
We shall also follow this route here and, from now on, we focus exclusively on environments in
which the borrowing limit is binding.
       We conclude this section with a comment on the concept of storage. A literal interpretation
of storage is inventory accumulation. But one could also interpret storage as low-quality capital,
as in section 1.4. In this case the return to “storage” would be ρ + 1 − δ instead of one. Thus, a
reduction in storage could also be interpreted as a reduction in inefficient investments. A simple
variation on the model shows that there is also a third possibility. Assume now that the young
attach a positive value to consumption during youth. In particular, young savers in generation t
maximize,
                                                Ut = ct,t + β · Et ct,t+1                                           (28)
  26
       In some environments, bubbles lower the interest rate. In this case, they can exist even if R∞ > γ. Interestingly,
in this case small bubbles do not exist, but large enough bubbles that lower the interest below the growth rate do
exist. See Martin and Ventura (2012) for an example.


                                                            22
where β is the rate of time preference. Now, the return to “storage” would be β −1 instead of one.
Thus, a reduction in storage could also be interpreted as a reduction in early consumption. The
appropriate interpretation of “storage” depends on the context in which the theory is applied, and
the modeler has at least these three choices.


2.2       Are old bubbles always contractionary?

In the models we have developed so far new bubbles can only be expansionary while old bubbles
can only be contractionary. It seems to us that, under reasonable assumptions, the notion that new
bubbles are expansionary should be quite robust. But we know that the conclusion that old bubbles
are contractionary is not robust. To show this, we use now a popular market psychology according
to which no new bubbles are created, and either there is no bubble (the bubbleless equilibrium), or
the bubble has existed forever and it is stationary (the bubbly equilibrium). This market psychology
generates two possible steady-state situations with a constant bubble. A bubbleless steady state in
which the interest rate equals R∞ , and a bubbly steady state in which the interest rate equals γ.27
       Let us apply this market psychology first to the world economy of the previous section. The
law of motion of the capital stock is (recall that we are assuming from now on that the borrowing
limit is binding):
                                                   Rt+1
                                   γ · kt+1 =                · ε · (1 − α) · A · ktα .                            (29)
                                                Rt+1 + δ − 1
Thus, in any steady state we have that:
                                                                               1
                                            R       (1 − α) · A                 1−α
                                       k=       ·ε·                                                               (30)
                                          R+δ−1          γ

In the bubbleless equilibrium R = R∞ , while in the bubbly equilibrium R = γ. Since the capital
stock declines with R, we just confirm our earlier finding that if bubbles exist, i.e. R∞ < γ; they
raise the interest rate and are therefore contractionary.
       Let us now consider a simple modification of the model in which individuals live for three
periods: youth, middle age and old age. The young are endowed with 1 − ε units of labor, while
the middle-aged are endowed with ε units. Assume also that young individuals are savers, while
middle-aged individuals are entrepreneurs. Superficially, this model looks almost identical to the
one of the previous section. There are gains from intermediating resources between savers and
entrepreneurs, but financial frictions – and the wealth of entrepreneurs – limits the extent to which
  27
       This type of modeling is quite restrictive, and we do not recommend it in applications. But it does simplify the
analysis dramatically, and this makes it convenient for theoretical explorations of specific mechanisms.


                                                           23
this can be done. But the life-cycle structure of this model introduces a crucial innovation: now,
the entrepreneurs of period t are the savers of period t − 1, so that the wealth of the former depends
on the return to the savings of the latter.
      The law of motion of the capital stock in this modified economy is given by:
                                                                                             
                          Rt+1                           α   Rt                            α
            γ · kt+1 =              · ε · (1 − α) · A · kt +    · (1 − ε) · (1 − α) · A · kt−1 .   (31)
                       Rt+1 + δ − 1                          γ

The key novelty here is that entrepreneurial wealth has two components: wages plus the return to
savings. In any steady state, we now have that:
                                                           1
                                R        1−ε      (1 − α) · A 1−α
                           k=       · ε+     ·R ·                                                  (32)
                              R+δ−1       γ            γ

It is not clear now whether the steady state capital stock is decreasing or increasing with R. On
the one hand, a high interest rate lowers the multiplier and reduces entrepreneurial leverage. This
is the familiar bubble overhang effect of old bubbles that lowers capital accumulation. On the other
hand, a high interest rate raises entrepreneurial wealth and this raises capital accumulation. This
is the liquidity effect of old bubbles since, by raising the interest rate, old bubbles make it cheaper
to carry funds across periods. If bubbles exist, i.e. if R∞ < γ, they still raise the interest rate.
But this need not be contractionary.28 To see this, consider the case in which δ = 1, so that the
financial multiplier equals one. The overhang effect vanishes, only the liquidity effect operates, and
old bubbles raise capital accumulation.


2.3      Financial globalization with bubbles

Let us now bring our focus back to financial globalization. To do this, we consider a world with
local factor markets and countries that differ in their level of financial development. In a subset of
countries j ∈ C, which we call Core, domestic courts can seize the revenues obtained through the
sale of firms so that their entrepreneurs face the familiar borrowing limit in Equation (3). In the
remaining set of countries j ∈ P , which we call Periphery, domestic courts are unable to seize any
income and their entrepreneurs cannot borrow. Let π be the share of the world population that
lives in Periphery countries. Throughout, we consider two possible market psychologies for each
country j. The first one is the fundamental one in which there are no bubbles nj,t = 0. The second
one is the bubbly market psychology we used in section 1.3 in which nj,t is given by Equation (9).
                                                  
 28                                      1−δ   γ
      In this modified model R∞ = max 1,     ·       < γ.
                                         1−ε γ+δ−1



                                                     24
   Consider an initial situation in which Core countries participate in a world credit market, but
Periphery countries do not (1970s and 1980s). The capital stocks of the different countries evolve
as follows


                                   Rt+1                          α
                                                                            
                 γ · kj,t+1 =                · ε · (1 − α) · A · kj,t + nj,t , for j ∈ C,           (33)
                                Rt+1 + δ − 1
                                                           α
                           γ · kj,t+1 = ε · (1 − α) · A · kj,t + nj,t , for j ∈ P .                 (34)

The main difference between capital accumulation in Core and Periphery countries is the size of
the financial multiplier. This multiplier is above one in Core countries, since their entrepreneurs
are subject to the borrowing limit in Equation (3). The financial multiplier is one in Periphery
countries, since their entrepreneurs cannot borrow. The interest rate in Core countries is given by:
                                           P                                  
                                     
                                      γ ·     [(1 − δ) · kj,t+1 + Et bj,t+1 ] 
                                                                               
                                           j∈C
                        Rt+1 = max                                P α ,1 .                      (35)
                                      (1 − ε) · (1 − α) · A ·
                                                                     kj,t     
                                                                               
                                                                    j∈C

If their combined entrepreneurial collateral is large enough relative to the wealth of their savers,
the interest rate in Core countries is determined by “cash-in-the-market” and storage is not used
in equilibrium. Otherwise, the interest rate equals one and storage is used in equilibrium. In
Periphery countries, the interest rate equals one so that savers are indifferent between storage and
credit. However, this interest rate is only notional since the equilibrium amount of credit is zero.
Entrepreneurs would like to borrow at this rate, but they have no collateral to offer. Periphery
savers are forced to use storage.
   Let us assume that:
                                         1−δ         α·γ
                                    γ<       < ε−1 ·     + 1 − δ.                                   (36)
                                         1−ε         1−α
In Core countries, bubbles are fully pledgeable and their expected growth must equal the world
interest rate. But the first inequality in assumption (36) says that this interest rate is above the
growth rate. In Periphery countries, bubbles are not pledgeable and their expected growth in
equilibrium must equal the return to investment. But the second inequality in assumption (36)
says that this return to investment is above the growth rate. Thus, bubbles are not possible in
any country. The only feasible market psychology is the fundamental one and the Core-Periphery
world exhibits quiet dynamics. There are no shocks and all countries monotonically converge to
their respective steady states. Given that countries differ only in their level of financial development,
there is full convergence within regions but not across regions. Core countries converge to a steady
state with a higher capital stock and a higher interest rate than Periphery countries.

                                                     25
       Let us consider now what happens if Periphery countries join the world credit market (1990s-
today). The world interest rate, which now applies to all countries, becomes:
                                        P                                  
                                   γ ·
                                           [(1 − δ) · kj,t+1 + Et bj,t+1 ] 
                                                                            
                                        j∈C
                      Rt+1 = max                               P       α , 1 .                                   (37)
                                    (1 − ε) · (1 − α) · A ·
                                                                    kj,t   
                                                                       j∈C∪P

The entry of Periphery countries into the world financial market does not raise entrepreneurial
collateral, because Periphery entrepreneurs are still unable to borrow due to the inefficiency of
their domestic courts. But Periphery savers can now lend to Core entrepreneurs, and this raises the
wealth of savers in the market. Thus, the world interest rate drops and capital flows from Periphery
to Core. These capital flows raise world efficiency because they convert Periphery storage into Core
capital.
       If the collective size of Periphery countries is sufficiently large relative to that of Core countries,
capital flows are not large enough to eliminate all Periphery storage and the world interest rate
drops to one.29 The entry of Periphery countries into the world financial system has created a
bubbly environment! How do bubbles affect financial globalization? To answer this question, we
simulate a six-country version of the Core-Periphery world, two of which are in Core. Figure 6
plots the evolution of the aggregate capital stock, bubble, and current account deficit for each
of the countries in Core.30 The figure assumes that all countries are in the steady state when
Periphery joins the world financial system. The dashed lines depict the benchmark dynamics with
the fundamental market psychology, whereas the solid lines depict the evolution of these same
variables for a simulated realization of the bubbly market psychology.
       There are three main takeaways from Figure 6. First, bubbles reinforce the effects of financial
globalization. By creating collateral in Core, bubbles sustain additional capital flows and deepen
financial integration between Core and Periphery. In the simulation, both the capital stock and
the current account deficit in each Core country rises and falls alongside its bubble. From the
perspective of an outside observer, bubbly episodes are accompanied by a high degree of de facto
                                                  α
  29                                            δ 1−α · (1 − δ)
       In particular, this requires that π >        α            . Note that this is a sufficient but not necessary
                                         1 − ε + δ 1−α · (1 − δ)
condition for creating a bubbly environment. Even if all storage is eliminated, the interest rate can fall below the
growth rate.
  30
     In this version of the model, the capital stocks of Periphery countries are not affected. The reason is that
entrepreneurs cannot borrow. But this need not be the case if entrepreneurs also save. In a multi-country version of
the life-cycle model of Section 2.2., for instance, bubbles would be a source of liquidity regardless of the country in
which they are located, so that bubbles in Core could lead to an expansion in both, Core and Periphery.



                                                          26
financial integration, whereas reversals to the fundamental state are accompanied by retrenchment.
This leads to the second point, which is that the capital flows sustained by bubbles are volatile.
Indeed, as the figure shows, Core countries experience surges in inflows and sudden stops driven
solely by market psychology. Third, because they are country-specific, bubbles lead to dispersion
within Core. Although both Core countries are fundamentally identical to one another, market
psychology can favor any one of them over the other. The general insight here is that the global
allocation of savings will be determined both by bubbles and by productivity and, in principle,
there is no reason for both forces to coincide.


2.4     Managing bubbles

Up to now, we have focused exclusively on the positive aspects of bubbles, namely when they can
exist and how they affect macroeconomic dynamics. We have shown the reader how the theory
of rational bubbles can help us interpret the boom-bust episodes of recent years. We now turn to
some normative issues and explore both the desirability of bubbles and the role, if any, of policy in
managing them. Both questions have been the object of a lively, if often unstructured, debate in
the academic and policy communities. But the theory of rational bubbles has much to offer to this
debate.
   In the bubbly economy, market psychology is an essential component of equilibrium. This
raises two central questions. Which is the most desirable market psychology? Can the policy
maker implement it? Much has been written about these questions, and a thorough treatment of
them would require more space than we have at our disposal. We therefore address them within
the context of a particular example, the Core-Periphery world of the previous section. Although
the setting is specific, the insights that it delivers are easily generalizable to other environments.


2.4.1     What should governments do?

We return to the Core-Periphery world and assume that there is a global planner with the ability
to coordinate the market on its preferred psychology. Which one would she select? Answering this
question requires defining the objective function of the planner. This is not trivial because bubbles
entail a complex web of intra- and inter-generational transfers. One common approach, which we
adopt here, is to assume that the planner’s goal is to maximize some measure of welfare in the
steady state. Since the only source of uncertainty in this world is market psychology itself, the
planner selects a “deterministic” market psychology with a constant rate of bubble creation , i.e.,

                                                  27
nj,t = ηj , and no shocks to the return of old bubbles, i.e., gj,t+1 = Rt+1 , for all t and j ∈ C. Note
that we need only specify the market psychology for Core, as we know that in Periphery the only
admissible psychology is nj,t = bj,t = 0, for all t and j ∈ P .
       All market psychologies of this type yield a deterministic steady state, which is characterized
by the following set of equations:

                                       g
                                           · ε · A · (1 − α) · kjα + ηj for j ∈ C,
                                                                      
                              kj =                                                                                (38)
                                     g+δ−1
                                                            1
                                            ε · A · (1 − α) 1−α
                                      kj =                          for j ∈ P ,                                   (39)
                                                    γ
                                                    P                          
                                           γ·
                                                       [(1 − δ) · kj + bj ]    
                                                                                
                                                    j∈C
                                  g = max                             P α,1 .                                     (40)
                                           (1 − ε) · (1 − α) · A ·
                                                                            kj 
                                                                                
                                                                          j∈C∪P

where g denotes the world interest rate, which must equal the growth rate of bubbles in all countries.
Equation (38) implicitly defines the steady-state capital stock in Core countries solely as a function
of g and ηj . Equation (39) instead shows that, because its entrepreneurs are cut-off from the
credit market, the capital stock in Periphery is independent of bubbles and the world interest rate.
Equation (40), in turn, characterizes the world interest rate. Finally, note that there are two market
psychologies under which bj > 0: if g = γ, it must be that ηj = 0, or; if g < γ, it must be that
ηj > 0 and bj = ηj · g · (γ − g)−1 .31
       Which psychology would a global planner choose? To answer this question, let us first cha-
racterize the set of Pareto-optimal allocations. This may seem like a complicated task, given that
this world is populated by savers and entrepreneurs in many different countries. But it is actually
quite simple.32 An allocation can only be Pareto-optimal if storage is not used. The intuition is
simple: if storage is being used, it is always possible to increase bubble creation – and thus invest-
ment – in some country without reducing investment (and therefore welfare) anywhere else. Once
  31
       Indeed, by evaluating Equation (8) in steady state and setting nj,t = ηj for all t, we obtain,

                                             γ · bj = g · (bj + ηj ) , for j ∈ C,

so that bj > 0 only if γ = g and ηj = 0, or if γ > g in which case,

                                                              g
                                                      bj =       · ηj .
                                                             γ−g

  32
       In Core, the welfare of entrepreneurs equals only the rental income of capital because undepreciated capital has
been fully pledged to creditors. In Periphery, instead, the welfare of entrepreneurs equals the entire capital income.
The steady-state welfare of savers, in turn, equals their labor income times the market interest rate.


                                                             28
storage is completely eliminated, any additional increase in bubble creation comes at the expense
of investment somewhere else and cannot be Pareto-improving.
       Indeed, there is a continuum of Pareto-optimal allocations in the Core-Periphery world, each
of them sustained by a different market psychology. Although the use of storage is eliminated in
all of them, these allocations differ in their bubbles, their capital stocks, and their interest rates,
which can lie anywhere between 1 and γ. Whether one market psychology is preferred over another
depends on the relative weights that the global planner assigns to the different type of individuals.
If the planner favors entrepreneurs, she will prefer allocations with the lowest interest rate to
maximize investment. If instead the planner favors savers, she may prefer allocations with higher
interest rates even if this comes at the expense of investment.
       This discussion illustrates some key normative implications of the theory of rational bubbles.
Perhaps the main one is that, far from the widespread notion that bubbles are undesirable, the
theory suggests that they can be Pareto-improving.33 Naturally, different bubbles have different
effects on global output and its distribution.34 But characterizing the set of optimal bubbles is
only the first step towards a proper analysis of policy. The other is thinking about implementation,
which raises further questions of its own. First, the world is not run by a global planner but rather
by a collection of individual governments. It is natural to expect each government to favor bubble
creation in its own economy even if this comes at the expense of investment elsewhere in the world.
As in other areas of international economics, this creates a need for policy coordination on which
we shall not elaborate here. We turn instead to a second crucial point: once governments have
decided on their preferred market psychology, what can they do to induce it?


2.4.2       What can governments do?

This section considers the problem of governments that, having settled on a preferred market
psychology, want to implement the corresponding allocation. One possible approach is to assume
that governments can choose this psychology directly, for instance, by forcing individuals to act
in a certain way and punishing those that deviate. This is not very interesting, however. An
  33
       This need not be the case, of course, as bubbles may also entail costs. They may redirect investment towards
unproductive uses, as we have seen, they may be too volatile, or they may become too large thereby leading to
inefficiently severe crises when they burst (see, for instance, Caballero and Krishnamurthy 2006).
  34
     These effects of bubbles, moreover, are model-specific. In the Core-Periphery world, for instance, it is the wealth
effect of bubble creation that enables entrepreneurs to expand their investment. In the life-cycle model of Section
2.2., instead, the liquidity effect of old bubbles can do the trick.



                                                            29
alternative approach, which we have developed over various papers and follow here, is to endow
governments with specific policy tools and study how these tools can be used to re-create the
transfers implemented by the preferred bubble, thereby implementing the desired allocation.35
Since bubbles implement these transfers through the credit market, it is reasonable to begin by
looking at credit market interventions.
       Let us assume that governments want to implement the Pareto-optimal allocation associated
with market psychology {ηj }j∈C . To do so, we assume that governments in Core are able to
subsidize and/or tax their entrepreneurs. In particular, we assume that the government of country
j ∈ C promises to give its entrepreneurs of generation t a gross transfer of sj,t+1 units of the
consumption good during old age. These transfers can be negative and/or contingent on the state
of the economy, and we assume that they can be pledged by entrepreneurs to outside creditors.
We do not allow for cross-country subsidies, though. Thus, positive transfers in country j ∈ C are
financed through a tax on the country’s young entrepreneurs; negative transfers, in turn, generate
a revenue that is distributed among young entrepreneurs.
       These interventions can be thought of as credit management policies. Given policies {sj,t }j∈C
for all t, we can define:
                                                        γ · Et sj,t+1
                                              nsj,t =                 − sj,t .                     (41)
                                                             g
Thus, nsj,t represents the net transfers to young entrepreneurs in country j, i.e., the difference
between the present value of subsidies that they will obtain in old age and the taxes paid in young
age. This difference can be positive or negative. The key observation is that there are now three
sources of entrepreneurial wealth: wages, new bubbles, and net transfers, i.e., entrepreneurial wealth
equals wj,t + nj,t + nsj,t . Moreover, there are now three sources of collateral: undepreciated capital,
bubbles, and gross transfers, i.e., collateral equals (1 − δ) · kj,t+1 + Et {bj,t+1 + sj,t+1 }.
       As this discussion makes it clear, these interventions replicate the effects of bubbles. For in-
stance, to implement the desired allocation, governments simply need to set sj,t = bj − bj,t , which
implies that nsj,t = ηj − nj,t for any market psychology {nj,t }j∈C . That is, governments can repli-
cate any allocation by appropriately designing state-contingent policies! In our case, this requires
“leaning against market psychology”. In countries and times where the bubble is low relative to
the desired benchmark, the policy requires the corresponding government to subsidize credit. In
countries and times where the bubble is high relative to the desired benchmark, the policy requires
the corresponding government to tax credit.
  35
       See, for instance, Martin and Ventura (2015, 2016).


                                                             30
    A salient feature of these policies is that they are expectationally robust, in the sense that they
implement the desired allocation regardless of market psychology. That is, they do not target asset
prices, but instead insulate the economy from their fluctuations. Note that these policies achieve
their objectives even if their adoption changes market psychology.
    Bubbles create a web of inter and intra generational transfers. The key insight of this section is
that, if governments have the necessary tools to replicate these transfers, they can always replicate
the desired bubble. We have focused here on the case of taxes and subsidies on credit, but nothing
changes if we allow governments to finance these policies through debt. Moreover, depending on
the setup, these interventions can also be interpreted as capital controls or bailouts.
    What if governments do not have this full set of tools at their disposal? They may, for instance,
have only a limited ability to tax and/or subsidize entrepreneurs. Or, as in some monetary models,
they may be able to influence the real interest rate, which in turn determines the equilibrium growth
rate of old bubbles. Although such limitations certainly curtail governments’ ability to replicate
a desired bubble, they do not change the general nature of the problem. At times, the observed
bubble is too small relative to the desired one and policy should try to raise its size; at other times,
the observed bubble is too large relative to the desired one and policy should try to reduce its size.


3     A guide to the literature

In the previous sections, we have used simple models and examples to convey the main positive and
normative insights of the theory of rational bubbles for macroeconomics. We now provide a brief
guide to the literature that has developed these insights and built on them to generate additional
results.


3.1    The traditional view of bubbles

The seminal papers in the theory of rational bubbles are Samuelson (1958) and Tirole (1985).
Samuelson showed how, in an endowment economy with overlapping-generations, rational bubbles
could offer a remedy to the problem of dynamic inefficiency. Tirole extended these insights to the
classic Diamond (1965) model of capital accumulation, providing the first full treatment of bubbles
in a production economy. We describe below his results.
    In the absence of frictions, the interest rate in the Diamond (1965) model equals the marginal
return to investment, i.e., the return to capital accumulation. It is well-known that the equilibrium


                                                  31
in this model can be dynamically inefficient, which happens whenever the steady-state interest
rate lies below the growth rate of the economy. These are situations in which the capital stock is
excessive and its return is too low. Tirole (1985) showed that, in such situations, there exists an
alternative bubbly steady state in which agents are willing to hold rational bubbles. This steady
state has two key features relative to the standard fundamental one. First, both the capital stock
and output are lower, because bubbles divert resources away from capital accumulation. This is
nothing but the overhang effect of old bubbles that we have discussed so extensively. Second,
welfare is higher, because the capital stock eliminated by the bubble is inefficient to begin with.
Both results correspond exactly to our analysis of the world economy of section 2.1, for the case in
which the borrowing limit is not binding.
   These first findings were derived in highly stylized models and it was not obvious how robust they
were to some natural generalizations of the environment. One such generalization is the inclusion
of non-reproducible factors of production such as land, which provide rents to their owners. In
equilibrium, the price of these factors must equal the discounted value of the stream of rents that
they are expected to generate in the future. This is problematic, because dynamic inefficiency –
which generates the low interest rates necessary for the existence of bubbles – may imply infeasibly
high prices of non-reproducible factors. Tirole (1985) partially explored this connection and showed
that sometimes, in the presence of rents, the unique market psychology must feature a bubble! Rhee
(1991) focused specifically on land, and showed that its presence is not incompatible with dynamic
inefficiency insofar as the land share of output vanishes asymptotically.
   Another unappealing feature of this early work is that it focused on deterministic bubbles, which
display a very predictable behavior and never burst. The fact that real-world bubbles are anything
but predictable prompted the study of stochastic bubbles like the ones we have used throughout this
guide. Blanchard (1979) and Blanchard and Watson (1982) used partial-equilibrium asset-pricing
models to show that such bubbles can be consistent with rational expectations. They also argued
that stochastic bubbles could display a wide range of behavior, and studied conditions under which
their presence could be verified econometrically. Weil (1987) studied the existence of stochastic
bubbles in general equilibrium, extending Tirole (1985) to the case of bubbles that have a constant,
exogenous, probability of collapsing.
   This theory of rational bubbles provided an elegant and powerful way to think about real-world
bubbles, suggesting that it would be widely used by macroeconomists. But this did not happen.
A first drawback of the theory is its prediction that bubbles can only arise under low interest


                                                 32
rates, which – in the basic models discussed above – is equivalent to dynamic inefficiency. As we
anticipated in section 2.1, the empirical validity of the latter was questioned in an influential paper
by Abel et al. (1989). Although their findings have been recently questioned by Geerolf (2013),
the predominant view has been for many years that real economies are dynamically efficient. This
appeared to limit the relevance of the theory of rational bubbles, but only if one sticks to the
frictionless models in which the theory was first developed. In the presence of frictions, in fact,
the interest rate need not accurately reflect the return to capital and bubbles may exist even if the
economy is efficient.
   One set of papers made this point in the context of endogenous growth. Saint-Paul (1992),
Grossman and Yanagawa (1993), and King and Ferguson (1993), for instance, extended the analysis
of Tirole (1985) to economies with endogenous growth due to externalities in capital accumulation.
The key insight of these papers is that, in the presence of such externalities, the market interest
rate underestimates the true return to investment. Thus, the interest rate can be low enough
for bubbles to exist even if the economy is dynamically efficient. In these models, bubbles reduce
capital accumulation exactly as in Tirole (1985). But their welfare implications are different because
these economies accumulate too little, as opposed to too much, capital to begin with. By reducing
capital accumulation, bubbles slow down the long-term growth rate of the economy so that there
always exists a future generation that is harmed. Note that these insights are closely related to
our discussion of the Dutch disease in section 1.4., and they would also arise in our example in the
presence of externalities.
   Another set of papers showed that bubbles could arise in dynamically efficient economies if
there are financial frictions. Woodford (1990), Kocherlakota (1992), Azariadis and Smith (1993),
and Woodford and Santos (1997), for instance, showed how frictions such as borrowing constraints
and adverse selection could depress equilibrium interest rates and create bubbly environments. The
role of various financial frictions in creating this type of environments has since then been analyzed
in the literature, from the lack of insurance markets (e.g. Aoki et al. (2014)) to borrowing limits
like the ones we have explored here (e.g. Hirano and Yanagawa (2016)).


3.2   A new view of bubbles

Even if one accepts that the existence of bubbles does not require dynamic inefficiency, there is a
second implication of the basic models that seemed unpalatable; namely, bubbles crowd out capital
accumulation and reduce output. This prediction seemed particularly troubling in the aftermath of


                                                  33
the dot-com boom and bust of the late 1990s, during which the performance of the United States
economy closely tracked the growth and subsequent collapse of the stock market. If there was ever
a boom-bust episode where the theory of rational bubbles should apply, this was it. And yet, it
highlighted the theory’s limitations.
   To address this issue, Olivier (2000) used an endogenous growth model to show that the effects
of bubbles depend on the asset on which they appear. Bubbles on equity, in particular, can raise
the market value of firms thereby enhancing firm creation, investment, and growth. Bubbles on
unproductive assets, in turn, have the typical crowding-out effect and reduce growth. The key
insight of the model, in fact, is that bubbles on equity have similar effects to subsidies on R&D.
This is closely related to the subsidy effect of section 1.4., with the difference that Olivier (2000)
focuses on the case in which the bubble subsidizes productive investment.
   But most of the recent literature on rational bubbles has focused instead on models with fi-
nancial frictions. This has been partly due to the widespread introduction of financial accelerator
mechanisms, like those in Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), into ma-
croeconomic models. Financial frictions not only relax the conditions for the existence of bubbles,
as we have already mentioned, but they also enable bubbles to expand the capital stock and output.
Different strands of literature emphasize different mechanisms for this expansionary effect, most of
which have already been discussed throughout this guide. The common theme that underlies all
of them is that bubbles enable the transfer of resources, from agents who do not want to invest to
those that do.
   A first strand of the literature stresses the wealth effect of bubble creation, which we first in-
troduced in Martin and Ventura (2012) and has since then been explored in a series of papers. In
these models, newly created bubbles reallocate resources because they are sold by productive to
unproductive agents, either directly or indirectly through the credit market. This wealth effect of
bubble creation has been a recurrent theme throughout sections 1 and 2, and we shall not dwell
on it here. It suffices to say that all the main insights derived in the context of our stylized exam-
ples survive in richer environments, with more general preferences and alternative credit market
specifications (see Martin and Ventura 2011, 2015 and 2016).
   A second strand of literature stresses the role of bubbles as providers of liquidity, as in the
model of section 2.2. In these models, bubbles enable agents to transfer resources over time, from
periods in which they are unproductive to periods in which they are productive. Thus, rational
agents are willing to hold bubbles because they expect to sell them or borrow against them in the


                                                 34
future, when the time comes to invest. Some examples of this line of research include Caballero
and Krishnamurthy (2006), Kocherlakota (2009), Farhi and Tirole (2012), Miao and Wang (2017)
and Guerron-Quintana et al. (2017).
   Finally, a third strand of literature highlights the general equilibrium effects of bubbles, which
can induce price changes that enable the transfer of production factors from unproductive to pro-
ductive agents. Ventura (2012) and Ventura and Voth (2015), for instance, study environments in
which unproductive and productive agents compete for existing factors of production like capital
and labor. When unproductive agents purchase bubbles, they reduce their production and thus
their demand for capital and/or labor. The consequent fall in the price of these factors enable
productive but constrained agents to expand their production, thereby leading to a boom.


3.3   Macroeconomic applications

Building on these insights, there has been an explosion of research in recent years trying to explain
a wide array of macroeconomic phenomena.
   Let us start with financial markets. There is mounting evidence of a link between asset bubbles,
credit booms and busts, and financial crises (e.g. Schularik and Taylor (2012), Jordà et al. (2015)).
Martin and Ventura (2016) and Miao and Wang (2017) explore this connection in general equili-
brium models of credit and bubbles, in many ways similar to the world economy of section 2.1. In
these models, the bursting of a bubble pushes the economy into a recession but it does not lead
to defaults or unemployment because credit contracts are state-contingent and prices are flexible.
In related settings, Ikeda and Phan (2016) and Bengui and Phan (2016) introduce non-contingent
contracts to generate defaults, while Miao and Wang (2016) and Hanson and Phan (2017) introduce
nominal rigidities to generate unemployment.
   Delving deeper into financial markets, various papers have explicitly introduced financial inter-
mediaries to analyze how their presence shapes the effects of bubbly booms and busts. Aoki and
Nikolov (2015), Miao and Wang (2015), Martin and Ventura (2016 online appendix), and Freixas
and Perez-Reyna (2016) are some examples in this regard. In general, these models are similar
to the examples explored throughout this guide, with the difference that both entrepreneurs and
financial intermediaries are subject to borrowing limits. Bubbles can relax or tighten these limits
for financial intermediaries through the same mechanisms outlined above. The key insight is that
it is not just the size of the bubble, but also its location – i.e., whether it is created and/or held by
financial intermediaries or entrepreneurs – that matters for economic activity.


                                                   35
   The location of a bubble is also important in determining the allocation of resources across firms
and sectors. Queirós (2017a) provides empirical evidence in this regard. Miao and Wang (2014),
Basco (2016) and Tripathy (2017) develop models to study the role of bubbles in determining the
cross-sector allocation of resources. Much in the spirit of the subsidy effect discussed in section 1.4,
these papers identify conditions under which bubbles can reduce efficiency (and potentially growth)
by reallocating resources towards less productive uses. One specific sector that has received much
attention is housing, both because of its size and because it exhibits large fluctuations. Arce and
Lopez-Salido (2011), Basco (2014), Zhao (2015), and Huber (2016) develop models of rational
bubbles to study the macroeconomic implications of fluctuations in housing. Finally, for all this
sector-level research, there has been almost no work on the firm-level implications of bubbles. This
is somewhat surprising given the growing interest of macroeconomists on firm dynamics. Two
exceptions are Tang (2017) and Queirós (2017b), who study models of heterogeneous firms with
entry and exit and explore the effects of bubbles on competition, on average productivity, and on
its dispersion across firms.
   On the international sphere, bubbles affect the allocation of resources across countries, as we
illustrated through the Core-Periphery world. The role of bubbles in shaping the size, direction,
and volatility of capital flows has been explored in a number of papers. Kraay and Ventura (2007)
and Ikeda and Phan (2015) use models of rational bubbles to account for global imbalances between
the United States and the developing world. Basco (2014) and Rondina (2017) are closest to the
Core-Periphery example in section 2.3, as they provide formal models in which, due to asymme-
tric financial development, financial globalization itself creates a bubbly environment. In Martin
and Ventura (2015), we construct a multi-country model and explore the positive and normative
implications of bubbles for capital flows and for the global allocation of resources.
   Finally, there is a large literature on the ability (or not) of macroeconomic policy to manage
bubbles and their effects. Here, the desirability and effectiveness of policy depends on the tools at
the authority’s disposal. In Martin and Ventura (2015, 2016), we provide a formal analysis of the
policy results illustrated in section 2.4, which assume that the government has the necessary tools
to reproduce the transfers induced by bubbles. In Martin and Ventura (2011, 2016), we also explore
whether a government with limited ability to tax can nonetheless manage bubbles by issuing public
debt. Arce and Lopez Salido (2011) study policy interventions meant to eliminate bubbles on the
“wrong” assets, which generate distortions, and foster them on the “right” assets. Other papers
have focused not on the ability of policy to replicate the desired bubble, but rather on its role in


                                                  36
preventing crises or mitigating their effects. These interventions can be both ex ante in the form
of macroprudential regulation (e.g. Caballero and Krishnamurthy 2006), or ex post in the form of
bailouts (e.g. Hirano et al. 2015).
   Most of this literature on policy has a fiscal flavor to it, focusing almost exclusively on the
role that taxes and subsidies can play in managing bubbles. The role of monetary policy has been
much less explored, although it has featured prominently in the academic and policy debate for a
long time (e.g. Bernanke and Gertler 2001). This is now changing. Gali (2014) and Barlevy et al.
(2017) study how a monetary authority can, by controlling the interest rate, affect the evolution
of bubbles. Asriyan et al. (2016) construct a model of money, credit and bubbles and show that
market psychology can itself be a source of nominal rigidity if expectations are set in nominal
terms. They also explore the general equilibrium effects of bubbles, and of monetary policy, both
outside and inside of the liquidity trap. More recently, Gali (2017), Ikeda (2017) and Dong et al.
(2017) explore the interaction of monetary policy and bubbles in models with nominal rigidities
and long-lived agents, which renders these models more suitable for quantitative analysis.
   The key takeaway from these papers is not that policy should eliminate bubbles, as is commonly
argued in informal discussions. Rather, policy should “lean against market psychology”, making
the bubble larger when it is too small and reducing it when it is too large.
   This brings us to our last point on this tour of the literature. Most of the papers surveyed
here use OLG structures with short lifespans, which are extremely useful to explore the theoretical
mechanisms at hand. These models are hard to solve once individuals are long-lived, however,
because they give rise to a large degree of inter-generational heterogeneity. This is one of the
reasons for which macroeconomics has adopted models with infinitely-lived agents for quantitative
work. These models, however, are known to be inconsistent with rational bubbles. So how do we
construct macroeconomic models of rational bubbles for quantitative analysis?
   There are currently two approaches being explored in the literature. The first is to develop
OLG models with perpetual youth as in Yaari (1965) and Blanchard (1985), in which agents face
a certain probability of death: these models have the advantage of preserving the OLG structure,
and thus all of the basic results discussed above, while maintaining tractability for quantitative
analysis. This is the approach recently adopted by Gali (2017). The second approach, used by
Kocherlakota (2009) and Miao and Wang (2017) among others, is based once again on financial
frictions. In a nutshell, it consists of assuming that some assets have a special status as collateral.
From the perspective of potentially constrained agents, bubbles on these assets have the additional


                                                  37
benefit – over and above their growth rate – of relaxing the borrowing limit. Hence, bubbles need
not grow at the rate of interest to be attractive and may exist in infinite horizon models. Although
an in-depth discussion of this approach is beyond the scope of this guide, we refer the interested
reader to Miao (2014) for a survey.


4         Where do we go from here?

This paper has provided a user’s guide to the theory of rational bubbles for macroeconomists. It
has sought to introduce macroeconomists to the main positive and normative aspects of the theory,
and to illustrate its usefulness in accounting for important macroeconomic phenomena. We would
like to conclude by pointing out the two main challenges that we see as the literature moves forward.
         The first challenge is empirical. To assess the macroeconomic effects of bubbles, we need to
measure them. This is difficult, because the fundamental value of an asset is not observable.
Thus, any attempt to compare an asset’s market and fundamental values is only as reliable as the
underlying model that is used to assess fundamentals. This problem lies at the heart of the large
discrepancy of findings in the empirical literature on bubbles.36 Most of this literature, moreover,
tests for the existence of bubbles in a particular asset or asset class. From a macroeconomic
standpoint, it seems more relevant to measure the aggregate bubble, i.e. the bubble component of
the economy’s entire stock of assets.
         Measuring this aggregate bubble may seem like wishful thinking. But macroeconomists have
experience measuring unobservables, most notably the aggregate productivity of an economy. More
than half a century ago, Solow taught the profession how to use aggregate input and output data
to derive a model-based measure of aggregate TFP. In much the same vein, macroeconomists could
use data on asset prices and aggregate capital income from the national accounts to derive a model-
based measure of the economy’s aggregate bubble, or an aggregate “bubble residual”. In Carvalho
et al. (2012), we took a first step in this direction and used national accounts to estimate the
fundamental value of household net worth in the United States between 1950 and 2010. We found
large discrepancies between this estimated value and the actual net worth as reported in the Federal
Reserve’s flow of funds data, especially during recent decades. But our exercise merely scratched
the surface, and there is much to be done along this front.
         The second challenge is both empirical and conceptual. One of the running themes of this guide
    36
         Two excellent examples are Froot and Obstfeld (1991) and LeRoy (2004). See Gurkaynak (2008) for a survey.



                                                           38
is that, in standard macroeconomic models, multiplicity may be more prevalent than we typically
care to admit. Once we accept that there may be many market psychologies that are consistent with
rationality, how do we chose among them? Should we choose the market psychology that, within a
set of constraints, best fits the data? This is the approach recently used by Guerron-Quintana et
al. (2017), who develop a macroeconomic model of bubbles and use it to estimate the persistence
and volatility of productivity and psychology shocks on post-war US data (incidentally, the data is
strongly consistent with the presence of bubbles). An alternative and complementary strategy is
to appeal to theory and develop new refinement techniques that can be used to reduce the set of
admissible market psychologies.
   These challenges are far from minor, and they raise difficult questions going forward. But they
also point to an exciting path ahead, one that must be tread on if the theory of bubbles is to
become an integral part of the macroeconomist’s toolkit.




                                                39
5   Figures




                                  Japan private net worth           /GDP
              7.0




              6.5




              6.0




              5.5




              5.0




              4.5
                    1983             1988                  1993                    1998




                                       Japan CA as % of GDP
              4.0
              3.5
              3.0
              2.5
              2.0
              1.5
                    1983             1988                  1993                    1998

                                   Japan growth rates (annual)
              10

               5

               0

              05


                    1983             1988                  1993                    1998

                            RGDP            Real Consumption pc        Real Investment

                           So−rc s: / a%th data: /or%d / a%th and incom databas   , other data: JST   (2017)



                            Figure 1: Bubbly episode in Japan.




                                                    40
                         USA private net worth/GDP
5.0


4.5


4.0


3.5
      1993              1998              2003               2008                  2013


01
                               USA CA as % of GDP
02

03

04

05

06
      1993              1998              2003               2008                  2013

                         USA growth rates (annual)
 4


 2


 0


02
      1993              1998              2003               2008                  2013

                    RGDP           Real Consumption pc         Real Capital

                 So−rc s: / a%th data: /or%d / a%th and incom databas   , other data: JST   (2017)



             Figure 2: Dot-com and housing boom in USA.




                                          41
                      Spain private net worth/GDP
  8.5


  7.5


  6.5


  5.5


  4.5
        1993           1998             2003              2008                 2013

                           Spain CA as % of GDP
  0.0

 02.5

 05.0

 07.5

010.0
        1993           1998             2003              2008                 2013

                       Spain growth rates (annual)
  10

   0

 010

 020
        1993           1998             2003              2008                 2013

                RGDP           Real Consumption pc         Real Investment

               So−rc s: / a%th data: /or%d / a%th and incom databas   , other data: JST   (2017)



                 Figure 3: Housing boom in Spain.




                                        42
4.0
                Ireland private net worth/GDP

3.5


3.0


2.5
      2002   2004     2006          2008          2010          2012

                    Ireland CA as % of GDP
  2

  0

−2

−4

−6
      2002   2004     2006          2008          2010          2012

                Ireland growth rates (annual)
 20

 10

  0

−10

−20
      2002   2004     2006          2008          2010          2012

             RGDP      Real Consumption pc          Real Investment

                          Sources: wealth: Central Bank of Ireland, other data: OECD



             Figure 4: Housing boom in Ireland.




                               43
                                           Wealth during a Bubble Episode




                                          Current Account relative to Output




                                          Growth Rates of Macro Variables
0.04
                                                                                                      Capital
0.02                                                                                                  Output and Consumption

   0

-0.02

-0.04




                        Figure 5: Bubbly episode in the lab economy.


              Bubble of Country 1                       Capital Stock of Country 1                   Current Account Deficit of Country 1
   0.1                                       0.11                                          0.2

                                              0.1
  0.08
                                                                                          0.15
                                             0.09
  0.06                                       0.08
                                                                                           0.1
  0.04                                       0.07

                                             0.06
                                                                                          0.05
  0.02
                                             0.05

    0                                        0.04                                           0
         0   10       20        30   40             0    10         20        30     40          0          10        20        30          40



              Bubble of Country 2                       Capital Stock of Country 2                   Current Account Deficit of Country 2
  0.14                                       0.11                                          0.3

  0.12                                        0.1                                         0.25
   0.1                                       0.09
                                                                                           0.2
  0.08                                       0.08
                                                                                          0.15
  0.06                                       0.07
                                                                                           0.1
  0.04                                       0.06

  0.02                                       0.05                                         0.05

    0                                        0.04                                           0
         0   10       20        30   40             0    10         20        30     40          0          10        20        30          40




         Figure 6: Bubbly episode in the lab economy with two countries.


                                                               44
References

 [1] Abel, A. B. et al. (1989). Assessing Dynamic Effciency: Theory and Evidence. In: The Review
    of Economic Studies 56.1, pp. 1-19.

 [2] Aoki, K., T. Nakajima, and K. Nikolov (2014). Safe Asset Shortages and Asset Price Bubbles.
    In: Journal of Mathematical Economics 53.C, pp. 164-174.

 [3] Aoki, K. and K. Nikolov (2015). Bubbles, Banks and Financial Stability. In: Journal of Mo-
    netary Economics 74, pp. 33-51.

 [4] Arce, Ó. and D. López-Salido (2011). Housing Bubbles. In: American Economic Journal:
    Macroeconomics 3.1, pp. 212-241.

 [5] Asriyan, V., L. Fornaro, A. Martin, and J. Ventura (2016). Monetary Policy for a Bubbly
    World. In: National Bureau of Economic Research No. w22639.

 [6] Azariadis, C. and B. D. Smith (1993). Adverse Selection in the Overlapping Generations Model:
    the Case of Pure Exchange. In: Journal of Economic Theory 60.2, pp. 277-305.

 [7] Barlevy, G., D. Gale, and F. Allen (2017). On Interest Rate Policy and Asset Bubbles. In:
    2017 Meeting Papers, Society for Economic Dynamics.

 [8] Basco, S. (2014). Globalization and Financial Development: A Model of the Dot-Com and the
    Housing Bubbles . In: Journal of International Economics 92.1, pp. 78-94.

 [9] Basco, S. (2016). Switching Bubbles: From Outside to Inside Bubbles. In: European Economic
    Review 87, pp. 236 255.

[10] Beck, T., S. Claessens, S. Schmukler, et al. (2013). Financial globalization and crises: overview.
    In: The Evidence and Impact of Financial Globalization, Elsevier Inc, pp. 1-12.

[11] Bengui, J. and T. Phan (2016). Asset Pledgeability and Endogenously Leveraged Bubbles. In:
    mimeo, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

[12] Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (1989). Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations.
    In: The American Economic Review 79.1, pp. 14-31.

[13] Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (2001). Should Central Banks Respond to Movements in Asset
    Prices. In: The American Economic Review 91.2, pp. 253-257.

                                                  45
[14] Blanchard, O. J. (1979). Speculative Bubbles, Crashes and Rational Expectations. In: Econo-
    mics letters 3.4, pp. 387-389.

[15] Blanchard, O. J. and M. W. Watson (1982). Bubbles, Rational Expectations and Financial
    Markets. In: National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper.

[16] Blanchard, O. J. (1985). Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons. In: Journal of political Economy
    93.2, pp. 223-247.

[17] Caballero, R. and A. Krishnamurthy (2006). Bubbles and Capital Flow Volatility: Causes and
    Risk Management. In: Journal of Monetary Economics 53.1, pp. 33-53.

[18] Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2008). An Equilibrium Model of Global
    Imbalances and Low Interest Rates . In: The American Economic Review 98.1, pp. 358.

[19] Carvalho, V., A. Martin, and J. Ventura (2012). Understanding Bubbly Episodes. In: American
    Economic Review 102.3, pp. 95-100.

[20] Coeurdacier, N., S. Guibaud, and K. Jin (2015). Credit Constraints and Growth in a Global
    Economy. In: The American Economic Review 105.9, pp. 2838-2881.

[21] Diamond, P. A. (1965). National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model . In: The American
    Economic Review 55.5, pp. 1126-1150.

[22] Diba, B. T. and H. I. Grossman (1988). The Theory of Rational Bubbles in Stock Prices. In:
    The Economic Journal 98.392, pp. 746-754.

[23] Dong, F., J. Miao, and P. Wang (2017). Asset Bubbles and Monetary Policy. In: mimeo,
    Boston University.

[24] Eichengreen, B. and M. D. Bordo (2002). Crises Now and Then: What Lessons from the Last
    Era of Financial Globalization. In: National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper.

[25] Farhi, E. and J. Tirole (2012). Bubbly Liquidity. In: The Review of Economic Studies 79.2,
    pp. 678-706.

[26] Freixas, X. and D. Perez-Reyna (2016). Gilded Bubbles. In: mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.

[27] Froot, K. and M. Obstfeld (1991). Intrinsic Bubbles: the Case of Stock Prices. In: American
    Economic Review 81.5, pp. 1189-1214.

                                                46
[28] Gali, J. (2014). Monetary Policy and Rational Asset Price Bubbles. In: The American Econo-
    mic Review 104.3, pp. 721-752.

[29] Gali, J. (2017). Monetary Policy and Bubbles in a New Keynesian Model with Overlapping
    Generations. In: mimeo, CREI.

[30] Geerolf, F. (2013). Reassessing Dynamic Effciency. In: mimeo, UCLA.

[31] Gopinath, G., et al. (2017). Capital allocation and productivity in South Europe. In: The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 132.4, pp. 1915-1967.

[32] Grossman, G. M. and N. Yanagawa (1993). Asset Bubbles and Endogenous Growth. In: Jour-
    nal of Monetary Economics 31.1, pp. 3-19.

[33] Guerron-Quintana, P., T. Hirano, and R. Jinnai (2017). Recurrent Bubbles, Economic Fluc-
    tuations and Growth. In: mimeo, Boston College.

[34] Gurkaynak, R. (2008). Econometric Tests of Asset Price Bubbles: Taking Stock. In: Journal
    of Economic Surveys 22.1, pp. 166-186.

[35] Hanson, A., and T. Phan (2017). Bubbles, Wage Rigidity, and Persistent Recessions. In: Eco-
    nomic Letters 151, pp. 66-70.

[36] Hirano, T., M. Inaba, and N. Yanagawa (2015). Asset Bubbles and Bailouts. In: Journal of
    Monetary Economics 76, S71-S89.

[37] Hirano, T. and N. Yanagawa (2016). Asset Bubbles, Endogenous Growth, and Financial Fricti-
    ons. In: The Review of Economic Studies 84.1, pp. 406-443.

[38] Huber, S. J. (2016). Preference for Housing Services and Rational House Price Bubbles. In:
    mimeo, University of Amsterdam.

[39] Ikeda, D. (2017). Monetary Policy, Inflation and Rational Asset Price Bubbles. In: mimeo,
    Bank of England.

[40] Ikeda, D., and T. Phan (2015). Asset Bubbles and Global Imbalances. In: mimeo, University
    of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

[41] Ikeda, D. and T. Phan (2016). Toxic asset bubbles . In: Economic Theory 2.61, pp. 241-271.


                                                47
[42] Jordà, Ò., M. Schularick, and A. M. Taylor (2015). Leveraged Bubbles. In: Journal of Monetary
    Economics 76, S1-S20.

[43] Jordà, Ò., M. Schularick, and A. M. Taylor (2017). Macro Financial History and the New
    Business Cycle Facts. In: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 31.1, pp. 213-263.

[44] King, I. and D. Ferguson (1993). Dynamic Inefficiency, Endogenous Growth, and Ponzi Games.
    In: Journal of Monetary Economics 32.1, pp. 79-104.

[45] Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997). Credit Cycles. In: Journal of Political Economy 105.2, pp.
    211-248.

[46] Kocherlakota, N. (1992). Bubbles and constraints on debt accumulation. In: Journal of Eco-
    nomic Theory 57.1, pp. 245-256.

[47] Kocherlakota, N. (2009). Bursting Bubbles: Consequences and Cures. In: mimeo, University
    of Minnesota.

[48] Kraay, A. and J. Ventura (2007). The Dot-Com Bubble, the Bush Defcits, and the US Current
    Account. In: G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, University of
    Chicago Press, pp. 457-496.

[49] LeRoy, S. (2004). Rational Exuberance. In: Journal of Economic Literature 42.3, pp. 783-804.

[50] Martin, A. and J. Ventura (2011). Theoretical Notes on Bubbles and the Current Crisis. In:
    IMF Economic Review 59.1, pp. 6-40.

[51] Martin, A. and J. Ventura (2012). Economic Growth with Bubbles. In: American Economic
    Review 102.6, pp. 3033-3058.

[52] Martin, A. and J. Ventura (2015). The International Transmission of Credit Bubbles: Theory
    and Policy. In: Journal of Monetary Economics 76, S37-S56.

[53] Martin, A. and J. Ventura (2016). Managing Credit Bubbles. In: Journal of the European
    Economic Association 14.3, pp. 753-789.

[54] Miao, J. (2014). Introduction to Economic Theory of Bubbles. In: Journal of Mathematical
    Economics 53, pp. 130-136.



                                                48
[55] Miao, J. and P. Wang (2014). Sectoral Bubbles, Misallocation, and Endogenous Growth. In:
    Journal of Mathematical Economics 53, pp. 153 163.

[56] Miao, J. and P. Wang (2015). Banking Bubbles and Financial Crises. In: Journal of Economic
    Theory 157, pp. 763-792.

[57] Miao, J. and P. Wang (2016). Stock Market Bubbles and Unemployment. In: Economic Theory
    61.2, pp. 273-307.

[58] Miao, J. and P. Wang (2017). Asset Bubbles and Credit Constraints. In: mimeo, Boston
    University.

[59] Olivier, J. (2000). Growth-Enhancing Bubbles. In: International Economic Review 41.1, pp.
    133-152.

[60] Queirós, F. (2017a). The Real Side of Stock Market Exuberance. In: mimeo, Universitat
    Pompeu Fabra.

[61] Queirós, F. (2017b). Asset Bubbles and Product Market Competition. In: mimeo, Universitat
    Pompeu Fabra.

[62] Rhee, C. (1991). Dynamic Inefficiency in an Economy with Land. In: The Review of Economic
    Studies 58.4, pp. 791-797.

[63] Rondina, G. (2017). Bubbly Financial Globalization. In: mimeo, University of Colorado.

[64] Saint-Paul, G. (1992). Fiscal Policy in an Endogenous Growth Model. In: Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 107.4, pp. 1243-1259.

[65] Samuelson, P. A. (1958). An Exact Consumption-loan Model of Interest with or without the
    Social Contrivance of Money . In: The Journal of Political Economy 66.6, pp. 467 482.

[66] Schularick, M. and A. M. Taylor (2012). Credit Booms gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage
    Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870 2008 . In: The American Economic Review 102.2, pp.
    1029-1061.

[67] Tang, H. (2017). Asset Price Bubbles and the Distribution of Firms: A Theory of Economic
    Expansions with an Application to Spain. In: mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.



                                              49
[68] Tirole, J. (1985). Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations. In: Econometrica 53.6, pp.
    1071-1100.

[69] Tripathy, J. (2017). Bubbly Equilibria with Credit Misallocation. In: mimeo, Universitat Pom-
    peu Fabra.

[70] Ventura, J. (2012). Bubbles and Capital Flows. In: Journal of Economic Theory 147.2, pp.
    738 758.

[71] Ventura, J. and H.-J. Voth (2015). Debt Into Growth: How Sovereign Debt Accelerated the
    First Industrial Revolution. In: mimeo, CREI.

[72] Weil, P. (1987). Confidence and the Real Value of Money in Overlapping Generation Models.
    In: Quarterly Journal of Economics 102.1, pp. 1-22.

[73] Woodford, M. (1990). Public Debt as Private Liquidity. In: The American Economic Review
    80.2, pp. 382-388.

[74] Woodford, M. and M.S. Santos (1997). Rational asset pricing bubbles. In: Econometrica 65-1,
    pp. 19-57.

[75] Yaari, M. E. (1965). Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer. In:
    The Review of Economic Studies 32.2, pp. 137-150.

[76] Zhao, B. (2015). Rational Housing Bubble. In: Economic Theory 60.1, pp. 141-201.




                                               50
