                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   SIGNALING SAFETY

                                       Roni Michaely
                                       Stefano Rossi
                                       Michael Weber

                                     Working Paper 24237
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24237


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                         January 2018, Revised November 2019


Previously circulated as “The Information Content of Dividends: Safer Profits, Not Higher
Profits.” We thank Franklin Allen, Malcolm Baker, Bruce Carlin, Jonathan Cohn, Jason
Donaldson, Ran Duchin, Miguel Ferreira, Slava Fos, Xavier Freixas, Nicola Gennaioli, Simon
Gervais, Denis Gromb, Jie He, Praveen Kumar, Christian Leuz, Gustavo Manso, Jose-Luis
Peydro, Amit Seru, Henri Servaes, Victoria Vanasco, Jules Van Binsbergen, Vikrant Vig, Vish
Viswanathan, Yufeng Wu, Toni Whited, Ivo Welch, Amir Yaron and conference and seminar
participants at the American Finance Association Annual Meeting, Adam Smith Corporate
Finance Conference, Bocconi, Cambridge, the Corporate Finance Conference at Washington
University, ESMT, ESSEC, Frankfurt, London Business School, London School of Economics,
NBER Corporate Finance, Nova SBE, the Revelstoke Finance Conference, the Review of
Corporate Finance Studies Conference, the 2017 TAU Finance Conference, Universitat Pompeu
Fabra, Tsinghua SEM, University of Houston, University of Warwick, and the 2018 Western
Finance Association Annual Meeting for valuable comments. Weber acknowledges financial
support from the Fama Miller Center and the Cohen Keenoy Faculty Research Fund at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business. We thank Xiao Yin and Lisa Li for valuable
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Roni Michaely, Stefano Rossi, and Michael Weber. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Signaling Safety
Roni Michaely, Stefano Rossi, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 24237
January 2018, Revised November 2019
JEL No. G35

                                         ABSTRACT

Contrary to signaling models' central predictions, changes in the level of cash flows do not
empirically follow changes in dividends. We use the Campbell (1991) decomposition to construct
cash-flow and discount-rate news from returns and find the following: (1) Both dividend changes
and repurchase announcements signal changes in cash-flow volatility (in opposite direction); (2)
larger cash-flow volatility changes come with larger announcement returns; and (3) neither
discount-rate news, nor the level of cash-flow news, nor total stock return volatility change
following dividend changes. We conclude cash-flow news—and not discount-rate news—drive
payout policy, and payout policy conveys information about future cash-flow volatility.


Roni Michaely                                  Michael Weber
Cornell University                             Booth School of Business
rm34@cornell.edu                               University of Chicago
                                               5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Stefano Rossi                                  Chicago, IL 60637
Professor of Finance                           and NBER
Bocconi University                             michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
Via Rontgen, 1
20136 Milano,
Italy
stefano.rossi@unibocconi.it
                                I    Introduction
The idea that dividend changes convey information about firms’ future prospects has a
long tradition in finance and economics dating back at least to Miller and Modigliani
(1961). Miller and Rock (1985), Bhattacharya (1979), and others later formalize this
idea, which can explain why dividend changes come with large announcement returns,
but also predicts that changes in dividends should be followed by changes in earnings or
cash flows in the same direction. However, numerous empirical studies have failed to find
evidence supporting this mechanism. Ham et al. (2019) is a notable exception who find
that dividend changes have some predictive power for earnings next quarter, but even they
conclude “the timing of the information content is difficult to reconcile with traditional
signaling models”. In their review paper, DeAngelo et al. (2009) discuss the evidence and
write, “We conclude that managerial signaling motives [...] have at best minor influence
on payout policy” (p. 95).
    In this paper, we show dividends do convey information, but it is information
about the second moment of earnings, and not about the first moment. We show both
theoretically and empirically that dividend changes signal changes in cash-flow volatility
in the opposite direction. We borrow a method from asset pricing, namely the Campbell
and Shiller (1988a,b) return decomposition, to split movements in stock returns into parts
coming from news about future cash flows and parts coming from news about future
discount rates.
    Changes in cash-flow volatility follow changes in dividend policy in the opposite
direction both at the extensive margin, initiations and omissions, and at the intensive
margin, dividend increases and decreases. Cash-flow volatility decreases, on average,
by 15% in the five years after dividend increases relative to the prior five-year average,
whereas it increases by 7% after dividend cuts. Furthermore, volatility decreases by 20%
after dividend initiations and it increases by 6% after dividend omissions. In addition,
announcements of larger changes in dividends come with larger cumulative abnormal
returns and are followed by larger changes in cash-flow volatility.
    To construct measures of cash-flow and discount-rate news, we follow Vuolteenaho



                                             2
(2002) and apply the Campbell-Shiller method at the individual firm level. We then
examine whether cash-flow and discount-rate news vary around dividend events. For each
event, we estimate two firm-level vector auto-regressions (VARs) using 60 months of data
before and after the event, construct cash-flow and discount-rate news, and test whether
cash-flow and discount-rate news following the dividend event differ from those before the
event.
    An advantage of this method is that it directly uses information in returns to infer
cash-flow news rather than relying on balance-sheet variables such as earnings or cash
flows that are only available at a lower frequency, are prone to manipulation in the short
run, and are non-stationary in levels. Moreover, unlike total stock return volatility, our
return decomposition establishes directly whether any variation around dividend events
occurs because of news about future cash flows or discount rates, both for levels and
second moments. Finally, an important benefit of the return decomposition is that we
can provide novel evidence on changes in discount rates and the relation to corporate
decisions (Cochrane (2011)). We find no significant change in discount-rate news around
dividend events. This latter finding indicates discount-rate news does not drive corporate
dividend policies, consistent with the finding that it does not vary across firms in the long
run (see Keloharju, Linnainmaa, and Nyberg (2019)).
    Our results are robust to changing the estimation window of the VAR (36 or 48
months), to increasing the number of lags in the VAR (2, 3, or 4 lags), to considering
pre-trends in cash-flow volatility, to matching our dividend-event firms to non-dividend
firms with similar characteristics, and across subsamples.
    What about the first moment of cash flows? In line with the earlier literature,
we find no change in cash flows around dividend events, which is inconsistent with the
idea that dividends convey information about the first moment. Because we show that
neither discount-rate news nor total stock-return volatility changes following dividend
changes, we establish that any change in firm-level riskiness following dividend events
relates exclusively to cash-flow volatility.
    This result reinforces the advantages of our approach relative to traditional measures
of risk including total stock return volatility and beta (e.g., Grullon et al. (2002), Hoberg


                                               3
and Prabhala (2009)). Our results indicate changes in the volatility of cash-flow news
drive the evidence in Grullon et al. (2002) of a decrease in systematic risk, that is, beta,
following dividend increases and changes in discount-rate news.
      What explains the negative relation between changes in dividends and subsequent
changes in cash-flow volatility? We develop a signaling model in which managers have
superior information about future cash-flow volatility, generating predictions in line with
our empirical findings.     In our framework, signaling considerations predict cash-flow
volatility should decrease following a dividend increase, and should increase following a
dividend decrease. Furthermore, larger dividend payments should carry more information.
Thus, within a signaling framework, our model can explain the larger decreases in
cash-flow volatility and larger cumulative abnormal returns following the announcement
of larger dividend increases.
      The model predicts cross-sectional heterogeneity in the reaction of cash-flow volatility
around dividend events, which helps pin down the economic mechanism. In our signaling
model, as in Miller and Rock (1985), the cost of the signal is foregone investment
opportunities. Consequently, following a dividend change, the model predicts a larger
change in future cash-flow volatility for firms with smaller current earnings, because the
foregone future investment opportunities at a given dividend level increase. As a result,
the same dollar of dividend should carry a larger information content for firms with a
lower earnings level. In the data, we find the same dollar of dividend paid is followed
by a 25% larger reduction in cash-flow volatility for firms with smaller current earnings,
consistent with the prediction of the model. We also find the results are stronger in the
subset of firms that are financially constrained, using the definition of financial constraints
of Hadlock and Pierce (2010), consistent with the model.
      The predictions of our signaling model differ from those of the traditional signaling
models of dividends, in which dividend changes signal changes in the first moment of future
earnings.1 These signaling models predict that, first, following dividend changes, profits
should change in the same direction; and second, firms with growth opportunities and
young and risky firms should be more prone to use dividends as signal. By contrast, our
  1
   See, among others, Bhattacharya (1979, 1980), John and Williams (1985), Miller and Rock (1985),
Kumar (1988), Bernheim (1991), and Guttman et al. (2010).


                                                4
model implies safer firms, that is, those with more stable profits, signal more frequently.
This prediction is consistent with our empirical findings, as well as with the findings of
Kahle and Stulz (2017)) and others that mature and less risky firms pay the bulk of
dividends. We also discuss to what extent the predictions of our signaling model differ
from those of alternative theories, including precautionary savings and agency, and we
argue that other theories are unlikely to explain our results in full.
       Our paper also contains caveats. The main contributions of the paper are empirical
in nature, and the role of the model is to provide some theoretical guidance for organizing
the host of new empirical regularities we uncover. To keep tractability, we make several
simplifying assumptions, but our model is too stylized to speak to all findings in the
large dividend-signaling literature. First, in the tradition of Miller and Rock (1985), we
model the decision of firm managers in a world of risk-neutral investors. Risk neutrality
appears to be a good approximation for many diversified institutions that are large
shareholders in many dividend-paying firms. On the other hand, our model does not
have a stochastic discount factor, which may provide additional insights. Second, we
find that cash-flow volatility is priced in the stock market. At the same time, our model
is silent on whether the stock market should value idiosyncratic or systematic cash-flow
volatility. Empirically, we find firm cash flow volatility around dividend events at least in
part reflects a systematic component.2 Moreover, empirical and theoretical asset-pricing
work documents that idiosyncratic risk is priced (Fu (2009), Constantinides and Duffie
(1996)). Third, in our model, cash-flow volatility matters because of the concavity of the
production function as a result of Jensen’s inequality. Hence, in addition to the direct
signaling effect on firm value, our model also predicts an indirect effect through higher
future earnings. Using restrictions implied by our model, we estimate this indirect effect
to be orders-of-magnitude smaller than the direct signaling effect on cash-flow volatility.
The small magnitude, together with the fact that we would expect this level effect at
future (possibly long) horizons might help explain why the empirical literature has failed
to find significant changes in the first moment of cash flows around dividend events. By
   2
    Hence, we can provide additional insights into which aspects of the distribution of future earnings
are priced in the stock market. By contrast, much of the literature has focused on measurement issues
of accounting earnings (e.g., see Ham et al. (2019).


                                                  5
contrast, our empirical results concerning the second moment of cash flows are robust.
    Given our results so far, the question of whether similar dynamics regarding future
cash flows occur around share repurchases is a natural one. This question is particularly
relevant given the path of payout policies in the past four decades, whereby share
repurchases have become the dominant form of cash payouts (Farre-Mensa et al. (2014)).
We find a 15% decline in cash-flow volatility following share-repurchase announcements
and no changes in either the first moment of cash-flow news or discount-rate news.
Also consistent with our results on dividends and with the signaling hypothesis, we
find larger share-repurchase programs are associated with both larger reductions in
cash-flow volatility and larger announcement returns. We conclude that announcements
of changes to firms’ payout policies, whether through dividends or share repurchases,
convey information about future changes in firms’ cash-flow volatility.
    Our results yield several important insights and we highlight four of them here. First,
dividends do convey information, but the information or the signal is about expected
earnings volatility. As we argue below, this finding is consistent with Lintner (1956) and
survey evidence in Brav et al. (2005) of how managers set corporate dividend policy. Using
alternative methods, we also confirm that the information conveyed in dividends is not
about the first moment of earnings: The level of earnings does not increase economically
and statistically after a dividend increase.
    Second, our framework and results are able to explain why stable and mature
firms tend to signal more, as opposed to growth firms, because they have stable cash
flows, a finding that was otherwise puzzling under the idea that firms signal the first
moment of cash flows. Third, whereas prior literature rightly suggests dividends and
share repurchases have many different features, we document a key and novel shared
attribute: Both dividend changes and share repurchases signal future changes in expected
cash-flow volatility in the opposite directions. Finally, our method and our evidence speak
to the debate on whether cash flow, or discount rates drive corporate finance decisions
(e.g., Fama and French (1988), Cochrane (2011)). Our finding that dividend changes and
repurchases do not convey information about discount-rate news reinforces the notion
that cash flows–and not discount rates–drive corporate financial decisions, at least with


                                               6
respect to payout policies.
    We are not the first to suggest dividend changes are related in some form to future
changes in cash-flow volatility. The empirical literature on dividends and cash flows goes
back at least to Lintner (1956). Whereas most of the literature interprets Lintner (1956)
as evidence about the relationship between the level of dividends and cash flows, his
findings that managers increase dividends only when they believe earnings have increased
“permanently” can also be interpreted as reflecting risk. Accordingly, Benartzi et al.
(1997) show earnings do not increase after dividends increase, but earnings are less likely
to decrease in the years following a dividend increase, consistent with dividends reflecting a
permanent increase in earnings (see also Jagannathan et al. (2000) and Guay and Harford
(2000)). Grullon et al. (2002) and DeAngelo et al. (2006) present some evidence that
systematic risk is lower after dividend increases, and interpret it as suggesting dividends
convey information about firm “maturity.” Our paper extends these earlier efforts in
at least three ways. First, using a novel method, we are able to establish that not
only do dividend changes convey information about future volatility, but also that the
decrease in volatility is attributed to changes in cash-flow volatility. Second, using a simple
theoretical model, we are able to offer a consistent explanation to these findings, suggesting
managers signal future reductions in volatility through dividends. Third, consistent with
our theoretical framework, we find the relationship extends beyond dividends and applies
to stock repurchases as well.



                                    II      Method
To test our hypotheses on changes in cash flows and discount rates following dividend
changes, we require measures of the first and second moment of expected cash flows and
discount rates. We borrow a method from asset pricing to estimate the first and second
moment of future cash flows and discount rates, and use it to test our hypotheses.
    To see the intuition underlying the method, consider a simple discounted cash-flow
model, with current and expected future cash flows in the numerator and expected
future discount rates in the denominator. In this framework, returns today can be


                                              7
unexpectedly high due to either positive news about current or future cash flows—the
numerator—or due to negative discount-rate news—the denominator. This method allows
us to (i) test our hypotheses on changes in expected cash-flow volatility (measured by
the second moment of cash-flow news) following dividend changes, (ii) revisit the prior
literature on earnings changes (measured by the first moment of cash-flow news) following
dividend changes, and (iii) examine discount-rate changes (measured by discount-rate
news) following dividend changes.
    A large literature in economics and finance employs this method, initially developed
by Campbell (1991), to decompose returns into news originating from cash flows and
discount rates. Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and Weber (2015) find cash-flow news is as
important as discount-rates news for stock returns to monetary policy shocks following
Federal Open Market Committee monetary policy announcements. Vuolteenaho (2002)
extends the VAR methodology to the individual firm level and finds cash-flow news is the
main driver of stock returns at the firm level.
    The method provides a direct empirical counterpart to our hypotheses about
cash-flow volatility. By contrast, other measures of volatility (e.g., total stock return
volatility, implied volatility from option prices) do not allow a decomposition into
components originating from cash flows or discount rates. As we show below, total stock
return volatility does not change following dividend changes, implying total stock return
volatility is a poor proxy for cash-flow volatility. Furthermore, the method is not subject
to the bias arising from non-stationarity when estimating cash flows from accounting
information. In fact, because corporate earnings are not stationary, measuring cash-flow
volatility using the realized variance of earnings might pick up such non-stationarity rather
than any information content of dividends. A large literature in accounting has implicitly
recognized the non-stationarity and has adopted a variety of adjustments for linear or
non-linear trends in corporate earnings (see, e.g., DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Skinner (1996)
and Grullon, Michaely, and Swaminathan (2002)). However, no consensus exists on which
adjustment is more appropriate (see, e.g., DeAngelo et al. (2009)). The observation that
earnings are non-stationary is akin to the observation by Fama (1965) and others that
stock prices are non-stationary, which prompted the field of asset pricing to focus on stock


                                             8
returns, that is, stock-price changes, rather than levels of stock prices.


A.     Stock-Return Decomposition

We decompose stock returns into estimates of cash-flow and discount-rate news before
and after dividend announcements. Because this method has so far not been applied in
a corporate finance context, we briefly review the basic ingredients and closely follow the
original notation.
     Vuolteenaho (2002) takes the dividend-discount model of Campbell and Shiller
(1988a) for the aggregate market return as a starting point and applies it to the individual
firm. He adapts the present-value formula to accounting data, because many individual
firms pay dividends at irregular intervals. Three main assumptions are necessary to
achieve this goal. First, the clean surplus identity holds; that is, earnings (X) equal the
change in the book-value of equity (∆Bt ) minus dividends (D). Second, the book value
of equity, dividends, and the market value of equity (M ) are strictly positive. Third, log
book and market equity and log dividends and log book equity are cointegrated. We use
small letters to denote the log of a variable unless specified otherwise.
     These assumptions allow us to write the log book-to-market ratio, θ, as

                                      ∞
                                      X                ∞
                                                       X
                                             s
                      θt−1 = kt−1 +         ρ rt+s −         ρs (roet+s − ft+s ).           (1)
                                      s=0              s=0


roe is log return on equity, which we define as roet = log(1 + Xt /Bt−1 ), rt denotes the
excess log stock return, rt = log(1 + Rt + Ft ) − ft , Rt is the simple excess return, Ft is the
interest rate, ft is log of 1 plus the interest rate, k summarizes linearization constants,
which are not essential for the analysis, and ρ is a discount factor. The book-to-market
ratio can be low, because market participants expect low future discount rates; that is,
they discount a given stream of cash flows at a low rate (first component on the right-hand
side of equation (1)), or because they expect high future cash flows (second component
on the right-hand side of equation (1)).
     We can follow Campbell (1991) to get return news from changes in expectations from



                                                 9
t − 1 to t and reorganizing equation (1):

                                       ∞                                 ∞
                 rt − Et−1 rt = ∆ Et         ρ (roet+s − ft+s ) − ∆ Et
                                       X                                 X
                                              s
                                                                               ρs rt+s .   (2)
                                       s=0                               s=1


∆ Et denotes the change in the expectations operator from t−1 to t, that is, Et (·)− Et−1 (·).
Therefore, returns can be high, if we have news about higher current and future cash flows
or lower future excess returns.
     We then introduce notation and write unexpected returns as the difference in cash-
flow news, ηcf,t , and discount-rate news, ηr,t :


                                   rt − Et−1 rt = ηcf,t − ηr,t .                           (3)


B.     Vector Autoregression

A VAR provides a simple time-series model to infer long-horizon properties of returns
from a short-run model and to implement the return decomposition. Let zi,t be a vector
at time t containing firm-specific state variables. We begin by assuming a first-order VAR
describes the evolution of the state variables well. Later, we relax this assumption and
examine robustness to increasing the number of lags, and find similar results using two,
three, and four lags. We can then write the system as


                                       zi,t = Γzi,t−1 + ui,t .                             (4)


Σ denotes the variance-covariance matrix of ut+1 , and we assume it is independent of the
information set at time t − 1.
     We assume the state vector z contains firm returns as the first component, and we
define the vector e10 = [1 0 . . . 0]. We can now write unexpected stock returns as


                                    ri,t − Et−1 ri,t = e10 ui,t .                          (5)




                                                  10
Discount-rate news is

                                                      ∞
                                    ηr,t = ∆ Et
                                                      X
                                                            ρs rt+s ,                     (6)
                                                      s=1


which we can now simply write as

                                                ∞
                                                X
                                            0
                                ηr,t = e1             ρs Γs ui,t+s                        (7)
                                                s=1

                                     = e10 ρΓ(1 − ρΓ)−1 ui,t                              (8)

                                     = λ0 ui,t ,                                          (9)


where 1 is an identity matrix of suitable dimension and the last line defines notation.
    We can now write cash-flow news as


                                    ηcf,t = (e10 + λ0 )ui,t ,                         (10)


and the variance of cash-flows as


                            var(ηcf,t ) = (e10 + λ0 )Σ(e1 + λ).                       (11)



                                      III             Data
We use balance-sheet data from the quarterly Compustat file and stock-return data from
the monthly CRSP file. We follow Grullon, Michaely, and Swaminathan (2002) and
Michaely, Thaler, and Womack (1995) in defining quarterly dividend changes and dividend
omissions and initiations and Vuolteenaho (2002) in the sample and variable construction
of the state variables of the VAR we defined in section II. We detail both below. The
sample period for dividend events is 1964-2013, because we require sufficient post-event
data to estimate the VAR.




                                                   11
A.    Cash-Flow and Return News: Sample Screens

We follow Vuolteenaho (2002) and impose the following data screens. A firm must have
quarter t − 1, t − 2, and t − 3 book equity and t − 1 and t − 2 net income and long-term
debt data. Market equity must be available for quarters t − 1, t − 2, and t − 3. A valid
trade exists during the month immediately preceding quarter t returns. A firm has at
least one monthly return observation during each of the preceding five years. We exclude
firms with quarter t − 1 market equity less than USD 10 million and book-to-market ratio
of more than 100 or less than 1/100.


B.    Cash-Flow and Return News: Variable Definitions

The simple stock return is the three-month cumulative monthly return, recorded from
m to m + 2 for m ∈ {F eb, M ay, Aug, N ov}. We follow Shumway (1997) and assume a
delisting return of −30% if a firm is delisted for cause and has a missing delisting return.
rt is then the market-adjusted log return following Vuolteenaho (2002). Market equity is
the total market equity at the firm level from CRSP at the end of each quarter. If quarter
t market equity is missing, we compound the lagged market equity with returns without
dividends.
     Book equity is defined as in Weber (2018) and Chinco et al. (2019) and equals
shareholders’ equity plus balance-sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit (item
TXDITCQ) if available, minus the book value of preferred stock.             Depending on
availability, we use stockholders’ equity (item SEQQ), or common equity (item CEQQ)
plus the carrying value of preferred stock (item PSTKQ), or total assets (item ATQ) minus
total liabilities (item LTQ) in that order as shareholders’ equity. We use redemption
value (item PSTKRQ) if available, or carrying value for the book value of preferred
stock. If book equity is unavailable, we proxy it by the last period’s book equity plus
earnings, less dividends. If neither earnings nor book equity are available, we assume the
book-to-market ratio has not changed, and compute the book-equity proxy from the last
period’s book-to-market ratio and this period’s market equity. We set negative or zero
book-equity values to missing.


                                            12
     GAAP (US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles) ROE is the earnings over
the last period’s book equity. We use earnings available for common equity, in the ROE
formula. When earnings are missing, we use the clean-surplus formula to compute a proxy
for earnings. In either case, we do not allow the firm to lose more than its book equity.
Hence, the minimum GAAP ROE is truncated to −100%. We calculate leverage as book
debt over the sum of book equity and book debt. Book debt is the sum of debt in current
liabilities, total long-term debt, and preferred stock.
     Each quarter, we log transform market equity, stock returns, and return on equity
and cross-sectionally demean it. A log transformation may cause problems if returns are
close to −1 or if book-to-market ratios are close to zero or infinity. We mitigate these
concerns by redefining a firm as a portfolio of 90% common stock and 10% Treasury bills,
using market values. Every period, the portfolio is rebalanced to these weights.


C.    Dividend Changes

We use the CRSP daily file to identify dividend changes, and follow Grullon, Michaely, and
Swaminathan (2002) in the sample screens and to construct quarterly dividend changes.
We use all dividend changes for common stocks of U.S. firms listed on NYSE, Amex, and
Nasdaq that satisfy the following criteria. The distribution is a quarterly taxable cash
dividend, and the previous cash-dividend payment was within a window of 20–90 trading
days prior to the current dividend announcement. We focus on dividend changes between
12.5% and 500%. The lower bound ensures we include only economically meaningful
dividend changes, and the upper bound eliminates outliers. We also ensure no other
non-dividend distribution events, such as stock splits, stock dividends, mergers, and so
on, occur within 15 trading days surrounding the dividend announcement. We end up
with 2,441 dividend increases and 2,461 dividend decreases over 1964–2013.


D.    Initiations and Omissions

We follow Michaely, Thaler, and Womack (1995) to construct our dividend initiation and
omission sample. We require the following criteria for initiations to be in our sample. We


                                             13
focus on common stocks of U.S. companies that have been traded on the NYSE or AMEX
for two years prior to the initiation of the first cash dividend. This screen eliminates new
listings of firms that had previously traded on NASDAQ or on another exchange and
switched the exchange with the pre-announced intention of paying dividends in the near
future. We end up with 1,069 dividend initiations over 1964–2013.
     For omissions, the sample must meet one of the following three criteria: (i) The
company declared at least six consecutive quarterly cash payments and then paid no
cash payment in a calendar quarter; (ii) the company declared at least three consecutive
semi-annual cash payments and then paid no cash payments in the next six months; or
(iii) the company declared at least two consecutive annual cash payments and then paid
no cash payments in the next year. We first identify potential omission quarters using
the three conditions. We then use the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) Index to extract all
information about dividend omissions. We enrich the WSJ Index data with searches on
Factiva and ProQuest for any additional information regarding dividend omissions. We
end up with 1,233 dividend omissions over 1964–2013.


E.    Share Repurchases

We use Thomson ONE to construct our share-repurchase sample. We use all repurchases
of common stock announced between 1980 and 2013 for which we can determine the
amount announced. Our procedure follows Jagannathan, Stephens, and Weisbach (2000),
but they also study repurchases of preferred stock, which is not relevant for our purpose
of studying payout policy to common stockholders, and Grullon and Michaely (2002),
who use the Compustat definition of share repurchases and report a correlation of 0.97
between the Compustat and the SDC measures of share repurchases.
     We end up with 2,662 share-repurchases announcements. Table 1 reports descriptive
statistics for our sample. Despite imposing both the dividend sample screens above and
the VAR restrictions of section II, our sample sizes are comparable to those in prior
studies on dividend changes (e.g., see Grullon et al. (2002)), dividend initiations and
omissions (e.g., Michaely et al. (1995)), and share repurchases (e.g., Grullon and Michaely
(2004)). Relaxing these restrictions does not affect our results on dividend changes,

                                            14
dividend initiations and omissions, and share repurchases. Furthermore, we find few
delistings following dividend events, suggesting that sample selection is not an issue in
our data.
     We ensure across specifications that we have non-overlapping data for the two VARs
before and after dividend events and share repurchases; that is, two events at the firm
level are at least 10 years apart.



                                     IV    Results
In this section, we report our main empirical results. In section IVA., we report the
estimates of the VAR and the VAR-implied importance of cash-flow news and discount-
rate news for our sample of firms. In section IVB., we report our univariate tests on the
first and second moment of cash-flow and discount-rate news, and in section IVC. we
explore the robustness of our main findings along several dimensions. In section IVD., we
examine cumulative abnormal returns to the announcements of dividend events.


A.     Estimates of the VAR System

Following our discussion in section II, a central ingredient for our analysis is an estimate
of the transition matrix Γ of the VAR system and the discount factor ρ. We estimate
ρ as the regression coefficient of the excess log ROE minus the excess log stock return,
plus the lagged book-to-market ratio on the book-to-market ratio. We find an estimate
of 0.986, which is almost identical to the estimate of Vuolteenaho (2002).
     Table 2 reports point estimates of a constant VAR across firms and time with t-stats
in parentheses. Consistent with findings in the literature, we find returns are positively
autocorrelated, load positively on the log book-to-market ratio, and log profitability. The
quarterly book-to-market ratio is highly autocorrelated and loads positively on lagged
returns, and negatively on lagged profitability. Profitability is autocorrelated at the
quarterly frequency, and loads positively on lagged returns and negatively on the lagged
book-to-market ratio. The dynamics of our state variables are broadly consistent with
findings in the literature, particularly Vuolteenaho (2002).

                                            15
     To study the small sample properties of the VAR, we implement a Monte Carlo
simulation and re-estimate the VAR 1,000 times. Specifically, we first randomly draw a
10-year period with replacement from our full sample. Using these 10 years of data, we
estimate a new gamma matrix and store the coefficient estimates. We repeat this step
1,000 times and plot the distribution of point estimates of the VAR in Figure 1. We find
across simulations that the point estimates are tighly distributed around the full-sample
estimates.


B.    Dividend Events and Cash-Flow Volatility

We estimate a VAR before and after each dividend-event-quarter using all available firm
observations with non-missing balance-sheet data but requiring at least five years of data.
We then use equation (11) to calculate the first and second moment of cash-flow news and
discount-rate news and compare these statistics after dividend events relative to before.
If dividends convey information about cash flows or discount rates, their first or second
moment or both will be different after the dividend events relative to before. To ensure
overlapping dividend events do not drive our results, we randomly drop one of the two
events. Results are robust to which event we drop and to not dropping any event.
     Table 3 reports changes in cash-flow news and discount-rate news after dividend
events relative to before separately for dividend increases, decreases, initiations, and
omissions. We estimate for each dividend event two VARs before and after the quarter of
the event using all firm observations with non-missing data. We then create cash-flow and
discount-rate news at the firm level using 60 months of data before and after the dividend
event, winsorize the data at the 1% and 99% levels, and report the average changes for a
given firm across events in the table.
     Using our novel method, we first revisit results reported in earlier literature and
examine changes in the first moment following dividend changes. In Panel A, we find
positive dividend changes, dividend initiations, negative dividend changes, or dividend
omissions or pooling across events do not result in a statistically significant change in
cash-flow news after the event relative to before the event. These findings are consistent
with most of the earlier literature, which does not detect any predictive power of dividend

                                            16
events for the first moment of future realized earnings.
     In Panel B, we also find dividend events are not followed by changes in discount-
rates news. These results indicate market expectations of lower future discount rates are
unlikely to drive the positive announcement returns to increases in dividends or dividend
initiations.
     We then turn to cash-flow volatility. We find in Panel C that dividend increases
are followed by a decrease in the variance of cash-flow news in the five years after the
event relative to the variance of cash-flow news in the five years before. Similarly, for
dividend decreases, we see an increase in the variability of cash-flow news after the event
relative to before. Changes in dividends are followed by changes in cash-flow volatility in
the opposite direction, consistent with our hypothesis that dividends convey information
about cash-flow volatility.
     The numbers in Panel C are difficult to interpret. We therefore scale the changes in
cash-flow-news variance around the dividend events by the average variance in cash-flow-
news before the event in Panel D. We see the variance of cash-flow news drops by, on
average, 15% of the average variance before the event after announcements of dividend
increases (see column (1)) but increases by more than 7% after dividend cuts (see column
(4)). Dividend initiations result in a variance of cash-flow news, which is, on average,
20% lower than the average variance before the dividend event. Dividend omissions lead
to an increase in the cash-flow variance of 6%, which is highly statistically significant (see
columns (2) and (5)).


C.     Robustness and Extensions

Vuolteenaho (2002) argues large amounts of data are necessary to get precise estimates
of the transition matrix Γ of the VAR. So far, we have used separate estimates for the
transition matrix to get residuals for the five years before and after each dividend event.
In Table 4, we impose less stringent restrictions on Γ, thus trading off efficiency with
precision. At the same time, we have used a limited sample, because we jointly impose
the same restrictions as Vuolteenaho (2002), Grullon et al. (2002), and Michaely et al.
(1995). To increase our sample sizes, we now also report results for a specification in

                                             17
which we do not impose some of the restrictions of the initial papers we follow.
    Table 4 directly reports the change in the variance of cash-flow news after the dividend
event relative to before as a fraction of the average variance before the event. In Panel
A, we estimate one VAR for the whole sample period and then use the estimate for Γ
to calculate both residuals in the five years before and after the dividend event and the
cash-flow news. In Panel B, we combine the previous two approaches and estimate one
VAR across all firms and events to get an estimate of Γ, but then estimate separate VARs
before and after each dividend events to get the VAR residuals. Panel C requires only
12 non-missing quarters within five years before and after the dividend event. We do not
restrict our sample to non-overlapping event windows within firms, and if no return data
are available, we substitute zeros for both returns and dividends. All three panels confirm
our baseline results. Announcements of dividend increases or initiations result in lower
cash-flow volatility after the announcement relative to before, whereas announcements of
dividend cuts or omissions result in an increased cash-flow volatility.
    We explore the robustness of our results to including more lags in the estimation
of the VAR in Table 5. Panel A presents results for a VAR with two lags, Panel B
considers three lags, and Panel C considers four lags. Our results are in general stronger
than in the baseline setting with one lag. Next, we consider robustness to shortening the
estimation window of the VAR, which in our baseline setting was five years. Panel A of
Table 6 presents results for estimating the VARs with three years of data before and after
dividend events; Panel B present results using four years of data before and after. Again,
the results are stronger than in the baseline setting.
    One concern with our results is that the changes in cash-flow volatility that we
document around dividend events reflect pre-existing trends and thus are unrelated to
dividends. To gauge the extent of pre-trends, we estimate VARs in the years before
the actual dividend events, and study the changes in the variance of cash-flow news in
these pre-event windows. Table 7 reports the results. We find these differences are either
statistically indistinguishable from zero, or have the “wrong” sign, indicating pre-trends
do not explain our findings.
    The changes in cash-flow volatility around dividend changes raise the question of


                                            18
whether these changes are entirely idiosyncratic or whether they share some systematic
component. To address this question, we regress our firm-level changes in cash-flow
volatility on a value-weighted market-wide measure of cash-flow volatility that aggregates
across all firms with dividend events.       Table 8 reports a positive and statistically
significant loading on the market-wide measure of cash-flow volatility across dividend
events, suggesting at least in part that the changes in cash-flow volatility that we document
reflect a systematic component.
    The possibility of structural breaks during our sample period may raise the concern
that our results are concentrated in the earlier part of the sample. For example, return
predictability decreased in the 1990s (see Lettau and Van Nieuwerburgh (2007)). Clean
surplus accounting might also be more likely to break in the same period, and many
firms stopped paying dividends (Fama and French (2001)) or started more intensively
substituting dividends for repurchases (Grullon and Michaely (2002)). Panels A and B
of Table 9 split our sample in half (1964–1988 and 1989–2013) and repeat our baseline
analysis for both subsamples separately. We estimate a constant Γ matrix within each
sample to ensure we have enough data points for reliable estimates.
    We see in Panel A that results for the early part of our sample are similar to
our baseline results: Dividend increases and initiations result in lower future cash-flow
volatility, whereas dividend cuts and omissions are associated with increases in cash-flow
volatility. More importantly, we also find very similar results in Panel B despite the various
potential structural changes, including a significant change in dividend taxation in the
middle of the second period (in 2003). To directly test whether the change in taxation can
partially explain our findings, we also report in Panel C results for a sub-sample beginning
in 2003. We find similar results to our baseline findings. The sub-sample test we perform
here also allows us to draw some insight on the role of differential taxation in dividend
signaling. We discuss this issue in more detail below.
    One concern with our findings so far is that dividend events might coincide with
market-wide breakpoints in cash-flow volatility, so that we might merely capture an overall
market-wide phenomenon for mature firms with similar observable characteristics, and
unrelated to dividend changes.


                                             19
    Table 10 considers this alternative explanation. We report the scaled change in the
volatility of cash-flow news for our event firms relative to the scaled change in the volatility
of cash-flow news of observationally similar firms that do not have dividend events.
Specifically, we use a nearest-neighbor algorithm to match firms based on propensity
scores. We estimate propensity scores with a logit regression of the treatment indicator
on the book-to-market ratio, leverage, age, and size (the same variables we use in our
regression analysis of Table 12 below). We lose few observations relative to our baseline
analysis, due to missing matches. Table A.1 reports the characteristics we use for the
matching exercise both for event firms and observationally similar firms. Characteristics
are similar for both sets of firms for the averages as well as for the standard deviations.
We see in Table 10 that this alternative story cannot explain our findings. Firms that
increase their dividends see a large drop of 15% in the variance of their cash-flow news
after the announcement relative to before and relative to observationally similar firms that
do not have a dividend event. The drop in variance is similar in magnitude to our baseline
specification. For decreases in dividends, instead, we see an increase in the variance of
cash-flow news following the cut relative to before and to matched firms. Results for
dividend initiations and omissions are consistent with our baseline analysis.
    Our results indicate dividend changes are followed by changes in cash-flow volatility
in the opposite direction.      This result is novel.     Furthermore, our results indicate
that following dividend changes, the cash-flow levels are unchanged. These results are
inconsistent with prior dividend-signaling models, but consistent with earlier empirical
literature that used accounting-based measures of cash-flow or earnings levels. In Table
A.2 in the Online Appendix, we show the variance of cash-flow news and total return
volatility are only mildly positively correlated with each other, which decreases the
likelihood that changes in generic return volatility can explain our findings. In Table
A.3 in the Online Appendix, we directly show that annualized stock return volatility does
not change around the dividend events, or the change has the “wrong” sign. We use five
years of daily return data before and after the dividend events to calculate stock return




                                              20
volatility consistent with the windows we use in the VAR.3 Finally, our results indicate
that following dividend changes, the firm’s discount-rate news is unchanged. This result
is also novel and clarifies the earlier evidence of Grullon et al. (2002) and Hoberg and
Prabhala (2009) that beta and other measures of firm risk are lower following dividend
payments. Our results clarify that only cash-flow volatility changes, and discount rates
do not. Therefore, our evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that dividends convey
information about cash-flow volatility, that is, the second moment of future earnings. The
evidence indicates discount-rate news does not drive corporate dividend policies. Next,
we examine cumulative abnormal returns to dividend events, and how such dividend
announcement returns relate to subsequent changes in cash-flow volatility.


D.       Returns around Dividend Events

So far, we have shown dividend changes are associated with a reduction in future cash-flow
volatility. We now turn to examining dividend announcement returns. If dividend changes
convey information about subsequent changes in cash-flow volatility, announcements of
larger dividends should come with both larger cumulative announcement returns and
larger subsequent changes in cash-flow volatility in the opposite direction.
       Therefore, we study how the immediate market reaction to dividend changes is related
to the subsequent change in cash-flow volatility and to the size of the dividend change
itself. We first confirm in Table A.4 in the Appendix that in our sample, dividends do
represent good news for investors, consistent with previous findings. Table A.4 reports
the univariate market response to dividend changes in a three-day window bracketing the
dividend event. Columns (1) to (3) show positive announcement returns for dividend
increases, dividend initiations, and the pooled sample ranging between 0.7% and 2.37%.
For cuts in dividends, columns (4) to (6) show a negative announcement return of 0.7%
and a negative return of 8.7% for omissions. All results are nearly identical when we look
at market-adjusted returns.
       We then turn to a test of our hypothesis. We split the data into two sub-samples
   3
    Our results might differ from previous literature (Venkatesh (1989), Jones et al. (2014), Jayaraman
and Shastri (1993), Chay and Suh (2009)) because we use a different window to calculate total return
volatility and we have a substantially larger sample period.


                                                  21
by the size of the dividend changes, using the median dividend change as the break
point. Table 11 reports the results. In Panel A of Table 11, we see in column (1)
that for large increases in dividends, the variance of cash-flow news drops by more than
21%, on average, after the announcement. The drop in variance is 14 percentage points
smaller in column (2) when we instead study increases in dividends that are below the
median increase. Column (3) shows the difference is highly statistically significant. We
bootstrap the difference to calculate standard errors. Columns (4) and (5) instead show
that announcements of large dividend cuts drive the increase in cash-flow-news variance.
The difference is again highly statistically significant (see column (6)).
       In Panel B of Table 11, we find in columns (1) to (3) that announcement returns for
above-median dividend increases are significantly larger than announcement returns for
below-median dividend increases; and we find in columns (4) to (6) that announcement
returns for above-median dividend decreases are significantly larger in absolute terms (i.e.,
they are more negative) than announcement returns for below-median dividend decreases.
Together with our earlier results in Panel A, these results indicate larger changes in
dividends carry more information because they are associated with larger announcement
returns and larger subsequent changes in cash-flow volatility in the opposite direction,
consistent with the hypothesis that dividend changes convey information about future
cash-flow volatility.
       Changes in the future riskiness of cash flows might occur over time, and we can
reasonably assume changes in the variance of cash-flow news build up with horizon.4 To
examine this intuition, we study the change in the variance of cash-flow news over time
using larger windows in Table A.8 of the Online Appendix. We see on impact a reduction
in the variance of cash-flow news in the year around the dividend event for positive
dividend changes. The reduction builds up over the following two years and levels off
after four years. We observe a similar build up for dividend cuts and omissions.
       Finally, we examine a premise of the signaling model we develop below, namely, that
external financing and hedging are not costless. Extending this line of reasoning, one
would expect our results to be stronger for firms that are more financially constrained.
  4
      We thank our AFA discussant Yufeng Wu for this suggestion.



                                                 22
To examine this premise empirically, we use the financial-constraints index of Hadlock
and Pierce (2010). Consistent with our premise, we find that following dividend changes,
the change in cash-flow volatility (in the opposite direction) and the abnormal returns
are larger for firms that are more financially constrained. We report these results in the
Online Appendix, Table A.9.



                      V      Theoretical Framework
In this section, we develop a framework to account for our empirical results of section IV.
In the Online Appendix, we show that a simple framework with symmetric information
and a precautionary savings motive is sufficient to generate the prediction that dividend
payments should correlate negatively with subsequent changes in cash-flow volatility. This
baseline framework, however, cannot account for the announcement return evidence we
present. We consider two alternative ways to augment the precautionary-savings model.
First, in section VA., we consider a setting with asymmetric information about future
cash-flow volatility. Next, in section VB., we consider a setting with agency costs. In
both settings, we derive cross-sectional predictions that allow us to empirically distinguish
across models.


A.    A Signaling Model of Dividends and Cash-Flow Volatility

Consider a manager running a firm on behalf of risk-neutral investors, which operates for
three dates (t = 0, 1, 2) and two periods. At t = 0, the manager starts with cash reserves,
ω0 , and invests I0 ≤ ω0 . At t = 1, the manager receives an endowment, ω1 , and decides
whether to pay dividends, D1 . Next, cash flows are realized, Y1 = f (Io ) + ν, where f
is a production function with f 0 > 0, f 00 < 0, and f 000 > 0; the shock ν is distributed
according to function G, with expected value E (ν) that we normalize to 0, and a known
variance σ 2 , with | ν |<< Y . We denote E [Y1 ] = Y . We only rule out extreme negative
realizations to avoid the firm going bankrupt at t = 2. After dividends are paid and cash
flows are realized, the manager invests any remaining cash, I1 = ω1 + Y1 − D1 + (ω0 − I0 ).
At t = 2, the manager pays out the final cash flows, Y2 = f (I1 ) + ν. The interest rate

                                             23
equals zero.
       We introduce asymmetric information by assuming the manager learns σ 2 at t =
1 before paying dividends, whereas investors only observe D1 . As a result, at t = 1,
asymmetric information exists concerning the variance of the firm’s cash flows, σ 2 , which
                                              2      2
is distributed according to function Ξ over [σmin , σmax ]. Prior to t = 1, the investors and
the manager have symmetric information on σ 2 with E [σ 2 ] = σp2 , that is, the prior. Both
the investors and the manager also know E [ν] = 0. Therefore, whereas the manager knows
the true σ 2 , investors attempt to infer σ 2 from the dividend policy. Thus, the timeline is
as follows:
Time 0: The firm gets endowment ω0 ; wlog invests I0 = ω0 ;
Time 1: The firm gets endowment ω1 ; the firm manager learns the true σ 2 and decides
how much dividend D1 to pay; after D1 is paid, investors trade; then, Y1 = f (I0 ) + ν is
realized; next, the firm invests I1 = ω1 + Y1 − D1 ;
Time 2: Y2 = f (I1 ) + ν is realized; remaining cash is paid out; the world ends.
       This setting captures a seasoned firm that has been in operation since well before
the dividend decision and expects to continue to operate in the future. Accordingly, we
can think of Time 0 as “the distant past,” Time 1 as “now,” and Time 2 as “the distant
future.” Similarly, we can interpret the endowments as the cash flows resulting from
past investment decisions. Throughout the analysis, we assume the existence of financial
constraints. To illustrate our results in the starkest manner, we completely shut down the
firm’s access to financial markets, although our results only require that external financing
not be perfectly costless. Similarly, we maintain that managers cannot perfectly hedge
the risk of the firm’s future cash flows.5
       For signaling to have scope, at least some investors need to have shorter horizons than
others. Consistent with the signaling literature (e.g., Miller and Rock (1985)), we assume
some investors are hit by an idiosyncratic liquidity shock at t = 1 and as a result must sell
their shares. To be precise, we assume a fraction k of these investors sell after dividends
D1 are paid and before cash flows Y1 are realized, whereas the remaining fraction (1 − k)
   5
   With perfect financial risk management and hedging, a firm’s earnings become fully informative
about the firm’s future prospects, thereby limiting any information content of dividend policy (see, e.g.,
DeMarzo and Duffie (1995)).


                                                   24
will hold their shares until t = 2, at which time they will learn the realization of σ 2 .
Investors may trade shares continuously between t = 0 and t = 2. We can summarize the
information set of the two groups of investors with respect to endowment, investment,
random shock, and net dividends at the time of the announcement of D1 as


                         ω0 , ω1 , I0 , D1 , E(ν) = 0, V ar(ν) = σ 2   = φh
                     

                                         {ω0 , ω1 , I0 , D1 , E(ν) = 0} = φs ,


where φh is the information set of the investors who continue holding their shares, and φs
is the information set of those who decide to sell. The perceived value of the firm at time
1 by those who decide to sell is thus


                  V1s = D1 + E [Y2 | φs ] = D1 + E [f (ω1 + Y1 − D1 ) | φs ] .


Similarly, the perceived value of the firm at time 1 by those who decide to hold is


                 V1h = D1 + E Y2 | φh = D1 + E f (ω1 + Y1 − D1 ) | φh .
                                                                  



The manager acts in the interest of investors who own the firm at t = 1, and maximizes


                                 max       W1 = kV1s + (1 − k)V1h
                                 {D1 }

                                           subject to

                                           Y2 = f (I1 ) + ν

                                           D1 ≤ ω1 ,


where we assume ω1 is sufficiently large and investors know the investment at time 1 will
be I1 = ω1 + Y1 − D1 after the realization of Y1 .
    Figure 2 illustrates the equilibrium. The worst firm type with the highest variance,
 2
σmax , sets dividends D1? as in the first-best, full-information case. As variance decreases,
firms pay more dividends and forego more investment opportunities. Therefore, relative
to the first-best case with full information, the signaling equilibrium features excessive


                                                  25
dividend payment and under-investment.
    In the Appendix, we show the concavity of the production function guarantees the
single-crossing property of signaling games is satisfied.     More broadly, we show this
problem satisfies the Riley (1979) conditions for games of incomplete information, and we
derive the ordinary differential equation (ODE) together with a boundary condition that
uniquely determines the schedule. Furthermore, we prove that this solution is the Riley
equilibrium outcome and it is the unique separating equilibrium of our game, by applying
the results of Mailath (1987), and it is the unique equilibrium that survives standard
refinement concepts for this class of games (Esö and Schummer (2009); see also Ramey
(1996) and Cho and Sobel (1990)).
    In this model, dividends are a signal to the market about the cash-flow volatility.
Because managers care about short-term investors, they would like to signal that their
cash flows have low volatility and therefore higher value. For this signal to be credible,
it must be costly. To prevent imitation and thus generate a separating equilibrium, the
signal must be costlier for low types than for high types. This conclusion follows from the
concavity of the production function, because riskier firms have more to lose in terms of
foregone investment if they pay a larger dividend in an attempt to imitate safer firms.
    We can now derive the main comparative statics, which guide our interpretation of
the data. The first comparative static indicates dividend changes should be followed by
changes in future cash-flow volatility in the opposite direction.
    Prediction 1 (signaling - time series). Changes in dividends should be followed
                                                                              ∂σ 2 (D1 )
by changes in future cash-flow volatility in the opposite direction; that is,            < 0.
                                                                                ∂D1
    Paying higher dividends will increase the probability of needing to forego future
investment opportunities, as the (expected) volatility of future cash flows increases.
Asymmetric information amplifies this channel, because riskier firms will not be able
to afford paying out higher dividends to imitate safer firms.
    The second comparative static provides the more nuanced cross-sectional prediction
of our signaling model.
    Prediction 2 (signaling - cross-section).               Following a dividend increase
(decrease), a larger decrease (increase) occurs in cash-flow volatility for firms with smaller


                                             26
(larger) current earnings:

                                                                 a
                     ∂ 2 σ 2 (D1 )           2f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 (D1 )
                                   =−                            2          i2 > 0.
                      ∂D1 ∂Y
                                               h
                                                    0
                                                                   a 2
                                        k · a · f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ (D1 )
                                                                   2

Prediction 2 states the cross derivative of cash-flow volatility with respect to dividends and
(current) earnings is positive. The intuition is that the smaller the earnings, the larger the
foregone investment opportunities for a given level of dividend payment. Therefore, the
same dividend should carry a larger information content for future changes in cash-flow
volatility for firms with smaller earnings. This prediction depends crucially on asymmetric
information about future cash-flow volatility and does not obtain in the basic setting with
symmetric information.6
       Our next predictions relate to the effect of dividend announcements on firm value.
In a fully separating equilibrium, investors perfectly learn the firm’s type, σ 2 , from the
dividend announcement. Then, recalling that σp2 indicates the prior belief about cash-flow
volatility, we obtain by Taylor-series approximation the change in firm value upon the
dividend announcement, ∆V , as follows:

                                        a                              a
                     ∆V ≈ D1 − E [D1 ] − (σ 2 − σp2 )f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 ),
                                        2                              2

where E [D1 ] indicates the prior expectation of dividends. As in the dividend-signaling
              ∆V
literature,   ∆D1
                    > 0, thus reflecting the fact that larger dividend announcements represent
news about better future prospects.              In our framework and contrary to the extant
literature, better future firm prospects refer not to the first but to the second moment of
future cash flows. This line of reasoning leads us to an additional testable prediction.
                                                                              
    Prediction 3 (signaling - firm value). Denote with ∆σ 2 = σ 2 − σp2 the change
in (expected) future cash-flow volatility. Also, denote with ∆D = D1 − E [D1 ] the
   6
    This prediction is also unique within the class of signaling models and crucially depends on the cost
of the signal being foregone investment opportunities. In a model in which the cost of the signal is an
exogenously assumed “flotation cost” of having to issue equity in the future following a negative shock,
Kale and Noe (1990) obtain that idiosyncratic volatility should decrease following dividend increases,
but systematic volatility should change non-monotonically with dividend payments. Because the cost of
the signal is exogenous, Kale and Noe (1990) find no cross-sectional variation in the expected change in
volatility following dividend changes.


                                                    27
(unexpected) change in dividends. We then obtain

                  ∆V      a                  a           ∆V
                     2
                       = − f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 ) < 0,    = 1 > 0;
                  ∆σ      2                  2           ∆D

that is, larger dividend announcement returns should be associated with larger dividend
changes and larger subsequent reductions in cash-flow volatility, which is consistent with
our empirical findings in Table 11.
     Prediction 3 implies announcements of dividend changes should carry a larger
information content (i.e., have a larger announcement return), because the expected
reduction in future cash-flow volatility increases. Note also that Prediction 3 does not
obtain in the basic setting with symmetric information that we discuss in the Online
Appendix.
     Finally, in our framework, dividends and share repurchases are two equivalent ways
to return cash to shareholders. As a result, Predictions 1 and 3 should also apply to share
repurchases.


B.    Agency and Cash-Flow Volatility

An alternative explanation of dividend policy is that dividends can help address
managerial agency problems. The fact that cash is paid out to investors as dividends,
rather than being wasted in managerial private benefits, represents good news for
investors. In addition, paying dividends may expose companies to the possible need to
raise external funds in the future, which may further shift control to outside investors and
reduce agency problems (e.g., Easterbrook (1984); see also Fluck (1999), Myers (2000),
Lambrecht and Myers (2012), and Wu (2018) for additional examinations of these ideas).
     To nest some of these ideas into our framework, two main alternative formulations
exist, which differ according to whether managerial private benefits are a function of the
dollar amount of dividends paid (additive formulation) or of the percent of earnings paid
out as dividends (multiplicative formulation).




                                            28
B.1     Agency: Additive Formulation

We assume the manager bears some private agency costs c(D1 ) from paying a dividend
D1 , where the function c is convex, that is, c0 > 0 and c00 > 0. (This formulation is
quite standard and is akin to assuming the existence of (concave) private benefits of
control, which increase in a concave manner with the cash flows that are not distributed
to the shareholders, Y − D.) As we show in the Internet Appendix, under this additive
formulation, we derive the following sharp predictions:
      Prediction i (additive agency - time series).

                                           ∂σ 2
                                                < 0.
                                           ∂D1

      Prediction ii (additive agency - cross-section).

                                          ∂ 2σ2
                                                < 0.
                                         ∂D1 ∂Y

      Prediction (i) states that, as in the signaling model, higher dividends should correlate
with lower future cash-flow volatility.       Two effects are at play.       First, as in the
baseline setting, lower future cash-flow volatility implies a higher income available for
paying dividends, holding investment opportunities fixed. Second, lower future cash-flow
volatility enables managers to extract fewer private benefits (incur higher agency costs),
again holding investment fixed.
      Prediction (ii) states that, unlike the signaling model, the larger the current earnings,
the larger the reduction in cash-flow volatility should be following the same dollar of
dividend paid. Unlike Prediction 2 from the signaling model, in this case, larger current
earnings make extracting more private benefits (incur lower agency costs) easier, for a
given dollar of dividends. The reason is larger earnings allow the manager not only to
pay dividends, but also to extract private benefits, holding fixed future investment.
      Finally, in agency settings, low investment opportunities should magnify agency
problems. To capture these ideas, we can use a similar formulation to Johnson et al.
(2000) and Choe et al. (1993) and assume the production function, f , is pre-multiplied by



                                              29
a positive parameter R representing investment opportunities. As we show in the Internet
Appendix, we obtain
      Prediction A.1 (additive agency - investment opportunities).

                                                ∂ 2σ2
                                                      < 0.
                                               ∂D1 ∂R

      As per the intuition above, the decline in cash-flow volatility following dividend
increases should be more pronounced for firms with smaller investment opportunities,
reflecting the fact that smaller investment opportunities magnify the extent of agency
costs. The reason is that if lower cash-flow volatility facilitates the extraction of private
benefits, high investment opportunities mute this effect because they increase the cost of
extracting private benefits relative to engaging in efficient investment.
      Interestingly, we also show in the Internet Appendix that by using this same
formulation of investment opportunities, in the signaling model, we obtain the opposite
               ∂ 2 σ2
prediction,   ∂D1 ∂R
                        > 0. The intuition is that the scope of using dividends to signal future
declines in cash-flow volatility is magnified when investment opportunities are larger.


B.2     Agency: Multiplicative Formulation

In this section, we discuss a multiplicative formulation of agency theory. According to
this formulation, the manager pays off as dividends a fraction of cash flows d1 and enjoys
private benefits b(1 − d1 ) from paying a dividend d1 , where the function b is concave, that
is, b0 > 0 and b00 < 0.
      Under this formulation, we show in the Internet Appendix that obtaining sharp
predictions is no longer possible, because the signs of the comparative statics exercises
become ambiguous. The reason is that a new effect arises because lower future cash-flow
volatility implies higher future income, enabling managers to extract higher private
benefits (incur lower agency costs). This effect pushes toward a positive correlation
between changes in dividends and subsequent changes in cash-flow volatility. As a result,
                                ∂σ 2
in general, we obtain that      ∂D1
                                       R 0. This finding has two implications. First, on the face of
it, this new effect cannot be of first-order importance in the data, because empirically we


                                                    30
       ∂σ 2
find   ∂D1
              < 0, consistent with the signaling model and with the additive agency model. The
second implication is more nuanced because it implies the second-order cross derivatives
                                ∂ 2 σ2           ∂ 2 σ2
also have ambiguous sign,      ∂D1 ∂Y
                                         R 0,   ∂D1 ∂R
                                                          R 0. The reason is that under a multiplicative
formulation, new effects arise because lower future cash-flow volatility implies higher
future income, enabling managers to extract higher private benefits (incur lower agency
costs). Similarly, higher current earnings and higher future investment opportunities also
allow managers to divert larger cash flows. In sum, the multiplicative agency model does
not yield sharp, clear-cut empirical predictions. As a result, this multiplicative version of
the agency model cannot be falsified in the data.
       The takeaway of this section is that by examining how the changes in volatility
following dividend changes vary in the cross section as a function of the level of earnings
and as a function of investment opportunities, that is, by estimating equation (13), we
can shed light on the economic mechanism driving our results and gain additional insights
relative to the specific predictions of signaling theory and of agency theory, at least in its
additive formulation.7



                       VI      Inspecting the Mechanism
In this section, we report additional empirical tests designed to establish the economic
mechanism driving our main results. In section VIA., we present cross-sectional tests of
our theoretical Prediction 2, which are a direct implication of the signaling framework. .
In section VIC., we examine share repurchases. In section VID. we examine additional
implications of an agency channel. In section VIE., we examine the extent to which tax
arguments can explain our results.


A.       Cross-Sectional Variation

To examine the theoretical mechanism underlying our findings, we turn to a regression
framework to examine cross-sectional variation in the response of cash-flow volatility to
   7
    Bernheim and Wantz (1995) propose a test to distinguish between signaling and agency theories of
dividends, although the conclusions of such tests are sensitive to the econometric techniques employed
(see Bernhardt et al. (2005)).


                                                          31
dividend changes. Specifically, for each dividend change in our sample, we now estimate a
regression of percent changes in cash-flow volatility, ∆ Var(η cfit ), for firm i and dividend
event t, which we measure from stock returns using the methodology in section II, on the
percent changes in dollar dividends, ∆Dit :


                          ∆ Var(η cfit ) = α + γ · ∆Dit + δ · Xit + εit .                (12)


We control for a host of additional potential determinants of cash-flow volatility and
dividend payments, Xi , such as firm age, size, book-to-market, and financial leverage,
as well as year and industry fixed effects at the Fama and French 17-industry level, and
cluster standard errors at the dividend-quarter level. We impose non-overlapping events
so we can consider equation (12) as a purely cross-sectional test. We expect γ < 0
following Prediction 1.
    To test the cross-sectional predictions of signaling and agency models, we then
estimate the following specification:


     ∆ Var(η cfit ) = α + β1 · ∆Dit + β2 · epsit + β3 · ∆Dit · epsit + δ · Xit + εit ,   (13)


where eps is earnings per share. Our main coefficient of interest is β3 . From our signaling
model of section VA., we should expect β3 > 0. According to the precautionary-savings
setting with a constant Arrow-Pratt coefficient and symmetric information, we should
expect β3 = 0. The additive formulation of the agency model instead predicts β3 < 0.
We should also expect β1 < 0 as per our baseline Prediction 1, and also β2 < 0, reflecting
a scale effect. Therefore, by estimating equation (13), we can tease out the nuanced
cross-sectional predictions that allow us to distinguish between alternative mechanisms
that might drive our baseline univariate results.
    Table 12 reports the estimates.         Column (1) confirms our baseline finding in a
regression framework: Dividend changes correlate with subsequent changes in the variance
of cash-flow news in the opposite direction. The interpretation is that firms change their
dividend payout in anticipation of future changes in cash-flow volatility. In column (2),
we add earnings per share (eps) as an additional covariate. Adding eps slightly increases

                                                32
the drop in variance following dividend increases. Firms with higher eps have a smaller
variance in cash-flow news. Column (3) confirms our novel Prediction 2, consistent with
the signaling model and inconsistent with the precautionary-savings and additive agency
models: Dividend increases result in a drop in the variance of cash-flow news, but this
drop is muted for firms with higher eps. Column (4) adds a host of potential determinants
of cash-flow volatility and dividend payments such as firm age, size, book-to-market, and
financial leverage. None of these additional covariates have a large impact on our main
estimates of interest. Positive dividend changes are followed by a decline in cash-flow
volatility, which is muted for firms with higher earnings per share. Columns (5) to (8)
add year and industry fixed effects at the Fama and French 17-industry-level definition
and confirm our basic findings.
     We show in the Online Appendix that results are robust when we add the initial
variance of cash-flow news (see Table A.5), when we add the level of cash and equivalents
as control variable (see Table A.6), and when we use cash flows rather than earnings
(see Table A.7). Hence, the data support Prediction 2 of the signaling model in that the
cross-sectional change in cash-flow volatility following dividend changes is muted for firms
with larger earnings.


B.    Indirect Effect of Cash-Flow Volatility

Our signaling model suggests that in addition to the direct impact of the change in
earnings volatility on value today through the signaling channel, increased earnings
volatility also has an indirect impact on the first moment of the earnings distribution.
Expected profits tomorrow, E [Y2 ], change in the opposite direction relative to a change
in cash-flow volatility, σ, according to

                                      ∂            a
                                        E [Y2 ] = − · f 0 .                              (14)
                                     ∂σ            2

The key question is thus whether the magnitude of this indirect effect of cash-flow volatility
on future earnings through Jensen’s inequality is large or small relative to the direct
signaling effect of cash-flow volatility on firm value. To gauge such magnitude, we first


                                              33
note that in our model, earnings are positively autocorrelated, because a shock to today’s
earnings translates into an increase in future expected earnings:

                                        ∂
                                          E [Y2 ] = f 0 .                                (15)
                                       ∂Y

     These comparative statics provide an insight into the relative magnitudes: The
derivative of future expected earnings with respect to cash-flow volatility (equation 14)
equals the derivative of future expected earnings with respect to current earnings times a
multiplicative constant, − a2 .
     Furthermore, combining the two comparative statics above,

                                         dY   a
                                            =− ,                                         (16)
                                         dσ   2

     implies we can estimate the parameter a in our data by the cross-sectional regression
of earnings (eps) on cash-flow volatility,




                                   epsi = α + β · σi + εi .                              (17)


     We present the results of this estimation strategy in Table 13. Our estimates imply
the indirect effect of cash-flow volatility on future earnings is small, as β̂ = −0.04 (see
column 2 of Table 13). Furthermore, this effect is an order of magnitude smaller than the
autoregressive coefficient of earnings, which is 0.6.
     These findings have three implications. First, the main effect of cash-flow volatility on
firm value is the direct signaling effect that we document in our paper. It works through
changes in cash-flow volatility following dividend changes, as documented by our results
that firms with larger dividend changes exhibit both larger CARs, and larger changes in
cash-flow volatility in the opposite direction.
     Second, changes in cash-flow volatility should also have an indirect effect on firm
value through changes in future earnings. The reason is Jensen’s inequality: With a
concave production technology, less volatile inputs translate into higher expected earnings,


                                              34
which, in turn, will influence the firm’s market value. Empirically, this indirect effect is
statistically significant and has the theoretically expected sign, but the magnitude of this
effect is small.
     Third, our findings help explain why the extant empirical literature has found no
changes in earnings following dividend changes. In light of our results, the magnitude
of such changes in future earnings may be small and apply to earnings in the not-so-
near future, so that typical empirical methods will have little power to detect statistical
significance at longer horizons even if economic theory predicts non-zero effects.


C.     Repurchases

We now examine announcements of share repurchases.              Together with dividends,
share-repurchase decisions constitute the firm’s overall payout policy. Unlike dividends,
which are sticky and regular, share repurchases tend to be lumpy and infrequent. However,
because share repurchases are yet another way to return cash to shareholders, our
framework in section V predicts patterns of cash-flow volatility following announcements
of share repurchases similar to the results following announcements of dividend increases
and initiation.
     Table 14 reports the results for scaled changes in the variance of cash-flow news after
the repurchase announcements relative to before. We find the variance of cash-flow news
is, on average, 15% lower after the repurchase announcements relative to before. We then
split the data into two sub-samples by the size of the share-repurchase announcements,
using the median amount as cutoff. Consistent with our results for changes in dividends
and with the predictions of the signaling model, we see in columns (2) and (3) of Panel A
that large repurchase announcements are followed by a drop in cash-flow volatility that is
more than 6% larger than the drop in variance for repurchase announcements below the
median.
     We then examine announcement returns to share repurchases in Panel B of Table
14. Consistent with prior literature, we find an announcement return of about 2% for all
repurchase announcements. We see in columns (2) to (4) that announcement returns are
almost 1.5% larger for large repurchase announcements relative to small ones.

                                            35
     These findings imply share-repurchase announcements convey information similar to
announcements of dividend increases and initiations. Prior research (e.g., Jagannathan
et al. (2000), Grullon and Michaely (2002)) emphasize differences in the timing and
scope of dividends and share repurchases. Our novel result is that share repurchases
and dividend announcements convey very similar information to the market regarding
changes in future cash-flow volatility.


D.     Investment Opportunities

The signaling model with investment opportunities in section V predicts the decline in
cash-flow volatility following dividend increases should be more pronounced for firms
with larger investment opportunities, because larger investment opportunities magnify
the scope of signaling with dividends. Conversely, the additive formulation of our agency
model predicts the opposite, because when investment opportunities are smaller, agency
costs are larger.
     To test these predictions, we employ two proxies for investment opportunities, namely,
the book-to-market ratio and idiosyncratic volatility. The book-to-market ratio is a
standard proxy for investment opportunities, and has a strong industry component
(e.g., see Cohen and Polk (1995), Daniel et al. (1997), and Freyberger et al. (2019)).
Idiosyncratic volatility also picks up within-industry variation.       Firms with higher
idiosyncratic volatility are harder to forecast. According to our signaling model, we
would expect that the smaller the book-to-market ratio and the larger the idiosyncratic
volatility, the larger the reduction in cash-flow volatility following dividend changes.
     In Table 15, we split firms by their ex-ante idiosyncratic volatility. Specifically,
we first calculate a firm’s ex-ante idiosyncratic volatility on a four-quarter rolling basis
relative to a Fama and French three-factor model using daily data. We then assign a firm
into the large idiosyncratic volatility sample if it had a volatility in the top third of the
distribution in the respective Fama and French 17 industries in the quarter before the
dividend event and in the small volatility sample if it was in the bottom third. Large
heterogeneity exists in firms’ idiosyncratic volatility, and our procedure ensures we do not
simply split our sample based on industry.

                                             36
     We find in columns (1) and (2) of Panel A of Table 15 that dividend increases for firms
with large idiosyncratic volatility result in a decrease in the average cash-flow volatility
of 19%, which is almost 9 percentage points larger than the drop for firms with low
idiosyncratic volatility. The bootstrapped difference between the changes in cash-flow
volatility within high- and low-volatility firms is highly statistically significant. We also
find that firms with large ex-ante volatility largely drive the increase in cash-flow volatility
after announced cuts in dividends, with the difference being statistically significant
(see columns (4) to (6)). In addition, we repeat the sample splits for announcement
returns. Panel B of Table 15 reports announcement returns, separately for firms with
high and low idiosyncratic volatility. We find larger announcement returns in absolute
value for firms with higher idiosyncratic volatility, and the difference is again statistically
significant. These results are consistent with the predictions of the signaling model. They
are inconsistent with the additive formulation of agency theory, although they can be
rationalized under the multiplicative formulation of agency.
     In Panel A of Table 16, we split firms by their ex-ante book-to-market ratio excluding
the middle tercile. We find that firms with smaller book-to-market ratios experience a
larger reduction in cash-flow volatility following dividend increases compared to firms with
high book-to-market ratios. Following dividend decreases, firms with high book-to-market
ratios experience a somewhat smaller increase in cash-flow volatility. Panel B of Table
16 reports announcement returns, separately for firms with high and low book-to-market
ratio. We find slightly smaller announcement returns for low book-to-market firms after
positive dividend news but more negative returns after negative dividend news relative
to high book-to-market firms. The sample split by book-to-market ratio produces results
that are, in general, consistent with the signaling model with investment opportunities
with the exception of the announcement returns after positive dividend news for high-
investment-opportunity firms.


E.    Taxes

Many theoretical and empirical papers on dividend policy rely, directly or indirectly, on
tax arguments. In some signaling models, the cost of the signal is the deadweight cost

                                              37
of the taxes paid on dividends relative to the (lower) tax that would be paid on capital
gains (see, e.g., John and Williams (1985), and Bernheim (1991)). In other models (e.g.,
Shleifer and Vishny (1986) Section V and Allen et al. (2000)), differential taxation across
different shareholders (institutions vs. retail investors) explains dividend policy as a way
for corporations to attract institutions as large shareholders.
    These tax-based explanations have been helpful in thinking about dividend policy.
However, since the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 in the U.S.,
dividends are taxed at the same rate as capital gains even for individual investors (and
for many classes of institutional investors, taxation has been the same since even before
the Jobs Act). In this more recent tax regime, 2003–2013, we find in Panel C of Table 9
results similar to those we obtained in the full sample, as well as in the early 1964–1988
sub-sample characterized by differential taxation.
    As a result, constructing a dividend equilibrium, signaling or otherwise, in which
differential taxation plays any role, whether differential corporate taxation of dividends
versus capital gains, or differential personal taxation across different investors, has become
challenging. For these reasons, we abstract from taxation in our analysis of dividend
policy.



                                VII       Conclusion
The notion that changes in dividend policy convey information to the market is intuitive,
and managers support it in surveys. The strong market reaction to announcements of
dividend changes further suggests dividend policy does contain value-relevant information.
But empirical research so far has found little support for dividend-signaling models in
the data: No meaningful relation exists between changes in dividends and changes in
future earnings, and “the wrong firms are paying dividends, and the right firms are not”
(DeAngelo et al. (2009), p.185). Consistent with existing theories, the empirical literature
has focused on the relationship between dividend changes and changes in earnings—the
first moment—rather than between dividend changes and changes in earnings volatility—
the second moment.


                                             38
    In this paper, we study whether the cash-flow volatility changes around dividend
events. We use the Campbell (1991) return decomposition to estimate cash-flow volatility
from data on stock returns. We find cash-flow volatility decreases following dividend
increases (and initiations), and cash-flow volatility increases following dividend decreases
(and omissions). Furthermore, larger dividend changes are followed by larger changes in
cash-flow volatility in the expected direction.
    To understand the theoretical forces driving these findings, we develop a model that
allows for both signaling and agency motives in an additive formulation. Both motives
have identical implications for the change in the variance of cash flows around dividend
events, but they make predictions of opposite signs regarding the interaction with the level
of earnings. In the signaling model, the smaller the current earnings, the more information
a given dollar of dividends contains, because the cost of the signal is foregone investment
opportunities. In the agency model, the higher the current earnings, the more strongly
the market should react, because low earnings already constrain the private benefits of
managers. In the cross section, we find empirically the same dollar of dividend paid is
followed by a larger reduction in cash-flow volatility for firms with smaller current earnings
consistent with the signaling model. We also study a multiplicative version of the agency
model in which managers can divert a fraction of earnings and show that this formulation
does not deliver sharp predictions.
    Payout policies have attracted voluminous research, both theoretical and empirical,
over the past decades. Our contributions are threefold. First, we provide an innovative
method in a corporate finance context to measure the first and second moment of future
cash flows; second, we provide a host of new facts about cash-flow volatility and payout
policy; and third, we offer a simple model to rationalize our empirical results. Our
static model simultaneously rationalizes our novel empirical results on payout policy and
expected cash-flow volatility, as well as many results from the prior literature. The main
takeaway of our analysis is that the riskiness of future cash flows is a central determinant
of firms’ payout policies.
    Signaling models in corporate finance have fallen out of favor since empirical research
failed to find support for their central predictions that cash flows should change after


                                             39
dividend changes in the same direction, and that younger and riskier firms should pay more
dividends than mature ones. Our paper shows the importance of considering precisely
which moment of the distribution of future cash flows dividend changes might signal. Far
beyond our specific application, our evidence suggests a need to reconsider more broadly
the predictions of signaling models in corporate finance and other fields.
    The method we employ to measure the moments of the distribution of expected
cash flows and discount rates, combined with our findings regarding firms’ conveying
information about the second moment of future cash flows, suggests opportunities for
future research exploring the motives of other corporate financial decisions. For example,
Kogan et al. (2019) examine whether “unusually large” investment expenditures (i.e.,
“spikes”) are followed by lower cash-flow volatility, as implied by the exercise of real
options, or by larger cash-flow volatility, as implied by agency theory. Our method may
also be able to shed light on questions beyond finance. For example, a recent strand of
research in economics has stressed ways in which aggregate uncertainty can affect firm
investment dynamics (e.g., Bloom (2009), Bloom et al. (2007)). Researchers may now
expand this line of reasoning to investigate the precise relevant source of uncertainty
driving firms’ investment policies.




                                            40
References
Allen, F., A. E. Bernardo, and I. Welch (2000). A theory of dividends based on tax
  clienteles. Journal of Finance 55 (6), 2499–2536.
Benartzi, S., R. Michaely, and R. Thaler (1997). Do changes in dividends signal the future
  or the past? Journal of Finance 52 (3), 1007–1034.
Bernanke, B. S. and K. N. Kuttner (2005). What explains the stock market’s reaction to
  federal reserve policy? Journal of Finance 60 (3), 1221–1257.
Bernhardt, D., A. Douglas, and F. Robertson (2005). Testing dividend signaling models.
  Journal of Empirical Finance 12 (1), 77–98.
Bernheim, B. D. (1991). Tax policy and the dividend puzzle. RAND Journal of
  Economics 22 (4), 455–476.
Bernheim, B. D. and A. Wantz (1995). A tax-based test of the dividend signaling
  hypothesis. American Economic Review 85 (3), 532–551.
Bhattacharya, S. (1979). Imperfect information, dividend policy, and “the bird in the
  hand” fallacy. Bell Journal of Economics 10 (1), 259–270.
Bhattacharya, S. (1980). Nondissipative signaling structures and dividend policy.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 95 (1), 1–24.
Bloom, N. (2009). The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77 (3), 623–685.
Bloom, N., S. Bond, and J. Van Reenen (2007). The impact of uncertainty shocks. Review
  of Economic Studies 74 (3), 391–415.
Brav, A., J. R. Graham, C. R. Harvey, and R. Michaely (2005). Payout policy in the 21st
  century. Journal of Financial Economics 77 (3), 483–527.
Campbell, J. and R. Shiller (1988a). The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
  dividends and discount factors. Review of Financial Studies 43 (3), 661–676.
Campbell, J. and R. Shiller (1988b). Stock prices, earnings, and expected dividends.
  Journal of Finance 43 (3), 661–676.
Campbell, J. Y. (1991). A variance decomposition for stock returns. Economic
  Journal 101 (405), 157–179.
Chay, J.-B. and J. Suh (2009). Payout policy and cash flow uncertainty. Journal of
  Financial Economics 1 (93), 88–107.
Chinco, A., A. Neuhierl, and M. Weber (2019). Estimating the anomaly baserate. Chicago
  Booth Research Paper (19-10).
Cho, I.-K. and J. Sobel (1990). Strategic stability and uniqueness in signaling games.
  Journal of Economic Theory 50 (2), 381–413.
Choe, H., R. W. Masulis, and V. Nanda (1993). Common stock offerings across the
  business cycle: Theory and evidence. Journal of Empirical Finance 1 (1), 3–31.
Cochrane, J. H. (2011). Presidential address: Discount rates. Journal of Finance 66,
  1047–1108.
Cohen, R. B. and C. K. Polk (1995). An investigation of the impact of industry factors
  in asset pricing tests. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.
Constantinides, G. M. and D. Duffie (1996). Asset pricing with heterogeneous consumers.
  Journal of Political economy 104 (2), 219–240.


                                           41
Daniel, K., M. Grinblatt, S. Titman, and R. Wermers (1997). Measuring mutual fund
  performance with characteristic-based benchmarks. Journal of Finance 52 (3), 1035–
  1058.
DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and D. J. Skinner (1996). Reversal of fortune dividend
  signaling and the disappearance of sustained earnings growth. Journal of Financial
  Economics 40 (3), 341–371.
DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and D. J. Skinner (2009). Corporate payout policy.
  Foundations and Trends R in Finance 3 (2–3), 95–287.
DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and R. M. Stulz (2006). Reversal of fortune dividend
  signaling and the disappearance of sustained earnings growth. Journal of Financial
  Economics 81 (2), 227–254.
DeMarzo, P. M. and D. Duffie (1995). Corporate incentives for hedging and hedge
  accounting. Review of Financial Studies 8 (3), 743–771.
Easterbrook, F. H. (1984). Two agency-cost explanations of dividends. American
  Economic Review 74 (4), 650–659.
Esö, P. and J. Schummer (2009). Credible deviations from signaling equilibria.
  International Journal of Game Theory 38 (3), 411–430.
Fama, E. F. (1965). The behavior of stock-market prices. Journal of Business 38 (1),
  34–105.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1988). Dividend yields and expected stock returns. Journal
  of Financial Economics 22, 3–25.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2001). Disappearing dividends: changing firm
  characteristics or lower propensity to pay? Journal of Financial Economics 60 (1),
  3–43.
Farre-Mensa, J., R. Michaely, and M. C. Schmalz (2014). Payout policy. Annual Review
  of Financial Economics 6, 75–134.
Fluck, Z. (1999). The dynamics of the manager-shareholder conflict. Review of Financial
  Studies 12 (2), 379–404.
Freyberger, J., A. Neuhierl, and M. Weber (2019).               Dissecting characteristics
  nonparametrically. Review of Financial Studies (forthcoming).
Froot, K. A., D. S. Scharfstein, and J. C. Stein (1993). Risk management: Coordinating
  corporate investment and financing policies. Journal of Finance 48 (5), 1629–1658.
Fu, F. (2009). Idiosyncratic risk and the cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal
  of financial Economics 91 (1), 24–37.
Grullon, G. and R. Michaely (2002). Dividends, share repurchases, and the substitution
  hypothesis. Journal of Finance 57 (4), 1649–1684.
Grullon, G. and R. Michaely (2004). The information content of share repurchase
  programs. Journal of Finance 59 (2), 651–680.
Grullon, G., R. Michaely, and B. Swaminathan (2002). Are dividend changes a sign of
  firm maturity? Journal of Business 75 (3), 387–424.
Guay, W. and J. Harford (2000). The cash-flow permanence and information content of
  dividend increases versus repurchases. Journal of Financial Economics 55 (3), 385–415.
Guttman, I., O. Kadan, and E. Kandel (2010). Dividend stickiness and strategic pooling.

                                           42
  Review of Financial Studies 12 (23), 4455–4495.
Hadlock, C. J. and J. R. Pierce (2010). New evidence on measuring financial constraints:
  Moving beyond the KZ index. Review of Financial Studies 5 (23), 1909–1940.
Ham, C., Z. Kaplan, and M. T. Leary (2019). Do dividends convey information about
  future earnings? Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Hoberg, G. and N. R. Prabhala (2009). Disappearing dividends, catering, and risk. Review
  of Financial Studies 1 (22), 79–116.
Jagannathan, M., C. P. Stephens, and M. S. Weisbach (2000). Financial flexibility and the
  choice between dividends and stock repurchases. Journal of Financial Economics 57 (3),
  355–384.
Jayaraman, N. and K. Shastri (1993). The effects of the announcements of dividend
  increases on stock return volatility: The evidence from the options market. Journal of
  Business Finance and Accounting 20 (5), 673–685.
John, K. and J. Williams (1985). Dividends, dilution, and taxes: A signalling equilibrium.
  Journal of Finance 40 (4), 1053–1070.
Johnson, S., P. Boone, A. Breach, and E. Friedman (2000). Corporate governance in the
  asian financial crisis. Journal of Financial Economics 58 (1-2), 141–186.
Jones, J. S., J. Gu, and P. Liu (2014). Do dividend initiations signal a reduction
  in risk? evidence from the option market. Review of Quantitative Finance and
  Accounting 42 (1), 143–158.
Kahle, K. M. and R. M. Stulz (2017). Is the US public corporation in trouble? Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 31 (3), 67–88.
Kale, J. R. and T. H. Noe (1990). Dividends, uncertainty, and underwriting costs under
  asymmetric information. Journal of Financial Research 13 (4), 265–277.
Keloharju, M., J. T. Linnainmaa, and P. Nyberg (2019). Long-term discount rates do not
  vary across firms. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kogan, S., R. Michaely, S. Rossi, and M. Weber (2019). Corporate investment and
  subsequent changes in stock returns. Unpublished manuscript.
Kumar, P. (1988). Shareholder-manager conflict and the information content of dividends.
  Review of Financial Studies 2 (1), 111–136.
Lambrecht, B. M. and S. C. Myers (2012). A Lintner model of payout and managerial
  rents. Journal of Finance 67 (5), 1761–1810.
Lettau, M. and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2007). Reconciling the return predictability
  evidence. Review of Financial Studies.
Lintner, J. (1956). Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained
  earnings, and taxes. American Economic Review 46 (2), 97–113.
Mailath, G. J. (1987). Incentive compatibility in signaling games with a continuum of
  types. Econometrica 55 (6), 1349–1365.
Michaely, R., R. H. Thaler, and K. L. Womack (1995). Price reactions to dividend
  initiations and omissions: Overreaction or drift? Journal of Finance 50 (2), 573–608.
Miller, M. H. and F. Modigliani (1961). Dividend policy, growth, and the valuation of
  shares. Journal of Business 34 (4), 411–433.
Miller, M. H. and K. Rock (1985). Dividend policy under asymmetric information. Journal

                                           43
  of Finance 40 (4), 1031–1051.
Myers, S. C. (2000). Outside equity. Journal of Finance 55 (3), 1005–1038.
Ramey, G. (1996). D1 signaling equilibria with multiple signals. Journal of Economic
  Theory 69 (2), 508–531.
Rampini, A. A. and S. Viswanathan (2013). Collateral and capital structure. Journal of
  Financial Economics 109 (2), 466–492.
Riley, J. G. (1979). Informational equilibrium. Econometrica 47 (2), 331–359.
Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1986). Large shareholders and corporate control. Journal
  of Political Economy 94 (3), 461–488.
Shumway, T. (1997). The delisting bias in CRSP data. Journal of Finance 52 (1), 327–340.
Venkatesh, P. (1989). The impact of dividend initiation on the information content of
  earnings announcements and return volatility. Journal of Business 62 (2), 175–197.
Vuolteenaho, T. (2002). What drives firm-level stock returns? Journal of Finance 57 (1),
  233–264.
Weber, M. (2015). Nominal rigidities and asset pricing. Unpublished manuscript,
  University of Chicago.
Weber, M. (2018). Cash flow duration and the term structure of equity returns. Journal
  of Financial Economics 128 (3), 486–503.
Wu, Y. (2018). What’s behind the smooth dividends? Evidence from structural
  estimation. Review of Financial Studies 31 (10), 3979–4016.




                                          44
                   Figure 1: Histogram of VAR Point Estimates from Simulation

                                                                                                                                                        150
140                                                                             200



                                                                                180
120

                                                                                160


100
                                                                                140
                                                                                                                                                        100


                                                                                120
 80


                                                                                100


 60
                                                                                 80

                                                                                                                                                         50

                                                                                 60
 40


                                                                                 40

 20
                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                            0
  0                                                                               0                                                                          5   6            7    8        9       10   11         12     13
   0       0.005   0.01   0.015       0.02   0.025   0.03   0.035        0.04     0.2                 0.25                  0.3                 0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10-3


120
                                                                                                                                                       90
                                                                                150



                                                                                                                                                       80
100


                                                                                                                                                       70



 80
                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                100



                                                                                                                                                       50
 60


                                                                                                                                                       40



 40
                                                                                 50                                                                    30



                                                                                                                                                       20
 20


                                                                                                                                                       10



  0
       4             6            8          10        12           14           0                                                                       0
                                                                                 0.31   0.32   0.33          0.34    0.35         0.36   0.37   0.38   -0.0215       -0.021       -0.0205       -0.02     -0.0195        -0.019
                                                                         10-3


120
                                                                                                                                                       90
                                                                                150



                                                                                                                                                       80
100


                                                                                                                                                       70



 80
                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                100



                                                                                                                                                       50
 60


                                                                                                                                                       40



 40
                                                                                 50                                                                    30



                                                                                                                                                       20
 20


                                                                                                                                                       10



  0
       4             6            8          10        12           14           0                                                                       0
                                                                                 0.31   0.32   0.33          0.34    0.35         0.36   0.37   0.38   -0.0215       -0.021       -0.0205       -0.02     -0.0195        -0.019
                                                                         10-3

                    This figure plots the histograms of the point estimates from estimates of the VAR.
                    Each simulation consists of 1,000 draws. In each draw, we randomly choose a
                    ten-years period with replacement and estimate the VAR we use in our empirical
                    analysis. The red lines indicate the full sample estimates we report in Table 2.




                                                                                                                45
                                   Figure 2: Model Solution

This figure plots the solution of the signaling model of Section VA. The red line depicts the equilibrium downward
sloping relationship between dividends, D1 , and cash flow volatility, σ 2 . The worst firm type with the highest
            2
variance, σmax  , sets dividends D1? as in the first-best, full-information case.




                           σ2


                         2
                        σmax




                         2
                        σmin




                                   D1?                                      D1




                                                  46
                                 Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

This table reports descriptive statistics. ∆ Var(η cf )/mean(η cf ) is the scaled change in the variance of cash-flow
news around dividend events, ∆η cf is the change in cash-flow news, ∆η dr is the change in discount-rate news,
BM Ratio is the book-to-market-ratio, and Market Cap is the market capitalization. We calculate cash-flow and
discount-rate news following Vuolteenaho (2002). Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.


                                                      ∆Div > 0                                  ∆Div < 0
                                          Nobs     Median      Mean      Std        Nobs     Median      Mean       Std
 ∆ Var(η cf )/mean(η cf )                 2,441     -0.13      -0.15     0.76       2,461      0.06       0.07     0.83
 ∆η cf                                    2,441      0.00       0.00     0.02       2,461      0.00       0.00     0.02
 ∆η dr                                    2,441      0.00       0.00     0.00       2,461      0.00       0.00     0.00
 BM Ratio                                 2,441      1.05       1.36     3.17       2,461      1.10       1.48     2.97
 Market Cap                               2,441      0.45       4.34    19.23       2,461      0.44       3.53    13.70
 Delistings 5 years post Event             21                                         12

                                                     Initiations                               Omissions
                                          Nobs     Median      Mean      Std        Nobs     Median      Mean       Std
 ∆ Var(η cf )/mean(η cf )                 1,069     -0.21      -0.20     1.30       1,233      0.05       0.06    0.88
 ∆η cf                                    1,069     0.00        0.00     0.02       1,233      0.00       0.00     0.01
 ∆η dr                                    1,069     0.00        0.00     0.00       1,233      0.00       0.00     0.00
 BM Ratio                                 1,069      1.01      1.29      0.86       1,233      1.39       1.93     2.76
 Market Cap                               1,069      0.20      1.67      5.34       1,233      0.15       1.88    11.24
 Delistings 5 years post Event             34                                         10




                                                    47
               Table 2: Estimate of Transition Matrix of VAR System

This table reports point estimates of a constant VAR for all firms following the method we outline in Section II.
rt denotes the excess log stock return, θ is the log book-to-market ratio, and roe is the log return-on-equity. The
sample period from 1964 till 2013.


                                        r                θ             roe
                                       (1)              (2)            (3)
                          r          0.02            0.01           0.28
                                    (2.12)          (9.87)        (13.61)

                          θ          0.10           0.94           −0.65
                                    (4.07)       (223.29)         (−9.67)

                          roe        0.01         −0.02             0.36
                                    (2.02)      (−29.49)          (28.85)




                                                   48
                         Table 3: Change in Cash-Flow and Discount-Rate News Around Dividend Events

     This table reports changes in cash-flow and discount-rate news around dividend events using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we describe in Section
     II. Panel A reports the average change in mean cash-flow news across firm events (∆η cf ), Panel B reports the average change in mean discount-rate news
     (∆η dr), Panel C reports the average change in the variance of cash-flow news (∆ Var(η cf )), and Panel D reports the average change in the variance of
     cash-flow news scaled by the average variance of cash-flow news before the event (∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))). Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.


                                    ∆Div > 0         Initiation       Pooled          ∆Div < 0         Omission           Pooled
                                      (1)                (2)           (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)
                                                             Panel A. ∆ Cash-flow News: ∆η cf
                                     -0.0001          0.0000          0.0000            -0.0003          0.0001           -0.0002
                                     (-0.22)          (0.47)          (-0.37)           (-1.08)          (0.85)           (-0.82)

                                                         Panel B. ∆ Discount-rate News: ∆η dr




49
                                      0.0000          0.0000     0.0000       0.0000     0.0000                            0.0000
                                      (-0.70)         (1.22)     (-1.17)      (-0.81)    (0.93)                            (-0.15)

                                                   Panel C. ∆ Variance Cash-flow News: ∆ Var(η cf )
                                     -0.0015         -0.0027   -0.0019        0.0006    0.0005                             0.0006
                                     (-9.65)         (-4.94)   (-8.63)        (4.38)    (2.42)                             (4.95)

                                    Panel D. ∆ Scaled Variance Cash-flow News: ∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))
                                     -14.86%    -20.01%     -16.43%      7.29%       6.09%         6.89%
                                      (-9.65)    (-4.94)     (-9.33)      (4.38)     (2.42)        (4.95)

                        Nobs          2,441            1,069           3,510             2,461            1,233            3,694
                 Table 4: Scaled Change in Variance of Cash-Flow News Around Dividend Events: Robustness

     This table reports robustness results for changes in cash-flow news around dividend events using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we describe in
     Section II. Panel A estimates one VAR for the whole sample period and then uses the estimate for Γ to calculate both residuals in the five years before and after
     the dividend event and the cash-flow news. Panel B estimates one VAR across all firms and events to get an estimate of Γ, but then estimates separate VARs
     before and after each dividend events to get the news terms. Panel C requires only 12 non-missing quarters within five years before and after the dividend event
     and we do not restrict our sample to non-overlapping event windows within firms. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.


                                     ∆Div > 0          Initiation        Pooled           ∆Div < 0          Omission         Pooled
                                       (1)                 (2)            (3)               (4)               (5)             (6)
                                                                    Panel A. Constant Gamma
                                    −14.06%          −25.45%          −17.53%              17.70%           10.50%          15.27%
                                    (−9.39)          (−7.33)         (−11.08)              (8.13)           (3.94)          (9.01)




50
                                                                    Panel B. Mezzanine Gamma
                                    −15.96%          −23.25%          −18.18%              10.72%           14.10%          11.84%
                                   (−11.47)          (−6.03)         (−11.05)              (6.57)           (5.79)          (8.70)

                          Nobs          2,441            1,069            3,510              2,461            1,233           3,694

                                                                    Panel C. Extended Sample
                                    −12.76%          −16.73%         −13.80%                9.06%            6.26%           8.71%
                                    (−6.93)          (−4.87)         (−8.26)               (4.51)           (2.57)          (5.32)

                          Nobs          4,869            1,732            6,601              4,709            1,233           5,942
            Table 5: Scaled Change in Variance of Cash-Flow News Around Dividend Events: VAR Robustness

     This table reports robustness results for changes in cash-flow news around dividend events using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we describe in
     Section II. Panel A estimates the VAR with two lags, Panel B estimates the VAR with three lags, and Panel C estimates the VAR with four lags. Our sample
     period is 1964 till 2013.


                                    ∆Div > 0         Initiation       Pooled           ∆Div < 0         Omission         Pooled
                                      (1)                (2)           (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)
                                                                   Panel A. Two-Lags VAR
                                   −17.29%         −27.86%         −20.40%              17.12%          20.23%          18.16%
                                   (−8.45)         (−8.48)        (−11.73)              (6.52)          (5.74)          (8.62)




51
                                                                  Panel B. Three-Lags VAR
                                   −17.52%         −24.02%         −19.43%              16.53%          21.45%          18.18%
                                   (−8.61)         (−7.31)        (−11.22)              (6.35)          (5.93)          (8.60)

                                                                  Panel C. Four-Lags VAR
                                   −18.11%         −23.77%         −19.77%              15.82%          20.88%          17.51%
                                   (−9.11)         (−7.30)        (−11.63)              (6.21)          (5.72)          (8.38)

                         Nobs          2,441           1,069           3,510              2,461           1,233          3,694
            Table 6: Scaled Change in Variance of Cash-Flow News Around Dividend Events: Years Robustness

     This table reports robustness results for changes in cash-flow news around dividend events using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we describe in
     Section II. Panel A estimates the VAR with three years before and after the dividends events and Panel B estimates the VAR with four years before and after
     the dividends events. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.


                                    ∆Div > 0         Initiation       Pooled           ∆Div < 0         Omission         Pooled
                                      (1)                (2)           (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)
                                                                  Panel A. Three-Years VAR
                                   −19.98%         −24.64%         −21.35%              21.30%          29.26%          23.96%




52
                                   (−8.19)         (−6.27)        (−10.29)              (6.47)          (6.56)          (9.03)

                                                                  Panel B. Four-Years VAR
                                   −20.64%         −27.45%         −22.64%              19.26%          24.55%          21.03%
                                   (−9.56)         (−7.57)        (−12.17)              (6.55)          (5.98)          (8.79)

                         Nobs          2,441           1,069           3,510              2,461           1,233          3,694
                Table 7: Scaled Change in Variance of Cash-Flow News Around Dividend Events: Pre-Trends

     This table reports robustness results for changes in cash-flow news around dividend events using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we describe in
     Section II. Panel A estimates the VAR three years before the actual dividends events, Panel B estimates the VAR five years before the actual dividends events,
     and Panel C estimates the VAR ten years before the actual dividends events. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.


                                     ∆Div > 0         Initiation       Pooled           ∆Div < 0          Omission         Pooled
                                       (1)                (2)           (3)               (4)               (5)             (6)
                                                               Panel A. Three-Years Pre-Events
                                       2.50%          −6.72%            0.03%           −5.65%           −8.38%          −6.51%
                                      (0.78)         (−1.40)           (0.01)          (−1.85)          (−1.80)         (−2.55)

                          Nobs          2,097            780            2,877              2,130            1,034           3,163




53
                                                               Panel B. Five-Years Pre-Events
                                       9.10%          −8.15%            3.07%           −8.25%             3.18%         −4.65%
                                      (3.82)         (−1.42)           (1.38)          (−3.76)            (0.83)        (−2.40)

                          Nobs          1,747            558            2,305              1,816             841            2,656

                                                                Panel C. Ten-Years Pre-Events
                                     −0.03%           −5.59%         −1.36%             −1.25%           −5.90%          −3.34%
                                    (−0.01)          (−1.49)        (−0.78)            (−0.71)          (−1.25)         (−1.22)

                          Nobs          1,223            242            1,465              1,288             483            1,770
Table 8: Average Loadings of Firm-Level Cash-Flow News on Market-Wide
News Around Dividend Events

This table reports the average loadings of firm-level cash-flow news on market-wide cash flow news using the
methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we describe in Section II. We use all firms with a dividend event in
a given quarter and value-weight individual firm level cash-flow news to define market cash-flow news. Our sample
period is 1964 till 2013.


                                    ∆Div > 0           Initiation       ∆Div < 0          Omission
                                      (1)                  (2)            (3)               (4)
  Market Cash-Flow News                 0.78             1.10               0.79             0.81
                                       (6.86)           (3.66)             (3.56)           (4.40)




                                                  54
Table 9: Scaled Change in Variance of Cash-Flow News Around Dividend
Events: Sample Split

This table reports changes in cash-flow news around dividend events using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002)
which we describe in Section II. Panel A reports results for the first half of the sample, Panel B reports results for
the second half of the sample, and Panel C reports results for a sample from 2003 until 2013.

              ∆Div > 0        Initiation       Pooled          ∆Div < 0        Omission        Pooled
                (1)               (2)           (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)
                                              Panel A. 1964 – 1988
             −12.53%          −5.72%        −11.10%              8.23%          11.19%          9.36%
             (−6.34)         (−0.80)        (−5.35)             (3.90)          (3.79)         (5.46)

   Nobs          1,155           307            1,462             1,175           533           1,708

                                              Panel B. 1989 – 2013
             −15.47%         −25.83%        −19.32%             16.61%           8.43%         13.16%
             (−6.69)         (−5.27)        (−8.54)             (6.02)          (2.54)         (6.23)
   Nobs          1,286           762            2,048             1,286           700           1,986

                                              Panel C. 2003 – 2013
             −11.31%         −31.85%        −18.84%             20.31%          18.59%         19.58%
             (−2.99)         (−5.27)        (−5.80)             (3.91)          (3.05)         (4.95)

   Nobs           848            491            1,339              609            491           1,100




                                                    55
Table 10: Scaled Change in Variance of Cash-Flow News Around Dividend
Events: Matched Sample

This table reports scaled changes in cash-flow news around dividend events using the methodology of Vuolteenaho
(2002) which we describe in Section II. The table reports scaled changes in the variance of cash-flow news for firms
with dividend events relative to scaled changes in the variance of cash flow news for similar firms without dividend
events. We match firms based on the propensity score using the book-to-market ratio, leverage, age, and size. Our
sample period is 1964 till 2013.

               ∆Div > 0        Initiation      Pooled          ∆Div < 0        Omission      Pooled
                 (1)               (2)          (3)              (4)             (5)          (6)
                 -14.81%        -25.72%       -17.80%            7.25%          5.36%         6.68%
                  (-9.57)        (-5.90)       (-9.89)           (4.32)         (2.27)        (4.87)

     Nobs         2,401           906           3,307            2,419           1,051        3,470




                                                   56
Table 11: Scaled Change in Variance of Cash-Flow News and Announcement
Returns Around Dividend Events: Heterogeneity

This table reports the average change in the variance of cash-flow news scaled by the average variance of cash-flow
news before the event (∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))) using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we
describe in Section II in Panel A and announcement returns in Panel B. The Table splits dividend events by the
size of the dividend change using the dividend change terciles as cutoff excluding the middle tercile. Announcement
returns are cumulative returns in a three-day window bracketing the dividend event. We bootstrap the difference
between large and small changes. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.

                               ∆Div > 0                                             ∆Div < 0
            Large Increase      Small Increase           ∆           Large Cut       Small Cut          ∆
                 (1)                 (2)                (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
                  Panel A. ∆ Scaled Variance Cash-flow News: ∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))
             −21.37%              −7.32%          −14.55%              7.50%           0.38%          8.01%
             (−7.65)             (−2.96)         (−12.30)             (2.65)          (0.13)         (7.44)

 Nobs            814                 814                                820             820

                                            Panel B. Cumulative Returns
                0.80%               0.57%            0.33%           −0.75%          −0.52%         −0.25%
               (8.09)              (8.31)           (5.39)          (−3.66)         (−2.86)        (−2.96)

 Nobs            814                 814                                820             820




                                                   57
                    Table 12: Regression of Changes in Variance of Cash-Flow News Around Dividend Events

     This table reports estimates from the following specification:

                                                 ∆ Var(η cfit ) = α + β1 · ∆Dit + β2 · epsit + β3 · ∆Dit · epsit + δ · Xit + εit .

     We regress changes in the scaled variance of cash-flow news around dividend events using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we describe in Section
     II of firm i at event t, ∆ Var(η cfit ), on the dividend change, ∆Dit , earnings per share, epsit , the interaction between the two, as well as additional covariates,
     Xit , with t-statistics in parentheses. Additional covariates include firm age, size, book-to-market, and financial leverage. We add year and industry fixed effects
     at the Fama & French 17 industry level whenever indicated. We cluster standard errors at the dividend-quarter level. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.


                                    (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)          (8)
        ∆Div                    −0.26           −0.24            −0.37            −0.35            −0.15            −0.14             −0.25       −0.23
                               (−5.55)         (−5.31)          (−5.94)          (−6.06)          (−4.92)          (−4.66)           (−5.01)     (−5.00)
        eps                                     −0.17            −0.12            −0.17                             −0.14             −0.10       −0.11
                                               (−1.56)          (−1.87)          (−2.71)                           (−1.41)           (−1.75)     (−1.76)
        ∆Div × eps                                                 0.24             0.21                                               0.19         0.18
                                                                  (3.12)           (3.19)                                             (2.64)       (2.51)
        Age                                                                         0.00                                                            0.00




58
                                                                                   (1.37)                                                          (1.20)
        Book-to-market                                                             28.21                                                         132.62
                                                                                   (0.33)                                                         (2.41)
        Leverage                                                                  −0.35                                                           −0.14
                                                                                 (−2.54)                                                         (−1.13)
        Size                                                                        0.05                                                            0.01
                                                                                   (3.06)                                                          (1.10)
        Constant                  0.03            0.12             0.08           −0.86
                                 (0.45)          (1.22)           (1.01)         (−2.75)

        Year FE                                                                                         X                X                X            X
        Industry FE                                                                                     X                X                X            X
        R2                        2.06%            2.89%           3.89%            5.11%            30.60%           31.15%           31.80%       32.24%
        Nobs                      3,127            3,127           3,127            3,127             3,127            3,127            3,127        3,127
               Table 13: Regression of Changes in Variance of Cash-Flow News Around Dividend Events
     This table reports estimates from the following specification:

                                              epsit = α + β1 · epsit−1 + β2 · Var(η cfit−1 ) + +δ · Xit + εit .

     We regress earnings per share (epsit ) after dividend events of firm i at event t on earnings per share before dividend events, the volatility
     of cash-flow news (Var(η cfit−1 )) using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we describe in Section II, epsit , as well as additional
     covariates, Xit , with t-statistics in parentheses. Additional covariates include firm age, size, book-to-market, and financial leverage. We add
     year and industry fixed effects at the Fama & French 17 industry level whenever indicated. We cluster standard errors at the dividend-quarter
     level and standardize all covariates. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.


                                (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)               (6)        (7)          (8)
        eps                   0.60                         0.56                              0.59                         0.54
                             (5.09)                       (4.64)                            (5.00)                       (4.53)
        Var(η cf )                        −0.04                         −0.02                             −0.06                      −0.04
                                         (−2.23)                       (−1.18)                           (−2.74)                    (−1.92)




59
        Age                                                0.01            0.03                                           0.02         0.05
                                                          (0.66)          (1.13)                                         (1.15)       (2.05)
        BM                                               −0.02          −0.03                                             0.00       −0.01
                                                        (−0.64)        (−1.02)                                          (−0.03)     (−0.31)
        Leverage                                         −0.01             0.01                                         −0.01        −0.02
                                                        (−0.68)          (0.38)                                         (−0.68)     (−1.04)
        Size                                               0.14           0.28                                             0.14        0.28
                                                          (2.85)        (10.35)                                           (2.98)     (10.24)

        Year FE                                                                                  X              X             X           X
        Industry FE                                                                              X              X             X           X
        R2                     0.36            0.00           0.39          0.10                0.38          0.05           0.40        0.14
        Nobs                   3,127          3,127          3,127          3,127              3,127          3,127         3,127       3,127
                       Table 14: Share Repurchases: Heterogeneity

This table reports the average change in the variance of cash-flow news scaled by the average variance of cash-flow
news before the event (∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))) using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we
describe in Section II in Panel A and announcement returns in Panel B. The Table splits repurchase announcements
by the size of the repurchase using the median repurchase as cutoff. Announcement returns are cumulative returns
in a three-day window bracketing the dividend event. We bootstrap the difference between large and small changes.
Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.


            Baseline        Large Repurchase            Small Repurchase                        ∆
              (1)                  (2)                         (3)                             (4)
            Panel A. ∆ Scaled Variance Cash-flow News: ∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))
          −14.79%              −18.05%                    −11.54%                         −5.39%
          (−6.51)              (−5.65)                    (−3.56)                       (−13.19)

 Nobs         2,662                 1,331                     1,331

                                            Panel B. Cumulative Returns
             1.91%                 2.62%                      1.19%                         1.41%
           (12.11)               (10.15)                     (6.68)                       (36.01)

 Nobs         2,662                 1,331                     1,331




                                                   60
Table 15: Sample split by Idiosyncratic Volatility: Scaled Change in Variance
of Cash-Flow News and Announcement Returns Around Dividend Events

This table reports the average change in the variance of cash-flow news scaled by the average variance of cash-flow
news before the event (∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))) using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we
describe in Section II in Panel A and announcement returns in Panel B. The table splits firms by their ex ante
idiosyncratic volatility using terciles as cutoff excluding the middle tercile. Specifically, we first calculate a firms’
ex ante idiosyncratic volatility on a four-quarter rolling basis relative to a Fama & French three-factor model using
daily data. Announcement returns are cumulative returns in a three-day window bracketing the dividend event. We
bootstrap the difference between large and small changes. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.

                              ∆Div > 0                                          ∆Div < 0
               Large Vol       Small Vol           ∆             Large Vol       Small Vol           ∆
                  (1)            (2)              (3)               (4)            (5)              (6)
                Panel A. ∆ Scaled Variance Cash-flow News: ∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))
             −19.23%         −10.96%          −8.22%             11.90%            4.52%          6.36%
             (−6.50)         (−4.72)         (−6.92)             (2.31)           (3.51)         (4.67)

   Nobs           752             872                               824             814

                              ∆Div > 0                                          ∆Div < 0
               Large Vol       Small Vol           ∆             Large Vol       Small Vol           ∆
                  (1)            (2)              (3)               (4)            (5)              (6)
                                         Panel B. Announcement Returns
                0.83%            0.66%          0.19%            −0.88%          −0.78%         −0.15%
               (4.12)           (5.07)         (2.65)           (−4.47)         (−3.21)        (−2.25)

   Nobs           752             872                               824             814




                                                        61
Table 16: Sample Split by Book-to-Market: Scaled Change in Variance of Cash-
Flow News and Announcement Returns Around Dividend Events

This table reports the average change in the variance of cash-flow news scaled by the average variance of cash-flow
news before the event (∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))) using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we
describe in Section II in Panel A and announcement returns in Panel B. The table splits firms by their book-
to-market ratio using using terciles as cutoff excluding the middle tercile. Announcement returns are cumulative
returns in a three-day window bracketing the dividend event. We bootstrap the difference between large and small
changes. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.

                             ∆Div > 0                                      ∆Div < 0
               Low BM        High BM            ∆            Low BM        High BM             ∆
                 (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
               Panel A. ∆ Scaled Variance Cash-flow News: ∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))
             −16.61%        −11.85%           5.45%           9.89%          6.86%        −2.84%
             (−6.30)        (−4.46)           (6.80)         (3.51)         (2.31)       (−3.91)

    Nobs          812           813                             819           819

                             ∆Div > 0                                      ∆Div < 0
               Low BM        High BM            ∆            Low BM        High BM             ∆
                 (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
                                       Panel B. Announcement Returns
                0.62%          0.96%         0.33%           −1.01%        −0.55%           0.47%
               (4.08)         (5.46)        (6.47)          (−4.44)       (−3.05)          (7.75)

    Nobs          812           813                             819           819




                                                     62
         Online Appendix:
         Signaling Safety
Roni Michaely, Stefano Rossi, and Michael Weber

              Not for Publication




                       1
I    Theoretical Appendices
In this Section we present our theoretical proofs. Appendix A solves the signaling model
of Section VA. Appendix B states and proves the main comparative statics results of
the signaling model. Appendix C presents an example with the log production function.
Appendix D verifies that the six assumptions given by Riley (1979) for signaling games
hold in our framework. Henceforth we refer to the best separating equilibrium outcome
discussed in the text as the “Riley outcome”. Appendix E verifies that the assumptions
of Theorem 1, Theorem 2 and Corollary of Mailath (1987) hold for our signaling model,
which implies that the Riley outcome is the unique separating equilibrium of our model.
Appendix F verifies that the assumptions of Theorem 1 of Esö and Schummer (2009) hold
for our signaling model, which implies that the Riley outome is the unique equilibrium
that survives the “credible deviations” refinement (Esö and Schummer (2009); see also
Cho and Sobel (1990) and Ramey (1996)). Appendix G states Theorem 1, Theorem 2 and
Corollary of Mailath (1987). Appendix H states Theorem 1 of Esö and Schummer (2009).
Appendix I considers the baseline setting, both with a general Arrow-Pratt certainty
equivalent formulation and in the CARA special case. Appendix J considers the additive
formulation of the agency model. Appendix K studies the multiplicative formulation of
the agency model. Appendix L extends the signaling and agency models to formally
include investment opportunities.


A.    Solving the Signaling Model

Assume we can associate to each level of variance σ 2 a level of dividends D1 that solves
the optimization problem of the manager. We write this correspondence as σ 2 (D1 ). If
σ 2 (D1 ) is single-valued and if the market is rational, we get the following condition,


                         V s (D1 ) = V h (σ 2 (D1 ), D1 ) = V h (σ 2 , D1 ).




                                                 2
     We then obtain

                                                               a
                  V s (−σ 2 (D1 ), D1 ) = D1 + f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 (D1 )),
                                                               2
                         h      2                              a 2
                       V (−σ , D1 ) = D1 + f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ ).
                                                               2

     Valuation schedules that satisfy the conditions above and solve the maximization
problem of the manager are termed “informationally consistent price functions” (Riley
(1979)). To find the Pareto-dominant schedule, we start from the boundary condition
                                                             2
that the worst firm that has the highest variance, that is, σmax , will choose the same
optimal dividend D1 as it would in the full-information case, so that

                                                    a
                            1 − f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1? − σ 2 ) = 0
                                                    2
                                                 σ (D1 ? ) = σmax
                                                  2           2
                                                                  .


     Because V s (D1 ) = V h (σ 2 (D1 ), D1 ) = V h (σ 2 , D1 ), the first-order condition is

        h       2              ∂(−σ 2 )
      kV−σ 2 (−σ (D1 ), D1 )            + kVdh (−σ 2 (D1 ), D1 ) + (1 − k)Vdh (−σ 2 , D1 ) = 0.
                                ∂D1

     Given σ 2 (D1 ) = σ 2 , the first-order condition is equivalent to the condition

                         h       2              ∂(−σ 2 )
                       kV−σ 2 (−σ (D1 ), D1 )            + Vdh (−σ 2 , D1 ) = 0;
                                                 ∂D1

that is,

                            a        ka 0                 a             ∂σ 2 (D1 )
      1 − f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 ) −    · f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 (D1 )) ·            = 0.
                            2         2                   2               ∂D1

     Then the ordinary differential equation (ODE) together with the boundary condition
above uniquely determine the schedule. The worst firm type with the highest variance,
 2
σmax , sets dividends D1? as in the first-best, full-information case. As variance decreases,
firms pay more dividends and forego more investment opportunities. Therefore, relative
to the first-best case with full information, the signaling equilibrium features excessive



                                                   3
dividend payment and under-investment. Figure 2 illustrates the equilibrium.
     We can establish the relevant solution informally by checking the second-order
conditions for a maximum of the optimization problem of the manager

                             ∂(−σ 2 )
                                                                                 
   ∂     h      2                          h   2                       h   2
       kV−σ2 (−σ (D1 ), D1 )          + kVd (−σ (D1 ), D1 ) + (1 − k)Vd (−σ , D1 ) < 0.
  ∂D1                         ∂D1

     Substituting the first-order condition leads to a simple condition guaranteeing a
maximum,
                                    h     2      ∂σ 2
                                 −Vdσ 2 (σ , D1 )     < 0.
                                                ∂D1
               h     2         a 00               a
     Because Vdσ 2 (σ , D1 ) =   f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 ) < 0, a maximum occurs if and only
                               2                  2
   ∂σ 2
if      < 0. The relevant solution must lie on the right-hand side of the red line in Figure
   ∂D1
2 where higher dividends are associated with a lower variance of cash flow. Thus, only
dividends that exceed D1? are optimal. This solution is the Riley equilibrium outcome. In
the Appendix, we show this equilibrium is the unique separating equilibrium of our game,
by applying the results of Mailath (1987), and we show it is the unique equilibrium that
survives standard refinement concepts for this class of games (Esö and Schummer (2009);
see also Ramey (1996) and Cho and Sobel (1990)).
     In this model, dividends are a signal to the market about the cash-flow volatility.
Because managers care about short-term investors, they would like to signal that their
cash flows have low volatility and therefore higher value. For this signal to be credible,
it must be costly. To prevent imitation and thus generate a separating equilibrium, the
signal must be costlier for low types than for high types. This conclusion follows from the
concavity of the production function, because riskier firms have more to lose in terms of
foregone investment if they pay a larger dividend in an attempt to imitate safer firms.


B.    Proof of Comparative Statics

Here we state and prove the main comparative statics.
    Prediction 1 (signaling - time series). The dividend changes should be followed
                                                                          ∂σ 2 (D1 )
by changes in future cash flow volatility in the opposite direction, i.e.            <0
                                                                            ∂D1


                                             4
Proof. The proof is immediately given in the analysis of the schedules in the main text.
    Combining the FOC and SOC of the manager’s optimization problem we get a simple
condition guaranteeing a maximum

                                      h     2         ∂σ 2
                                  − Vdσ 2 (σ , D1 )        <0                       (A.1)
                                                      ∂D1

           h     2         a 00              a
    With Vdσ 2 (σ , D1 ) =   f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 ) < 0, a maximum occurs if and only if
                           2                 2
∂σ 2
     < 0.
∂D1

    Prediction 2 (signaling - cross-section). Following a dividend increase (re.
decrease), there’s a larger decrease (re. increase) in cash flow volatility for firms with
                                            ∂ 2 σ(D1 )
smaller (re. larger) current earnings, i.e.            >0
                                            ∂D1 ∂Y
Proof. Recall the FOC,



        0              a 2    ka 0                 a 2         ∂σ 2 (D1 )
   1 − f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ ) −    · f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ (D1 )) ·            = 0,      (A.2)
                       2       2                   2             ∂D1

    we get
                                                             a
                      ∂σ 2 (D1 )      1 − f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 )
                                 =                           2                      (A.3)
                        ∂D1        ka 0                    a 2
                                       · f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ (D1 ))
                                    2                      2
Then


                                                              a
                                      1 − f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 ) 
                                ∂                             2
                                   ka 0                     a 2
                ∂ 2 σ 2 (D1 )          · f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ (D1 ))
                              =     2                       2
                 ∂D1 ∂Y                             ∂Y
                                                           a
                                      2f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 (D1 ))
                              = −                          2          i2 > 0
                                         h
                                             0
                                                              a 2
                                  k · a · f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ (D1 )
                                                              2

because f 00 < 0.



                                              5
C.    An Example
                                             a 2                       a
For this example, define f (ω1 + Y − D1 −      · σ ) = ln(ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ 2 ).
                                             2                         2
     The ODE (i.e. FOC)

                       a             ka 0                 a             ∂σ 2 (D1 )
 1 − f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 (D1 )) −    · f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 (D1 )) ·            = 0 (A.4)
                       2              2                   2               ∂D1

becomes
                                                          a
                          ∂σ 2 (D1 )   2(ω1 + Y − D1 − 1 − σ 2 )
                                     =                    2      .                    (A.5)
                            ∂D1                  k·a
Together with the boundary condition which says the worst type chooses the dividend
such that σ 2 (D1? ) = σmax
                        2
                            , we get the solution to this problem,

                               a                                                 a
                                                     2
             2(ω1 + Y − 1 − σ 2 )D1 − D12 + a · k · σmax + D1?2 − 2(ω1 + Y − 1 − σ 2 )D1?
 σ 2 (D1 ) =                   2                                                 2
                                                 k·a
                                                                                     (A.6)
                                                             2               2 2
                                                          ∂σ (D1 )          ∂ σ (D1 )
      where D1 ≥ D1? . It is then immediate to check that           < 0 and           > 0.
                                                            ∂D1              ∂D1 ∂Y

D.     Proof of Riley (1979) conditions

This Section shows that our signaling model of Sections IIB-IID satisfies the Riley (1979)
conditions for signaling games. Proof. Let


                        W = k · V s + (1 − k) · V h
                                                   a         
                        V s = D1 + f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ 2 (D1 )
                                                    2
                                                   a    
                        V h = D1 + f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ 2
                                                    2

so that

                              a 2                                 a 2
   W = D1 + k · f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ (D1 ) + (1 − k) · f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ .
                               2                                     2

     Riley (1979) assumptions:
     A1. The unobservable attribute, σ 2 , is distributed on [σmin
                                                               2      2
                                                                   , σmax ] according to a


                                              6
strictly increasing distribution function
     A2. The functions W (·), V h (·) are infinitely differentiable in all variables
             ∂W
     A3.     ∂V s
                    >0
                                            ∂V h (−σ 2 ,D1 )
     A4. V h (−σ 2 , D1 ) > 0;                 ∂(−σ 2 )
                                                               >0
                  ∂W 
            ∂     − ∂D
     A5. ∂(−σ2 )     ∂W
                        1
                           <0
                          ∂V s
                                     
     A6. W −σ ; D1 , V h (−σ 2 , D1 ) has a unique maximum over D1 .
                     2



     Assumptions A1-A4 are immediate.
     ConditionA5 isalso known as the “single crossing condition” of signaling games and
                      ∂W
          ∂       − ∂D
is that ∂(−σ 2)     ∂W
                        1
                             < 0.
                   ∂V s
     ∂W             0                  a     2
                                               
     ∂D1
          = 1   − f    ω  1 + Y − D1 − 2
                                         · σ
     ∂W
     ∂V s
            = k.
     Hence:

                               ∂W
                                        !                                                               !
                 ∂           − ∂D 1
                                                   ∂              −1 + f 0 ω1 + Y − D1 −     a
                                                                                             2
                                                                                                 · σ2
                                 ∂W
                                              =
              ∂ (−σ 2 )          ∂V s
                                                ∂ (−σ 2 )                         k
                                                    a · f 00   ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2
                                                                                      
                                              =                                         <0
                                                                     2k

because f 00 (·) < 0.

     Condition A6 requires that V h (−σ 2 , D1 ) has a unique maximum over D1 , which it
does at the point D1? such that

                                                            a     
                                            f 0 ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ 2 = 1                                      (A.7)
                                                             2

with the S.O.C. f 00 ω1 + Y − D1 −                     a
                                                                
                                                       2
                                                           · σ 2 < 0 satisfied.
     Because the Riley conditions are satisfied, we refer to the separating equilibrium of
Section IIC in the main text as the ”Riley equilibrium” and to the separating equilibrium
outcome of Section IIC in the main text as the ”Riley outcome”.




                                                                    7
E.    Uniqueness of the Separating Equilibrium

This section shows that the Riley equilibrium is the unique separating equilibrium of our
model.
     According to Theorem 1, Theorem 2 and Corollary in Mailath (1987) (see Appendix
D), if the payoff function satisfies Mailath (1987)’s conditions (1)-(5) and the single
crossing condition (7), together with the initial value condition (6), then the Riley
equilibrium is the unique separating equilibrium solution.
     To begin with, in the dividend framework, the set of possible types is the interval
  2
[σmin    2
      , σmax ] ⊂ R and the set of possible actions is R. Let τ −1 (D1 ) = σ 2 (D1 ) where
      2
τ : [σmin    2
          , σmax ] → R is the proposed equilibrium one-to-one strategy.
     Recall that


                           W = k · V s + (1 − k) · V h
                                                      a         
                           V s = D1 + f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ 2 (D1 )
                                                       2
                             h
                                                      a  2
                                                            
                           V   = D1 + f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ
                                                       2

so the expected payoff function is

                    2      2
                                                                  a 2       
            W −σ , −σ (D1 ), D1          = D1 + k · f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ (D1 )
                                                                    2
                                                                     a     
                                           +(1 − k) · f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ 2
                                                                      2

     As we already shown σ 2 (D1 ) (i.e., τ −1 (D1 )) solves the optimization problem, it
satisfies incentive compatibility:
     (IC)     τ (σ 2 ) ∈  argmax          W (−σ 2 , −τ −1 (D1 ) , D1 ) , ∀σ 2 ∈ [σmin
                                                                                  2      2
                                                                                      , σmax ]
                     D1 ∈τ ([σmin ,σmax ])
                              2     2

     Mailath (1987)’s regularity conditions on the payoff function W ,

                                                                    ] × R (smoothness)
                                                                     2
              (1) W (−σ 2 , −σ 2 (D1 ), D1 ) is C 2 on [σmin
                                                         2      2
                                                             , σmax
              (2) W2 never equals zero, and so is either positive or negative (belief
      monotonicity)
              (3) W13 never equals zero, and so is either positive or negative (type
      monotonicity)

                                                  8
                  (4) W3 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 ) = 0 has a unique solution in D1 , denoted φ (σ 2 ),
        which maximizes W (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 ), and W33 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , φ (σ 2 )) < 0 (“strict”
        quasi-concavity)
                  (5) there exists k > 0 such that for all (−σ 2 , D1 ) ∈ [σmin
                                                                            2      2
                                                                                , σmax ] × R,
        W33 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 ) ≥ 0 ⇒| W3 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 ) |> k (boundedness)
        The other two conditions which play a role in what follows are
                  (6) τ (σw2 ) = φ (σw2 ), where σw2 = σmax
                                                        2                  2
                                                            if W2 > 0 and σmin if W2 < 0 (initial
        value)
                        W3 (−σ 2 ,−σ 2 (D1 ),D1 )
                  (7)   W2 (−σ 2 ,−σ 2 (D1 ),D1 )
                                                    is a strictly monotonic function of −σ 2 (single crossing).

     Condition (1) is satisfied because it is obvious that W (−σ 2 , −σ 2 (D1 ), D1 ) is C 2 on
             ] × R.
  2      2    2
[σmin , σmax
     Condition (2) is satisfied because W2 is always negative and will never be zero.

                                ∂W           k·a 0                a 2        
                   W2 =                    =    f   ω1 + Y − D 1 −   · σ (D1 )  >0                       (A.8)
                             ∂(−σ 2 (D1 ))    2                    2
since f 0 (·) > 0.
     Condition (3) is satisfied because W13 < 0 is always negative and will never equal
zero.

                                      ∂W
                                    ∂(−σ 2 )
                         W13      =
                                      ∂D1
                                    (1 − k) · a 0
                                               f ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2
                                                                        
                                  =     2
                                                     ∂D1
                                    −(1 − k) · a 00               a      
                                  =             f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ 2 > 0
                                         2                         2

since f 00 (·) < 0.
     Condition (4) is satisfied because f 0 (·) is monotonic with f 00 (·) < 0.


                                                       W3 −σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1
                                                                             
                                                                                 = 0

                                                                 ⇐⇒
                                                              a 2
                                     1 − f0       ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ = 0
                                                               2
                                                              9
     Since f 0 (·) > 0 is monotonic, W3 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 ) = 0 has a unique solution in D1 ,
denoted φ(σ 2 ). It is easy to show that φ(σ 2 ) also maximizes W (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 ).
    W (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 ) = D1 + f ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2
                                                          

     To find the optimal D1 that maximizes W (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 ), the F.O.C. is
W3 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 )       =     0 which is already shown above and the S.O.C. is
W33 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 ) < 0 which is shown below,

                                                       ∂W3
                   W33 −σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1
                                                 
                                                     =
                                                       ∂D1
                                                       1 − f 0 ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2
                                                                                      
                                                     =
                                                                    ∂D1
                                                                         a      
                                                     = f 00 ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ 2 < 0
                                                                          2
                            since f 00 (·) < 0.


     Condition (5) is satisfied because if for all (−σ 2 , D1 ) ∈ [σmin
                                                                    2      2
                                                                        , σmax ] × R,
W33 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 ) ≥ 0 then there exist some k > 0 such that | W3 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 ) |> k.




                                                 W33 −σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1
                                                                        
                                                                            ≥ 0

                                                              ⇐⇒
                                                           a     
                                    f 00       ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ 2 ≥ 0
                                                            2

    Thus, to maximize the expected payoff function, the manager will never choose D1?
where D1? is the solution of 1 − f 0 ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2 = 0. The reason is that D1? (σ 2 )
                                                           

will minimize the expected utility payoff function instead of maximizing it.



                   0
                                       a 2         0
                                                       
                                                                ?  a 2
     W3 = 1 − f            ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ 6= 1 − f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ = 0               (A.9)
                                        2                          2

     Thus, | W3 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 ) |> 0. It means we can always find some k > 0 such that
| W3 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 , D1 ) |> k.
     The next step is to show that both the initial value condition and the single crossing


                                                          10
condition hold.
     Condition (6) holds because W2 < 0, in the solution proposed the worst-type firm
                                                                          2          2
behaves as if it is in the full information case in equilibrium, i.e. τ (σmax ) = φ(σmax ).
     Condition (7) holds because



                  2    2
                                                  0
                                                               a 2         
        W3 −σ , −σ (D1 ), D1 = 1 − k · f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ (D1 )
                                                                2
                                        k·a 0                  a 2          ∂(−σ 2 (D ))
                                                                                       1
                                      +     f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ (D1 )
                                          2                     2                 ∂D1
                                                                  a       
                                      −(1 − k) · f 0 ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ 2
                                                                   2
                                           ∂W
        W2 −σ 2 , −σ 2 (D1 ), D1 =
                                  
                                      ∂(−σ 2 (D1 ))
                                      k·a 0                  a           
                                    =      f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ 2 (D1 )
                                       2                      2
               2      2
        W3 (−σ , −σ (D1 ), D1 )
      ∂
                                        a 2(1 − k) f 00 ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2 (D1 )
                                                                                     
        W2 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 (D1 ), D1 )
Then,                               = − ·
                                              k · a f 0 ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2 (D1 )
                                                                                    
              ∂(−σ 2 )                  2
                                        1 − k f 00 ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2 (D1 )
                                                                                
                                    = −        · 0                              >0
                                          k      f ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2 (D1 )

           W3 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 (D1 ), D1 )
     Thus                              is a strictly increasing function of (−σ 2 ).
           W2 (−σ 2 , −σ 2 (D1 ), D1 )
     Since Mailath (1987)’s conditions (1)-(7) are satisfied, the Riley equilibrium is the
unique separating equilibrium of our model.


F.    Equilibrium Refinement and Uniqueness

In this Section we want to show that our game belongs to the class of monotonic signaling
games discussed in Section 3 of Esö and Schummer (2009), (see also Cho and Sobel (1990)
and Ramey (1996)) and thus we can apply theorem 1 of Esö and Schummer (2009) to
show that in this game the Riley equilibrium (i.e., the unique separating equilibrium as
per above) is also the unique equilibrium that is immune to Credible Deviations.
     First, let’s check the 5 assumptions of Esö and Schummer (2009), A1 to A5, one by
one. The firm (Sender) with variance σ 2 (type) decides to pay D1 (signal). The investors



                                              11
(receivers) in the market buy the share of the firm at price V s (D1 ) in the belief that the
dividend D1 reflect the value of the firm as a function of the unobserved variance, which
can be denoted as σ 2 (D1 ).
     A1. W (−σ 2 , D1 , V s (D1 )) is strictly increasing in V s (D1 ) for all (−σ 2 , D1 ). In
order to avoid solutions involving arbitrarily large messages and actions we assume that
limD1 →∞ W (−σ 2 , D1 , V s (D1 )) = −∞.
Proof.
                                ∂W (−σ 2 , D1 , V s (D1 ))
                                                           =k>0
                                     ∂V s (D1 )


     A2. Assume that V s (D1 ) is such that, for any type σ 2 and message D1 , the Receiver
has a unique best response, i.e. that BR(−σ 2 , D1 ) is a singleton.
Proof. Since the investors (Receivers) act as price takers, they purchase the shares of
the firm at the price V s (D1 ). Their best response BR(−σ 2 , D1 ) is a singleton {V s (D1 ) :
V s (D1 ) = V h (D1 )}.
     A3. Assume that V s (D1 ) is strictly increasing in (−σ 2 (D1 ) for all (D1 , V s ).
Proof.

                        ∂V s       a 0               a
                         2
                                 =   f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 (D1 )) > 0.
                     ∂(−σ (D1 ))   2                 2

In particular,

                           ∂V h    a 0               a
                               2
                                 =   f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 ) > 0.
                          ∂(−σ )   2                 2



     Together with monotonicity, A3 captures the idea that the manager (Sender) wants
to induce the investors (Receivers) to buy the firm at a larger price by trying to convince
them that the firm type is better (its variance is lower).
     A4. Assume the game satisfies the central assumption in Spencian signaling games,
the single crossing condition, that −(∂W/∂D1 )/(∂W/∂(V s (D1 ))) is strictly decreasing in
−σ 2 .


                                               12
Proof. According to the proof of Riley (1979)’s assumption A5 (see Appendix A), this
assumption obviously holds.
     A5. Assume that W (−σ 2 , D1 , V h (D1 )) is strictly quasi-concave in D1 .
Proof. Similar with the proof of Mailath (1987)’s condition (4) (see Appendix B), this
assumption obviously holds. In detail,


                W (−σ 2 , D1 , V h (D1 )) = V h (D1 )
                                                               a     
                                          = D1 + f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ 2 .
                                                                2

We have

              ∂W (−σ 2 , D1 , V h (D1 ))        0
                                                             a 2
                                         = 1 − f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ = 0
                       ∂D1                                    2

has a unique solution and

               ∂ 2 W (−σ 2 , D1 , V h (D1 ))     00
                                                                    a 2
                                             = f      ω 1 + Y − D1 −   · σ < 0.
                          ∂D12                                       2

Thus, W (−σ 2 , D1 , V h (D1 )) is strictly quasi-concave in D1 .
     Thus, our game satisfies the assumptions of monotonic signaling games discussed
in Esö and Schummer (2009). As a result, the Riley outcome is the unique equilibrium
outcome that is immune to Credible Deviations.


G.     Mailath (1987)

This Section states results in Mailath (1987) that are used above.
     Suppose the set of possible types is the interval [m, M ] ⊂ R and the set of possible
actions is R. If τ : [m, M ] → R is an equilibrium one-to-one strategy for the informed
agent, then when he chooses y ∈ τ ([m, M ]) the uninformed agents infer his type is τ −1 (y).
Thus, his expected payoff is U (α, τ −1 (y) , y). Furthermore, τ is an optimal strategy for the
informed agent, so that τ (α) maximizes the expected payoff. So, for τ to be a separating
equilibrium strategy it must be one-to-one and satisfy incentive compatibility (IC):



                                               13
     (IC)    τ (α) ∈ argmax U (α, τ −1 (y) , y) , ∀α ∈ [m, M ]
                        y∈τ ([m,M ])
If U (α, τ −1 (y), y) has no other maximizer for y ∈ τ ([m, M ]) for all α ∈ [m, M ], then τ
satisfies strict incentive compatibility (SIC), i.e.,
     (SIC) τ (α) = argmax U (α, τ −1 (y) , y) ∀α ∈ [m, M ].
                         y∈τ ([m,M ])
The regularity conditions on U are (where subscripts denote partial derivatives):

             (1) U (α, α̂, y) is C 2 on [m, M ]2 × R (smoothness)
             (2) U2 never equals zero, and so is either positive or negative (belief
      monotonicity)
             (3) U13 never equals zero, and so is either positive or negative (type
      monotonicity)
             (4) U3 (α, α, y) = 0 has a unique solution in y, denoted φ (α), which
      maximizes U (α, α, y), and U33 (α, α, φ (α)) < 0 (“strict” quasi-concavity)
             (5) there exists k > 0 such that for all (α, y) ∈ [m, M ] × R U33 (α, α, y) ≥
      0 ⇒| U3 (α, α, y) |> k (boundedness)
      The other two conditions which play a role in what follows are
             (6) τ (αw ) = φ (αw ), where αw = M if U2 < 0 and m if U2 > 0 (initial value)
                   U3 (α,α̂,y)
             (7)   U2 (α,α̂,y)
                                 is a strictly monotonic function of α (single crossing)

Theorem 1 Suppose (1) - (5) are satisfied and τ : [m, M ] → R is one-to-one and satisfies
incentive compatibility. Then τ has at most one discontinuity on [m, M ], and where it is
                                                                 dτ      −U2 (α, α, τ )
continuous on (m,M), it is differentiable and satisfies (DE)         =                  .
                                                                 dα       U3 (α, α, τ )
Furthermore, if τ is discontinuous at a point, α0 say, then τ is strictly increasing on one
of [m, α0 ) or (α0 , M ] and strictly decreasing on the other, and the jump at α0 is of the
same sign as U13 .

Theorem 2 Suppose, in addition, that either the initial value condition or the single
crossing condition for (α̂, y) in the graph of τ is satisfied. Then τ is strictly monotonic
on (m, M ) and hence continuous and satisfies the differential equation (DE) there. If the
                                                                                  dτ
initial value condition is satisfied, then in fact τ is continuous on [m, M ] and    has the
                                                                                  dα
same sign as U13 .



                                                    14
     The following corollary shows that incentive compatibility and the initial value
condition together imply uniqueness. Let τ̃ denote the unique solution to the following
restricted initial value problem: (DE), τ (αw ) = φ(αw ) and (dτ /dα)U13 > 0.
     Corollary: suppose (1)-(5) are satisfied and the initial value condition holds. If τ
satisfies incentive compatibility, then τ = τ̃ .


H.     Esö and Schummer (2009)

This Section states results in Esö and Schummer (2009) that are used above.
     Define the Sender-Receiver game which is denoted by the tuple (Θ, π, uS , uR ). The
Sender has private information that is summarized by his type θ ∈ Θ = {θ1 , θ2 , · · · , θn } ⊂
R, where θ1 < θ2 < · · · < θn . The commonly known prior probability that the Sender’s
type is θ is π(θ). Upon realizing his type, the Sender chooses a message m ∈ R+ . A
strategy for the Sender is a function M : Θ → R+ . The Sender and Receiver receive
respective payoffs of uS (θ, m, a) and uR (θ, m, a), which are both continuously differentiable
in (m, a).
     The Receiver’s (posterior) beliefs upon receiving the Sender’s message is a function
µ : R+ → ∆(Θ), where ∆(Θ) refers to the set of probability distributions on Θ. For
any message m ∈ R+ and any fixed (posterior belief) distribution π̃ ∈ ∆(Θ), denote the
Receiver’s best responses to m (given π̃) by BR(π̃, m) ≡ argmaxa∈R E [uR (θ, m, a) | π̃].


Formalizing Credible Deviations

Definition 1 (Vulnerability to a Credible Deviation) Given an equilibrium (M, A, µ), we
say that an out-of-equilibrium message m ∈ R+ \M (Θ) is a Credible Deviation if the
following condition holds for exact one (non-empty) set of types C ⊆ Θ.


                        C = {θ ∈ Θ : u?S (θ) <       min   uS (θ, m, a)}                (A.10)
                                                   a∈BR(C,m)


We call C the (unique) Credible Deviators’ Club for message m. If such a message exits,
the equilibrium is Vulnerable to a Credible Deviation.




                                               15
Monotonic Signaling Games and the Uniqueness of the Equilibrium

Following Cho and Sobel (1990) and Ramey (1996), monotonic signaling games are defined
as follows,
    A1. uS (θ, m, a) is strictly increasing in a for all (θ, m). One can think of a as some
sort of compensation for the Sender. In order to avoid solutions involving arbitrarily large
messages and actions we assume that limm→∞ uS (θ, m, a) = −∞.
    A2. Assume that uR is such that, for any type θ and message m, the Receiver
has a unique best response, i.e. that BR(θ, m) is a singleton. We denote this action as
{β(θ, m)} ≡ BR(θ, m) and β(θ, m) is uniformly bounded from above.
    A3. Assume that BR(π̃, m) is greater for beliefs that are greater in the first-order
stochastic sense, and in particular, β(θ, m) is strictly increasing in θ for all (m, a) (Cho
and Sobel 1990, p. 392).
    A4. Assume the game satisfies the central assumption in Spencian signaling games,
the single crossing condition, that −(∂uS /∂m)/(∂uS /∂a) is strictly decreasing in θ.
    A5. Assume that uS (θ, m, β(θ, m)) is strictly quasi-concave in m.
    An additional piece of notation simplifies the exposition. For any θ and m, let â(θ, m)
be the action to satisfy,
                                uS (θ, m, â(θ, m)) = u?S (θ)                        (A.11)

if such an action exists, and denote â(θ, m) = ∞ otherwise. This action by the Receiver
would give Sender-type θ his equilibrium payoff after sending m. If such an action exists,
it is unique by monotonicity.
    Lemma 3 If an equilibrium (M, A, µ) is not Vulnerable to Credible Deviations, it is
a separating equilibrium - no two types send the same message.
    Lemma 4 Any equilibrium whose outcome is different from the Riley outcome is
Vulnerable to Credible Deviations.
    Theorem The Riley outcome is the unique equilibrium outcome that is not Vulnerable
to Credible Deviations.




                                             16
I.       Baseline Setting: General Case and CARA Special Case

In the baseline setting, the manager chooses the dividend payment to maximize


                                            max D1 + E [Y2 ]
                                             D1

                                            subject to

                                            Y2 = f (I1 ) + ν

                                            D1 ≤ ω1 ,


which implies, assuming for illustration that the second constraint is slack, D1 < ω1 ,

                                                    a 2
                             max D1 + f ω1 + Y − D1 − · σ ,
                              D1                     2

where E [Y2 ] = E [f (I1 ) + ν] = f ω1 + Y − D1 −         a
                                                                   
                                                          2
                                                              · σ 2 and a is the certainty equivalent
coefficient in the sense of Arrow-Pratt. We begin by assuming that the Arrow-Pratt
coefficient is scale-invariant, i.e., a (I1∗ ) ≡ a, for clarity of illustration, which is the case
for exponential production functions. Later in this section we analyze the general case.
         To understand this formulation, note that in our framework, randomness in Y reduces
the expected profits if the function f (.) is concave, in which case the firm is essentially
risk averse with respect to fluctuations in Y , in the precise sense that E [f (Y )] < f (E [Y ]),
that is, Jensen’s inequality.1 The first-order condition is 1−f 0 ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2 ≥ 0.
                                                                                          

Prediction 1 (baseline). The following result is straightforward:

                                           ∂σ 2    2
                                                = − < 0.
                                           ∂D1     a

         Larger dividends should be associated with subsequent lower cash-flow volatility.
Because managers pay dividends before the cash flows are realized, managers take into
account, in a certainty-equivalence sense, that paying higher dividends will increase the
probability of foregoing future investment opportunities, as the (expected) volatility of
cash flows increases. This prediction follows from the precautionary savings motive,
     1
    This insight exactly parallels the one in Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1993) about conditions under
which risk management increases firm value. See also Rampini and Viswanathan (2013).


                                                   17
because in our setting lower dividends directly translate in higher cash balances available
for future investment.2
       This stylized model already delivers the main hypothesis of our paper; that is,
dividend changes should be followed by changes in cash-flow volatility in the opposite
direction. We now consider the more general case, a = a (I1∗ ). Recall the manager’s
maximization problem is,


                                       max       D1 + E [Y2 ]
                                        D1

                                                 s.t.

                                                 Y2 = f (I1 ) + ν

                                                 D1 ≤ ω1


We can rewrite D1 + E(Y2 ) as


        D1 + E(Y2 ) = D1 + E(f (I1 ) + ν)

                       = D1 + E(f (ω1 + Y1 − D1 ))                  (since E(ν) = 0)

                       = D1 + E(f (ω1 + Y + ν − D1 ))               (since E(Y1 ) = f (I0 ) = Y )

                      a
Let f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 ) = E [f (ω1 + Y + ν − D1 )]. By first order Taylor expansion of
                      2
the left-hand side (LHS),

                          a                                               a
          f (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 ) ≈ f (ω1 + Y − D1 ) + f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 )(− σ 2 )
                          2                                               2

By second order Taylor expansion of the right-hand side (RHS),


  f (ω1 + Y + ν − D1 ) = f (ω1 + Y − D1 + ν)
                                                                                f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 ) 2
                            ≈ f (ω1 + Y − D1 ) + f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 )ν +                             ν
                                                                                          2
   2
    Together with Jensen’s inequality, this equivalence between cash balances and the negative of cash
payouts implies that lower cash-flow volatility will eventually result in higher investment and cash flows
at Time 2. In a richer model with a wedge between cash holdings and cash payouts, this prediction would
no longer necessarily hold.




                                                   18
          Taking expectation in both sides, obtain

                                                                                        f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 )
          E [f (ω1 + Y + ν − D1 )] ≈ f (ω1 + Y − D1 ) + f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 )E(ν) +                            E(ν 2 )
                                                                                                  2
                                                          f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 )
                                     = f (ω1 + Y − D1 ) +                     E(ν 2 )     (since E(ν) = 0)
                                                                    2
                                                          f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 ) 2
                                     = f (ω1 + Y − D1 ) +                     σ
                                                                    2

                                                                                   f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 )
          Comparing Taylor expansions of LHS and RHS, we obtain a(Y, D1 ) = −                          .
                                                                                   f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 )
          It is not only a function of Y , but also a function of D1 . Therefore, D1 + E(Y2 ) can be
                                                a(Y, D1 ) 2
          expressed as D1 + f (ω1 + Y − D1 −             σ ). The F.O.C. of the problem is
                                                    2

                                   a(Y, D1 ) 2   σ2                  a(Y, D1 ) 2 ∂a(Y, D1 )
          1 − f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 −            σ ) − f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 −          σ )           =0
                                      2          2                      2          ∂D1

                We can then show that:
                ∂σ 2
                     < 0 if
                ∂D1

                                     a(Y, D1 ) 2
          a(Y, D1 )f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 −          σ )   1
                                                        
                                                                             a(Y, D1 ) 2
                                                                                         
                                          2                  0
                                                    − 2 1 − f (ω1 + Y − D1 −          σ ) < 0.
                  0
                                  a(Y, D1 ) 2        σ                          2
                2f (ω1 + Y − D1 −           σ )
                                     2

                                                                 a(Y, D1 ) 2   σ2 0
          Proof. Let G(D1 , σ 2 ) = 1 − f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 −                σ )−   f (ω1 + Y − D1 −
                                                                    2          2
          a(Y, D1 ) 2 ∂a(Y, D1 )
                   σ )           = 0,
             2          ∂D1

          ∂G
∂σ 2
     = − ∂D
         ∂G
            1

∂D1      ∂σ 2
                                                               2
                                                σ 2 ∂a(Y, D1 )      σ2                 a(Y, D1 ) 2 ∂ 2 a(Y, D1 )
                                          
           00                 a(Y, D1 ) 2
             f (ω1 + Y − D1 −          σ ) 1+                     − f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 −          σ )
                                 2               2    ∂D1           2                     2             ∂D12
 =   −
                                            σ 2 ∂a(Y, D1 ) a(Y, D1 ) 1 0
                                                         
                           a(Y, D1 ) 2                                                     a(Y, D1 ) 2 ∂a(Y, D1 )
       f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 −          σ ) 1+                             − f (ω1 + Y − D1 −           σ )
                              2             2      ∂D1            2      2                     2            ∂D1

          Recalling the F.O.C.,

                                a(Y, D1 ) 2 σ 2 0            a(Y, D1 ) 2 ∂a(Y, D1 )
           1−f 0 (ω1 +Y −D1 −            σ )− f (ω1 +Y −D1 −          σ )           = 0, (A.12)
                                   2         2                  2          ∂D1

                                                        19
                                                                            
          ∂a(Y, D1 )   2                           1
we have              = 2                                                 − 1. The S.O.C. is
                                                                             
            ∂D1       σ                               a(Y, D1 ) 2
                                  f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1? −          σ )
                                                         2
                                                2
                                 σ 2 ∂a(Y, D1 )                         a(Y, D1 ) 2 ∂ 2 a(Y, D1 )
                             
 00              a(Y, D1 ) 2                        1
f (ω1 + Y − D1 −          σ ) 1+                   − f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 −          σ )              <0
                    2            2     ∂D1          2                      2             ∂D12

Thus,
                                                                                  
                                    2                       1                      
                                ∂                                                − 1
                                    σ2                            a(Y, D1 ) 2
                                       
           ∂ 2 a(Y, D1 )                   f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 −              σ )
                         >                                           2
                ∂D12                               ∂D1
                                                                       σ 2 ∂a(Y, D1 )
                                                                                     
                                 00                 a(Y, D1 ) 2
                                f (ω1 + Y − D1 −              σ ) 1+
                             2                          2              2     ∂D1
                           =
                             σ2                               a(Y, D1 ) 2 2
                                         f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 −            σ )
                                                                   2
                                  00                 a(Y, D1 ) 2
                             2 f (ω1 + Y − D1 −          2
                                                              σ )
                           =
                             σ2 0                   a(Y, D1 ) 2 3
                                f (ω1 + Y − D1 −             σ )
                                                        2

                a(Y, D1 ) f 0 ∂a(Y, D1 )                        a(Y, D1 )     1
Thus, if f 00          0
                            −                   < 0 (i.e., f 00       0
                                                                           − 2 [1 − f 0 ] < 0),
                   2f            2    ∂D1                          2f        σ
                            f 00   σ 2 0 2f 00
                                 − f 2 03
       ∂σ 2                f 02     2 σ f                  ∂σ 2
               <−                                     ⇒           <0
       ∂D1            00
                         a(Y, D1 ) f 0 ∂a(Y, D1 )          ∂D1
                    f              −
                           2f 0        2    ∂D1
                                               a(Y, D1 ) 2                                  a(Y, D1 ) 2
       where f 0 = f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 −                   σ ), f 00 = f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 −              σ ) and
                                                  2                                             2
                                   a(Y, D1 ) 2
f 000 = f 000 (ω1 + Y − D1 −                σ ).
                                       2
                                                                ∂ 2σ2
       We can now examine the cross derivative,                         , and see that in general its sign is
                                                              ∂D1 ∂Y
ambiguous.


                                                                ∂σ    2
                                            ∂ 2σ2            ∂( ∂D 1
                                                                     )
                                                        =
                                           ∂D1 ∂Y                ∂Y




                                                        20
   According to the proof above,

                                                            2
                                             σ 2 ∂a(Y, D1 )     σ 2 ∂ 2 a(Y, D1 )
                                           
                                      00
                                   −f 1 +                      + f0
                     ∂σ 2                    2     ∂D1          2        ∂D12
                             =
                                        σ 2 ∂a(Y, D1 ) a(Y, D1 ) 1 0 ∂a(Y, D1 )
                                                      
                     ∂D1
                               f 00 1 +                           − f
                                        2      ∂D1           2      2      ∂D1

                                         a(Y, D1 ) 2                              a(Y, D1 ) 2
   where f 0 = f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 −                 σ ), f 00 = f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 −          σ ) and
                                              2                                      2
                                  a(Y, D1 ) 2                                   ∂σ 2
   f 000 = f 000 (ω1 + Y − D1 −            σ ). Let A denote the numerator of        and B denote
                                      2                                         ∂D1
                            ∂σ 2
   the denominator of            , then
                           ∂D1

                                            ∂ 2σ2        A0 B − AB 0
                                                    =
                                           ∂D1 ∂Y            B2

   where

                                                                ∂ 2a 
                                                              ∂
       σ 2 f 00 ∂ 2 a           σ 2 ∂a 2       σ 2 ∂a    σ 2 0 ∂D12             σ 2 ∂a σ 2 ∂ 2 a
                                                                                 
 0                        000                                              00
AB = {                 − f (1 +        )    1+          + f            − 2f 1 +                  }
         2 ∂D12                  2 ∂D1         2 ∂D1     2      ∂Y              2 ∂D1 2 ∂D1 ∂Y
                     σ 2 ∂a a 1 0 ∂a
                             
         00
     ×{f 1 +                    − f       }
                      2 ∂D1 2 2 ∂D1

   and
                                           2
                            σ 2 ∂a(Y, D1 )     σ 2 ∂ 2 a(Y, D1 )
                         
         0          00
    AB       = {−f 1 +                        + f0               }
                             2    ∂D1          2        ∂D12
                            σ 2 ∂a 2 a 1 00 ∂a           σ 2 ∂a      a σ2 ∂ 2a    f 0 ∂ 2a
               ×{f 000 (1 +        ) − f           (1 +           ) + f 00      −          }
                            2 ∂D1 2 2 ∂D1                2 ∂D1       2 2 ∂D1 ∂Y   2 ∂D1 ∂Y




                                                    21
    Special Case
    Assume f (x) = A − e−kx with constants A > 0 and k > 0. To begin with,


                               f 0 (x) = −(−ke−kx ) = ke−kx

                               f 00 (x) = −k 2 e−kx

                     −f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 )
    In this case, a = 0                   = k is constant.
                      f (ω1 + Y − D1 )
    The F.O.C. will be

                                                   a
                             1 − f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 ) = 0
                                                   2

   Prediction 1 (Special Case).
    ∂σ 2
         <0
   ∂D1
                                     a
Proof. Let J = 1 − f 0 (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 ) = 0,
                                     2

                              ∂J                          a
                   ∂σ2                f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 )     2
                             ∂D1                          2
                         = −      =−                     a        =− <0
                   ∂D1        ∂J     f 00 (ω1 + Y − D1 − σ 2 ) a2   a
                             ∂σ 2                        2

Because a = k > 0.
    Prediction 2 (Special Case).
     ∂ 2 σ2
    ∂D1 ∂Y
              =0
    Proof: by inspection.




                                             22
J.    Agency: Additive Formulation

We report here the proofs of the statements in Section VB in the main text. Under an
additive agency formulation, the maximization program is:


                                   max D1 + E [Y2 ] − c (D1 ) ,
                                    D1

                                   subject to

                                   Y2 = f (I1 ) + ν

                                   0 ≤ d1 ≤ 1.


The first-order condition is 1 − f 0 ω1 + Y − D1 −     a
                                                           · σ 2 − c0 (D1 ) ≥ 0. Therefore, we
                                                                
                                                       2

obtain:
     Prediction i (additive agency - time series).

                     ∂σ 2    2        2 · c00 (D1 )
                          = − +  00                            a
                                                                            < 0.
                     ∂D1     a a f ω1 + Y − D1 −                2
                                                                    · σ2

     As in the baseline setting and in the signaling model, higher dividends should
correlate with lower future cash-flow volatility. Two effects are at play. First, as in
the baseline setting, lower future cash-flow volatility implies a higher income available for
paying dividends, holding investment opportunities fixed. Second, lower future cash-flow
volatility enables managers to more easily extract private benefits (re. incur lower agency
costs) and pay more dividends, again holding investment fixed.
     Now, however, the larger the current earnings, the larger the reduction in cash-flow
volatility should be following the same dollar of dividend paid:
     Prediction ii (additive agency - cross-section).

                           2 · c00 (D1 ) · f 000 ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2
                                                                        
                  ∂ 2σ2
                        =−                                    2         < 0.
                 ∂D1 ∂Y         a f 00 ω1 + Y − D1 − a · σ 2
                                   
                                                            2


K.     Agency: Multiplicative Formulation

We assume the manager faces a private (agency) cost c(d1 ) from paying as dividends a
fraction d1 of cash flows in the first period and the remaining cash in the second period,

                                              23
where the function c is convex, that is, c0 > 0 and c00 > 0. In this setting, the manager
chooses the dividend payment to maximize




                                     max ω1 [d1 − c (d1 )] + E [Y2 ] [1 − c (d1 )]
                                         d1

                                     subject to

                                     Y2 = f (I1 ) + ν

                                     0 ≤ d1 ≤ 1.


     The         first-order              condition        is:           ω1 [1 − c0 (d1 )]          −   ω1  ·
f 0 (1 − d1 ) ω1 + Y −    a
                                         [1 − c (d1 )] − c0 (d1 ) · f (1 − d1 ) ω1 + Y −     a
                                   2
                                                                                                     
                          2
                              ·σ                                                             2
                                                                                                 · σ 2 ≥ 0 or
for brevity ω1 (1 − c0 ) − ω1 · f 0 (1 − c) − c0 · f ≥ 0. Therefore, we obtain:
     Prediction i (multiplicative agency - time series).

           ∂σ 2    2ω1         2 · c00 · (ω1 + f )                2 · ω 1 · f 0 · c0
                =−     +                                  −                                  ≷0
           ∂d1      a    a · [ω1 · f 00 (1 − c) + f 0 c0 ] a · [ω1 · f 00 (1 − c) + f 0 c0 ]

     To illustrate, assume that ω1 · f 00 (1 − c) + f 0 c0 < 0 (the discussion for the reverse case
in which ω1 · f 00 (1 − c) + f 0 c0 > 0 is largely symmetric).
     Three effects are at play. First, as in the baseline setting, lower future cash flow
volatility implies a higher income available for paying dividends, holding investment
opportunities fixed. Second, lower future cash-flow volatility enables managers to more
easily extract private benefits (re. incur lower agency costs) and pay more dividends,
again holding investment fixed. These effects are as in the additive agency model, and
predict a negative correlation between σ 2 and d1 . Now, however, a third effect also arises,
as lower future cash flow volatility, implying a higher future income, also allows managers
to divert a larger share of the cash flows. This third effect is captured by the term f 0 c0 .
As a result, the sign of the comparative static exercise cannot be uniquely determined
and the prediction is therefore ambiguous.
     We can now compute the cross-derivative:




                                                         24
     Prediction ii (multiplicative agency - cross-section).

                          ∂ 2σ2  −ω 2 · f 000 + c00 · f 0 + 2ω1 f 00 c0
                                = 1                                    ≶0
                         ∂d1 ∂Y   a
                                    · [ω   · f 00 (1 − c) + f 0 c0 ] 2
                                  2     1




     As in the additive agency model, larger current earnings make extracting more private
benefits (re. incur lower agency costs) easier. Now, a further effect also arises, namely,
higher current earnings also allow managers to divert larger cash flows. This latter effect
is captured by the terms f 0 c0 . As a result, this cross-sectional prediction is also ambiguous.


L.    Investment Opportunities

To model investment opportunities we follow Johnson et al. (2000) and Choe et al. (1993)
and assume that the production function, f , is pre-multiplied by a positive parameter R
representing investment opportunities. The maximization program of the additive agency
model then becomes:




                                     max D1 + E [Y2 ] − c (D1 ) ,
                                      D1

                                     subject to

                                     Y2 = R · f (I1 ) + ν

                                     D1 ≤ ω1 .


     We establish:
     Prediction A.1 (additive agency - investment opportunities ).

                           −2 · c00 (D1 ) · f 00 ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2
                                                                        
                   ∂ 2σ2
                         =                                       2 > 0
                  ∂D1 ∂R    a · R · f 00 ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2
                                


     In the additive agency model, the decline in cash flow volatility following dividend
increases should be more pronounced for firms with smaller investment opportunities.
The reason is that, if lower cash flow volatility facilitates extraction of private benefits,
then high investment opportunities mute this effect because they increase the cost of

                                                 25
extracting private benefits relative to engaging in efficient investment.
    Conversely, the maximization program of the multiplicative agency model becomes


                              max ω1 [d1 − c (d1 )] + E [Y2 ] [1 − c (d1 )]
                               d1

                              subject to

                              Y2 = R · f (I1 ) + ν

                              0 ≤ d1 ≤ 1.


    We obtain:
    Prediction A.2 (multiplicative agency - investment opportunities).

                       ∂ 2σ2  −c00 · ω1 · a2 · [ω1 · f 00 (1 − c) + f 0 c0 ]
                             =                                              ≷0
                      ∂d1 ∂R     a
                                   · R · [ω    · f 00 (1 − c) + f 0 c0 ] 2
                                 2           1


    Relative to the additive agency model, a new effect arises, as higher investment
opportunities also allow managers to divert larger cash flows, an effect captured by
the terms f 0 c0 . As a result, the sign of this comparative statics depends on the term
in parentheses.     If [ω1 · f 00 (1 − c) + f 0 c0 ] < 0 then the multiplicative agency model
generates the same prediction as the additive agency model (see above). If instead
[ω1 · f 00 (1 − c) + f 0 c0 ] > 0 then the multiplicative agency model generates the same
prediction as the signaling model (see below).
    Finally, the maximization program of the signaling model becomes


                                max      W1 = kV1s + (1 − k)V1h
                                {D1 }

                                         subject to

                                         Y2 = R · f (I1 ) + ν

                                         D1 ≤ ω1 ,


    We establish:




                                                 26
    Prediction S.1 (signaling - investment opportunities).

                              −f 0 ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2
                                                           
                     ∂ 2σ2
                           =                                2 < 0
                    ∂D1 ∂R   R · f 00 ω1 + Y − D1 − a2 · σ 2

    In the signaling model, the decline in cash flow volatility following dividend increases
should be more pronounced for firms with higher investment opportunities. The intuition
is that the scope of using dividends to signal future declines in cash flow volatility is
magnified when investment opportunities are larger.




                                            27
                       Table A.1: Descriptive Statistics Matching

This table reports descriptive statistics for the event firms and the observationally-similar firms matched on
propensity scores. BM is the book-to-market-ratio, Size is the log market cap, Lev is financial leverage and age
is the time since the firm has been on CRSP. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.


                               Event Firms                           Matched Firms
                      Nobs     Median     Mean     Std       Nobs     Median     Mean      Std
      BM              6,777      0.70      0.92    0.79      6,777      0.80      0.98    0.73
      Size            6,777     19.66     19.74    1.93      6,777     18.98     19.20    1.94
      Leverage        6,777      0.41      0.43    0.27      6,777      0.39      0.41    0.22
      Age             6,777     12.75     15.96    9.93      6,777     12.50     14.44    9.03




                                                  28
Table A.2: Correlation between Variance of Cash Flow News and Stock Return
Volatility

This table reports correlations of the variance of cash-flow news using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which
we describe in Section II and stock-return volatility which we calculate using five years of daily data around dividend
events. The sample period from 1964 till 2013.


                                                          Before         After
                                                           (1)            (3)
                           Initiations                   17.82%         21.54%
                           Dividend Increases            22.38%         21.31%
                           Omissions                     20.62%         21.29%
                           Dividend Decreases            21.56%         21.34%




                                                    29
Table A.3: Scaled Change in Stock Return Volatility Around Dividend Events

This table reports changes in annualized stock return volatility around dividend events using using five years of daily
data before and after the dividend event. Panel A reports the average change in annualized stock return volatility
and Panel B reports the average change in annualized stock return volatility scaled by the average stock return
volatility before the event. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.


             ∆Div > 0          Initiation       Pooled           ∆Div < 0           Omission         Pooled
               (1)                 (2)           (3)               (4)                (5)             (6)
                                Panel A. ∆ Annualized Return Variance
               18.42%           18.16%    18.31%       -6.42%      5.43%                             -4.24%
                (8.39)           (5.24)    (9.82)      (-2.77)     (0.93)                            (-1.95)

                           Panel B. ∆ Scaled Annualized Return Variance
               3.76%          3.70%      3.73%        -1.31%     1.11%                               -0.86%
               (8.39)         (5.24)     (9.82)       (-2.77)    (0.93)                              (-1.95)

 Nobs           2,441            1,069           3,510              2,461             1,233           3,694




                                                    30
                             Table A.4: Announcement Returns

This table reports three-day cumulative returns on dividend event days for a sample period from 1964 till 2013.



            ∆Div > 0          Initiation      Pooled          ∆Div < 0          Omission         Pooled
              (1)                 (2)          (3)              (4)               (5)             (6)
               0.72%            2.37%          1.22%            -0.70%            -8.68%         -3.38%
               (7.69)          (11.00)        (13.11)           (-6.11)          (-29.77)       (-24.37)

 Nobs          2,441            1,069          3,510             2,461            1,233           3,694




                                                  31
       Table A.5: Regression of Changes in Variance of Cash-Flow News Around Dividend Events: Initial Variance

     This table reports estimates from the following specification:

                                                 ∆ Var(η cfit ) = α + β1 · ∆Dit + β2 · epsit + β3 · ∆Dit · epsit + δ · Xit + εit .

     We regress changes in the scaled variance of cash-flow news around dividend events using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we describe in Section
     II of firm i at event t, ∆ Var(η cfit ), on the dividend change, ∆Dit , earnings per share, epsit , the interaction between the two, as well as additional covariates,
     Xit , with t-statistics in parentheses. Additional covariates include firm age, size, book-to-market, and financial leverage. We add year and industry fixed effects
     at the Fama & French 17 industry level whenever indicated. We cluster standard errors at the dividend-quarter level. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.


                                    (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)          (8)
        ∆Div                    −0.26           −0.24            −0.37            −0.13            −0.15            −0.14             −0.25       −0.11
                               (−5.55)         (−5.29)          (−5.94)          (−2.76)          (−4.92)          (−4.64)           (−5.04)     (−2.90)
        eps                                     −0.17            −0.12            −0.22                            (−0.14)           (−0.10)     (−0.16)
                                               (−1.59)          (−1.91)          (−4.41)                           (−1.43)           (−1.77)     (−3.21)
        ∆Div × eps                                                 0.24             0.17                                               0.20         0.16
                                                                   3.13             3.18                                               2.67         2.87
        Vart−1 (η cf )                                                          −93.65                                                           −80.83
                                                                               (−29.17)                                                         (−32.08)




32
        Age                                                                         0.00                                                            0.00
                                                                                   (1.23)                                                          (0.24)
        Book-to-market                                                             81.87                                                         112.71
                                                                                   (0.93)                                                         (1.81)
        Leverage                                                                    0.16                                                            0.14
                                                                                   (1.36)                                                          (1.33)
        Size                                                                        0.04                                                            0.01
                                                                                   (2.57)                                                          (0.87)
        Constant                  0.03            0.12             0.08             0.09
                                 (0.45)          (1.24)           (1.04)           (0.29)

        Year FE                                                                                         X                X                X            X
        Industry FE                                                                                     X                X                X            X
        R2                        2.06%            2.89%           3.89%            39.16%           30.60%           31.15%           31.80%       52.24%
        Nobs                      3,127            3,127           3,127             3,127            3,127            3,127            3,127        3,127
                   Table A.6: Regression of Changes in Variance of Cash-Flow News Around Dividend Events

     This table reports estimates from the following specification:

                                                 ∆ Var(η cfit ) = α + β1 · ∆Dit + β2 · epsit + β3 · ∆Dit · epsit + δ · Xit + εit .

     We regress changes in the scaled variance of cash-flow news around dividend events using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we describe in Section
     II of firm i at event t, ∆ Var(η cfit ), on the dividend change, ∆Dit , earnings per share, epsit , the interaction between the two, as well as additional covariates,
     Xit , with t-statistics in parentheses. Additional covariates include firm age, size, book-to-market, financial leverage, and cash. We add year and industry fixed
     effects at the Fama & French 17 industry level whenever indicated. We cluster standard errors at the dividend-quarter level. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.


                                    (1)              (2)               (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)          (8)
        ∆Div                    −0.26           −0.24            −0.37            −0.35            −0.15            −0.14             −0.25       −0.23
                               (−5.55)         (−5.31)          (−5.94)          (−6.05)          (−4.92)          (−4.66)           (−5.01)     (−5.03)
        eps                                     −0.17            −0.12            −0.18                             −0.14             −0.10       −0.23
                                               (−1.56)          (−1.87)          (−2.76)                           (−1.41)           (−1.75)     (−1.78)
        ∆Div × eps                                                 0.24             0.21                                               0.19         0.18
                                                                  (3.12)           (3.20)                                             (2.64)       (2.54)
        Age                                                                         0.00                                                            0.00
                                                                                   (1.44)                                                          (1.21)




33
        Book-to-Market                                                             34.02                                                         134.39
                                                                                   (0.40)                                                         (2.44)
        Leverage                                                                  −0.35                                                           −0.14
                                                                                 (−2.58)                                                         (−1.12)
        Size                                                                        0.05                                                            0.02
                                                                                   (3.35)                                                          (1.23)
        Cash                                                                      −0.00                                                           −0.00
                                                                                 (−2.35)                                                         (−1.40)
        Constant                  0.03            0.12             0.08           −0.86
                                 (0.45)          (1.22)           (1.01)         (−2.75)

        Year FE                                                                                         X                X                X            X
        Industry FE                                                                                     X                X                X            X
        R2                        2.06%            2.89%              3.89%          5.24%           30.60%           31.15%           31.80%       32.27%
        Nobs                      3,127            3,127              3,127          3,127            3,127            3,127            3,127        3,127
                   Table A.7: Regression of Changes in Variance of Cash-Flow News Around Dividend Events

     This table reports estimates from the following specification:

                                                 ∆ Var(η cfit ) = α + β1 · ∆Dit + β2 · CFit + β3 · ∆Dit · CFit + δ · Xit + εit .

     We regress changes in the scaled variance of cash-flow news around dividend events using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we describe in Section
     II of firm i at event t, ∆ Var(η cfit ), on the dividend change, ∆Dit , cash flow, CFit , the interaction between the two, as well as additional covariates, Xit , with
     t-statistics in parentheses. Additional covariates include firm age, size, book-to-market, financial leverage, and cash. We add year and industry fixed effects at
     the Fama & French 17 industry level whenever indicated. We cluster standard errors at the dividend-quarter level. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.


                                    (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)             (8)
        ∆Div                    −0.26           −0.27            −0.26           −0.25           −0.15            −0.16             −0.15          −0.14
                               (−5.55)         (−5.62)          (−5.47)         (−5.71)         (−4.92)          (−5.11)           (−4.82)        (−4.90)
        CF                                      −0.09            −0.11           −0.09                            −0.06             −0.08          −0.08
                                               (−2.54)          (−3.53)         (−2.87)                          (−2.47)           (−3.17)        (−3.20)
        ∆Div × CF                                                  0.02            0.02                                              0.02            0.02
                                                                  (3.05)          (2.91)                                            (2.40)          (2.62)




34
        Age                                                                        0.00                                                              0.00
                                                                                  (1.38)                                                            (1.23)
        Book-to-market                                                            57.49                                                           150.01
                                                                                  (0.62)                                                           (2.55)
        Leverage                                                                 −0.33                                                             −0.11
                                                                                (−2.43)                                                           (−0.95)
        Size                                                                       0.03                                                             0.00
                                                                                  (1.92)                                                          (−0.16)
        Constant                  0.03            0.03             0.02          −0.53
                                 (0.45)          (0.34)           (0.32)        (−1.76)

        Year FE                                                                                       X                X                X              X
        Industry FE                                                                                   X                X                X              X
        R2                        2.06%            2.61%           2.75%            3.52%          30.60%           30.80%           30.94%         31.45%
        Nobs                      3,127            3,127           3,127            3,127           3,127            3,127            3,127          3,127
              Table A.8: Scaled Change in Variance of Cash-Flow News Around Dividend Events: Build-Up
                    This table reports changes in cash-flow news around dividend events using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002)
                    which we describe in Section II. We study the build-up of the change in the variance of cash-flow news after the
                    dividend event over time when we expand the event window. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.

                                                               ∆Div > 0      Initiation      Pooled          ∆Div < 0       Omission   Pooled
                                                                 (1)             (2)          (3)              (4)            (5)       (6)
     (Var(η cft:t+1 − Var(η cft−1:t )/mean(Var(η cft−5:t ))    −9.00%       −17.04%       −11.75%              5.34%        11.58%      7.50%
                                                              (−3.61)       (−5.21)       (−5.91)             (1.97)        (2.87)     (3.33)
     (Var(η cft:t+2 − Var(η cft−2:t )/mean(Var(η cft−5:t ))   −14.29%       −21.97%        −16.91%             9.36%        11.91%     10.40%
                                                              (−7.96)       (−8.33)       (−11.37)            (4.64)        (4.24)     (6.36)




35
     (Var(η cft:t+3 − Var(η cft−3:t )/mean(Var(η cft−5:t ))    −15.98%      −21.63%        −17.71%             8.43%        11.93%      9.63%
                                                              (−10.42)      (−9.21)       (−13.79)            (4.93)        (4.79)     (6.82)
     (Var(η cft:t+4 − Var(η cft−4:t )/mean(Var(η cft−5:t ))    −16.12%      −23.58%        −18.48%             9.10%         8.14%      8.64%
                                                              (−11.44)     (−10.96)       (−15.65)            (5.71)        (3.47)     (6.54)
     (Var(η cft:t+5 − Var(η cft−5:t )/mean(Var(η cft−5:t ))   −14.86%       −20.01%        −16.43%             7.29%         6.09%      6.89%
                                                              (−9.65)       (−4.94)       (−16.07)            (4.38)        (2.42)     (6.19)

     Nobs                                                        2,441          1,069         3,510            2,461          1,233     3,694
Table A.9: Sample Split by Financial Constraints: Scaled Change in Variance
of Cash-Flow News and Announcement Returns Around Dividend Events

This table reports the average change in the variance of cash-flow news scaled by the average variance of cash-flow
news before the event (∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))) using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we
describe in Section II in Panel A and announcement returns in Panel B. The Table splits dividend events by the
Hadlock-Pierce Index using the terciles as cutoff excluding the middle tercile. Announcement returns are cumulative
returns in a three-day window bracketing the dividend event. We bootstrap the difference between large and small
financial constraints. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.

                            ∆Div > 0                                           ∆Div < 0
              High              Low                              High              Low
            Constraints      Constraints          ∆            Constraints      Constraints          ∆
               (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                Panel A. ∆ Scaled Variance Cash-flow News: ∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))
           −16.98%          −11.58%            5.20%              9.10%            6.98%         −3.11%
           (−5.98)          (−4.56)           (6.78)             (3.07)           (2.56)        (−3.21)

 Nobs           813              814                               820              820

                                           Panel B. Cumulative Returns
              1.02%            0.60%          −0.37%            −0.84%           −0.63%            0.23%
             (5.34)           (4.42)         (−7.13)           (−4.50)          (−3.25)           (4.48)

 Nobs           813              814                               820              820




                                                   36
Table A.10: Scaled Change in Variance of Cash-Flow News and Announcement
Returns Around Dividend Events: Total Vol

This table reports the average change in the variance of cash-flow news scaled by the average variance of cash-flow
news before the event (∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))) using the methodology of Vuolteenaho (2002) which we
describe in Section II in Panel A and announcement returns in Panel B. The table splits firms by their ex ante
total stock return volatility. Specifically, we first calculate a firms’ ex ante total volatility on a four-quarter rolling
basis using daily data. We then assign a firm into the large total volatility sample if it had a volatility above the
30% percentile of firm volatility in the respective Fama & French 17 industry in the quarter before the dividend
event. Announcement returns are cumulative returns in a three-day window bracketing the dividend event. We
bootstrap the difference between large and small changes. Our sample period is 1964 till 2013.

                              ∆Div > 0                                           ∆Div < 0
               Large Vol       Small Vol            ∆             Large Vol       Small Vol            ∆
                  (1)            (2)               (3)               (4)            (5)               (6)
                Panel A. ∆ Scaled Variance Cash-flow News: ∆ Var(η cf )/mean(Var(η cf ))
              −16.49%         −13.13%          −3.74%               9.61%           3.79%           3.45%
              (−7.23)         (−6.39)         (−6.27)              (4.28)          (1.55)          (4.64)

    Nobs         1,262            1,179                             1,482             979

                              ∆Div > 0                                           ∆Div < 0
               Large Vol       Small Vol            ∆             Large Vol       Small Vol            ∆
                  (1)            (2)               (3)               (4)            (5)               (6)
                                          Panel B. Announcement Returns
                 0.93%           0.48%           0.44%            −0.93%          −0.31%          −0.73%
                (5.97)          (5.10)         (11.15)           (−5.44)         (−2.85)          (16.34)

    Nobs         1,262            1,179                             1,482             979




                                                         37
