NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF HEALTH ON LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM MRFIT
Melvin Stephens, Jr.
Desmond J. Toohey
Working Paper 24231
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24231

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018

We thank seminar participants at the Michigan Labor Lunch, the NBER Labor Studies and Health
Economics meetings, Wisconsin CDE & CDHA, and the H2D2 conference for helpful comments
and suggestions. Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute On
Aging of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number R03AG046503. The content is
solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the
National Institutes of Health. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Melvin Stephens, Jr. and Desmond J. Toohey. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of Health on Labor Market Outcomes: Experimental Evidence from MRFIT
Melvin Stephens, Jr. and Desmond J. Toohey
NBER Working Paper No. 24231
January 2018
JEL No. I12,J24
ABSTRACT
While economists have posited that health investments increase earnings, isolating the causal
effect of health is challenging due both to reverse causality and unobserved heterogeneity. We
examine the labor market effects of a randomized controlled trial, the Multiple Risk Factor
Intervention Trial (MRFIT), which monitored nearly 13,000 men for over six years. We find that
this intervention, which provided a bundle of treatments to reduce coronary heart disease
mortality, increased earnings and family income. We find few differences in estimated gains by
baseline health and occupation characteristics. Reductions in serious illnesses and work-limiting
disabilities likely contributed to the observed gains.

Melvin Stephens, Jr.
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
356 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
mstep@umich.edu
Desmond J. Toohey
Department of Economics
University of Delaware
420 Purnell Hall
Newark, DE, 19716
dtoohey@udel.edu

1

Introduction

Economists have long recognized a strong connection between health and economic outcomes.
Measures of health, both self-reported and objectively measured, are positively associated with
human capital, earnings, income, and wealth. The direction of causality in these relationships is
unclear. Better health can lead to higher productivity, less working time lost to illness, and lower
mortality, which further incentivizes human capital investment. Higher productivity and financial
resources can facilitate access to care, avoidance of harmful environmental factors, and access to
higher-quality food and drugs.
In this paper, we examine the impact of health on earnings and income using data from the
Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT), a randomized trial studying the combined effects
of multiple health interventions aimed at reducing coronary heart disease (CHD) mortality risk in
the United States. MRFIT began screening men aged 35 to 57 in 1974 with high risk for CHD
mortality. After three rounds of screening, nearly 13,000 study participants were randomized into
two treatment groups. A “Special Intervention” (SI) group received interventions aimed at lowering
cholesterol, lowering blood pressure, and quitting smoking, while a “Usual Care” (UC) group was
instructed to continue seeking standard medical care in the community. The MRFIT intervention
substantially reduced CHD risk throughout the six (or more) years that each participant was
monitored.
We find that the improved health of the SI group raises earnings by three percent and total
family income by four percent, with no concurrent effect on labor force participation, when measured
six years after enrollment. These results are robust to multiple forms of sample selection including
survey attrition and labor force exit. While MRFIT has been examined extensively, particularly
in the medical and epidemiological literatures, this paper offers, to the best of our knowledge, the
first examination of the effects of the intervention on earnings, income, and other labor market
outcomes.
A key contribution of this paper is that it isolates the impact of health on earnings and family
income while avoiding concerns about reverse causality and unobserved heterogeneity. Surveys of
the literature examining the relationship between health and labor market outcomes (Currie and

1

Madrian 1999; O’Donnell, Doorslaer, and Van Ourti 2015) note that identification typically relies
on estimation strategies with “dubious” exclusion restrictions or, more recently, within-person
variation in health over time which also requires strong exogeneity assumptions. Recent work
in developing countries uses randomized controlled trials to study the impact of health on labor
market outcomes. However, while many of the interventions in developing economy settings focus
on increasing nutrient or consumption levels, MRFIT is largely aimed at improving health through
reducing overconsumption. In this way, our paper provides novel evidence of the effects of developed
countries’ health improvements on earnings.
Our analysis focuses on a key aspect of health in the United States, coronary heart disease.
Although the rate of mortality due to heart disease has been in steady decline for at least fifty
years, heart disease remains the leading cause of death in the United States (Kochanek et al.
2016). While MRFIT began in the 1970s, our findings are relevant for understanding how lowering
CHD mortality risk affects labor market outcomes in the present day as the current advice for
preventing CHD is dominated by the primary components of the MRFIT intervention: adjust
your diet, stop smoking, and control your blood pressure (e.g., Torpy, Burke, and Glass 2009).
Although the results of our analysis from MRFIT cannot speak directly to how any type of health
improvement will affect labor market outcomes, understanding the impact of CHD risk on workers’
outcomes is important due to the widespread prevalence of heart disease in the United States.
We investigate potential avenues through which the health improvements lead to higher earnings. We test for differential earnings effects across subgroups defined by baseline health characteristics including cholesterol, smoking, and blood pressure levels as well as CHD mortality risk and
BMI. We also examine earnings effects by baseline occupation classification (white vs. blue collar)
and occupational tasks (as defined by Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003)). However, the resulting
estimates are mainly suggestive as we are only able to reject the null hypothesis that the impact
of the intervention on earnings is the same across subgroups when comparing groups defined by
baseline smoking intensity and (marginally) when comparing white and blue collar workers.
In his seminal work, Grossman (1972) notes that investments in health can raise earnings by
increasing the amount of healthy time available for market work. Using responses to annual survey
questions which ascertain information on events that occurred over the past year, we find that
2

the SI group experiences less time lost to illness and lower levels of work-preventing disabilities
during the experimental period. Our results suggest that this mechanism posited by Grossman
likely contributed to the increased earnings levels due to the intervention.
In our analysis, we focus on the reduced form effect of the MRFIT intervention on labor market
outcomes. We do so for two reasons. First, we do not possess an ideal single measure of health
which fully captures the impact of health as affected by MRFIT. For example, while the intervention
lowered measured CHD risk, this metric may not fully capture all the dimensions through which the
intervention improved health. In addition, a global health summary question, such as self-reported
health status, was not asked of participants. Second, for nearly every potential health measure
that could be used in our analysis, there likely would be concerns about the exclusion restriction.
For example, as part of the smoking modification intervention, participants were encouraged to
avoid behaviors, such as going to bars, that might trigger the desire to smoke. To the extent that
this aspect of the intervention is not captured in a single health measure, using the intervention as
an instrument for health would lead to concerns regarding the validity of the exclusion restriction.
Our reduced form estimates still answer an important question: how does an intervention focused
on reducing mortality due to the leading cause of death in the United States affect labor market
outcomes?
Our paper contributes to an extensive literature examining the relationship between health and
labor market outcomes. Recent studies, using experimental or quasi-experimental research designs,
exploit the effects of short-run environmental factors (often, pollution) on productivity and labor
supply, in some cases focusing on intrahousehold effects (Graff Zivin and Niedell 2012; Adhvaryu,
Kala, and Nyshadham 2016; Aragón, Miranda, and Oliva, 2016). Other studies leverage the impacts
of medical interventions aimed at preventing or treating diseases (Thirumurthy, Graff Zivin, and
Goldstein, 2008; Lucas, 2010; Fink and Masiye, 2015; Dillon, Friedman, and Serneels, 2015).
Compelling evidence of one aspect of health on productivity comes from experimental evidence of
the effects of iron supplementation, particularly on anemic workers (Thomas et al., 2006).1 While
this work provides important evidence in developing contexts, individuals in developed countries
1
Other studies of iron supplementation on productivity include Haas and Brownlie (2001), Li et al. (1994),
Edgerton et al. (1979), and Basta et al. (1979).

3

face different health challenges. Health is naturally a multidimensional characteristic, and the
effects of variation in one dimension informs relatively less about effects along another dimension.2
Adult health interventions in the economics literature are relatively rarer in developed countries
than in developing economies. Some notable studies examine the causal impact of variation in the
costs of either health insurance or healthcare itself (Newhouse et al., 1993; Dow et al., 1997).
Broadly speaking, the findings point to a reduced form result that lower healthcare costs are
associated with better labor market outcomes. The intermediate step, in which greater access
to care leads to improved health is also generally supported, but can become more complicated.
Objective measures of health may improve with greater access to care, but self perceptions of health
may fall with the availability of health information. The analysis presented in this paper partially
sidesteps this issue because the UC group received continued (if less frequent) information about
health markers. In other research, evidence on the effects of body composition, as measured by
body-mass index (BMI), on labor market outcomes is summarized by Cawley and Ruhm (2011). In
terms of the relevant health conditions, this work is most closely related to ours although evidence
in these studies is plagued by concerns about unobserved heterogeneity.3
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the specifics of MRFIT, its sample, and the
data. After briefly documenting the impact of the intervention on health in section 3, we estimate
the effect of health on earnings and family income in section 4. Section 5 discusses and concludes.

2

Experimental Design

We leverage the experimental impact of MRFIT to identify causal effects of health on labor market
outcomes. MRFIT was designed to understand the impact of CHD on mortality where CHD
mortality risk was experimentally manipulated by a bundle of treatments. The trial was not
2

A related literature, reviewed by Thomas (2009), examines the effects of resources and nutrients before birth or
at young ages on adult economic outcomes. See Almond (2006), Roseboom et al. (2001), and Field, Robles, and
Torrero (2009) for examples spanning various countries and contexts. For examples from the extensive literature on
the effects of childhood nutrition or treatment against infection, some of which persist into adulthood, see Alderman,
Hoddinott, and Kinsey (2006), Glewwe and Miguel (2008), Maluccio et al. (2009), and Hoddinott et al. (2008).
3
Although our discussion focuses on the evidence regarding the impact of health on labor market outcomes, as
we noted above the causality may run in the opposite direction. For example, Frijters et al. (2005) exploit income
changes associated with German reunification to identify the effect of income on health. Work by Case, Lubotsky,
and Paxson (2002) and Currie and Stabile (2003) finds that the strong relationship between adult income and adult
health is also present for children and grows stronger as children age.

4

specifically designed to affect or measure our outcomes of interest. This section describes the
background, intervention, and data created by MRFIT. The information presented below draws
heavily on the eight papers making up volume 10, issue 4 of Preventive Medicine (1981), which
detailed the implementation of MRFIT and presented its early results.

2.1

Development of MRFIT

Prior to the 1960s, epidemiological research had already shown connections between coronary heart
disease and several risk factors. Existing research had found both that serum cholesterol levels were
associated with incidence of myocardial infarction and that cholesterol levels could be affected by
modifying dietary intake (Zukel et al. 1981). Blood pressure and smoking had also been established
as risk factors for CHD. Interest grew throughout the 1960s in a large-scale demonstration of the
effects of risk factor modification on CHD and mortality. While single-factor trials were considered
by epidemiologists and public health officials, a 1970 task force, organized by the director of the
National Heart and Lung Institute to address arteriosclerosis, recommended against trials modifying diet alone and suggested a multiple-risk-factor trial as the way forward. A multiple-factor
intervention was considered most likely to produce measurable results.
In response to these recommendations, the National Heart and Lung Institute’s Clinical Applications Program undertook planning for a trial addressing the multiple risk factors of serum
cholesterol, blood pressure, and smoking. The Framingham Heart Study, an ongoing observational
study of factors associated with heart disease, was used to determine the necessary sample sizes to
measure the expected effects. Ultimately, grants were awarded to 22 clinics across 16 metropolitan
areas in order to identify study participants and implement the trial. Study organizers provided
detailed information to each of the clinics and ensured that information and techniques were consistent across them.

2.2

Screening and Randomization

The MRFIT clinics screened initially 361,662 men in total, of whom 12,866 were randomized into
the Special Intervention and Usual Care groups (Sherwin et al., 1981). The study targeted men

5

aged 35 to 57 in the upper end of the CHD risk distribution as determined by a model predicting
CHD mortality risk using Framingham Study data.4 The upper age limit was chosen so as to
avoid participants moving at retirement since, as discussed below, participants in the SI group
needed to make regular visits to the clinics. There was not a unified method for sampling possible
participants, so clinics were free to enroll participants in different ways, provided that they met the
age and CHD risk requirements. Initially, the intention was to exclude men with diastolic blood
pressure readings over 110 mm Hg or who were taking antihypertensive medication, but both of
these requirements were ultimately relaxed.
Potential participants were enrolled through three separate screening visits separated by three to
four weeks. At each screening, measures needed to compute CHD risk were taken and the potential
respondents were analyzed for the likelihood of responding to intervention. Only those with elevated
CHD risk, initially targeted as the upper 15 percent of the distribution, and a willingness to change
risk factors were contacted again after each screening. The vast majority of the initially-screened
men were excluded after the first screening for having estimated CHD risk that was below the study’s
threshold (Sherwin et al., 1981). Despite targeting the upper 15 percent of the distribution based on
Framingham data, this restriction actually eliminated some 90 percent of the 360,000 men attending
the first screening. In total, 22,088 men returned for the second screening. Further respondents
were excluded because they expected to move from the area, had previously been hospitalized for
more than two weeks due to a heart attack, had been prescribed diabetes medication, or had very
high levels of serum cholesterol (greater than 350 mg/dl) or diastolic blood pressure (greater than
115 mm Hg). Following the third screening, participants were randomized into the SI and UC
groups.

2.3

The Intervention

MRFIT was a non-blind randomized trial. The SI group was subject to the intervention, which
is described in detail throughout this section, while the UC group was advised to seek their usual
avenues of care in the community. Information on their medical conditions and risk factors were
disclosed to the UC group and their medical providers. As the MRFIT organizers were aware,
4

We discuss the details of the CHD risk prediction model below.

6

the UC group was not a control group per se and, hence, avoided the standard “treatment” and
“control” terminology by instead using the SI and UC labels. UC participants were informed of
their elevated risk along with a number of medical measures and were followed-up with throughout
the study. However, the interventions described below induced differences in the two groups, which
were effectively identical at baseline. The SI and UC means for key baseline variables are displayed
in Table 1.5 There are no statistically significant differences in the means of these variables between
the two groups.6
The intervention for the SI group had multiple arms and aspects of implementation that were
used throughout the six years of the study. After initial meetings and screenings at baseline, SI
group members participated in a series of 10 meetings with MRFIT staff and other SI participants
over the first two or three of months of the study (Benfari, 1981). These sessions were aimed at
communicating to the participants the specific risks associated with various risk factors, giving
information on changing behaviors, and providing support for doing so. Participants were encouraged to bring their wives or “homemakers,” which was intended to be especially helpful in affecting
changes in diet and smoking behavior. Following this intensive period of meetings, depending on
their progress in modifying risk factors, the participants entered a period of extended intervention
or maintenance for each risk factor. Extended intervention involved continued efforts at changing
behavior, while maintenance provided support for changes already observed.

2.3.1

Cholesterol Intervention

MRFIT organizers sought to decrease serum cholesterol levels for all men in the SI group, but
a particular focus was placed on achieving a ten percent decrease for participants with baseline
levels greater than 220 mg/dl (Caggiula et al., 1981). Based on evidence from prior studies, it
was thought that such a reduction could be achieved by recommending a diet with ten percent of
calories each from saturated and polyunsaturated fats and a limit on dietary cholesterol of 300 mg
5

Our analysis sample, which is used in Table 1, contains the 12,562 of the original 12,866 MRFIT participants
that have non-missing data for age, race, education, marital status, and employment status measured at baseline.
Additional information regarding the available data is discussed below in the Data and Measurement sub-section.
6
The p-values for the differences reported in Table 1 are based on a wild cluster bootstrap which clusters at the
level of the 22 clinics (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2008). All the differences shown in Table 1 remain statistically
insignificant, with little movement in the corresponding p-values, if we do not applying clustering methods.

7

per day.7 The diet also set a goal for total fat intake as 35 percent of calories. Weight loss was also
a target for the subset of men in the SI group who were over 1.2 times “ideal body weight,” which
is solely determined as a function of height.8
When MRFIT participants turned out to have, on average, healthier pre-intervention diets
than those seen in the prior studies, these targets were made more ambitious. Compared to existing evidence, MRFIT participants in both experimental groups consumed fewer calories, a lower
percentage of calories from total fat and saturated fat, and a higher percentage of calories from
polyunsaturated fat at baseline. Diets were particularly better-than-expected among participants
with high baseline cholesterol levels. Caggiula et al. (1981) hypothesize that in response to screenings showing high cholesterol levels, participating men had already begun to adjust their diets. In
1976, some two to three years into the study, the saturated fat and dietary cholesterol limits were
lowered to eight percent of calories and 250 mg per day, respectively. The weight loss targets were
extended to include men over 1.15 times ideal body weight, and a goal of reducing bodyweight by
at least 10 pounds was added for most of the men in the SI group.
The specifics of the MRFIT intervention for modifying diet amounted to targeting particular
levels of intake for various food groups. A written manual was distributed to SI participants,
categorizing food types according to whether they were “OK” or should be avoided. SI sessions were
aimed at providing this kind of relevant information to participants and their wives or homemakers.
In addition to basic information on what foods to target and avoid, MRFIT sessions highlighted
shopping skills, label-reading, food demonstrations, and tastings. Over the long term, the intensity
of follow-up with each participant was a function of their cholesterol response. Throughout the
study, the serum blood cholesterol levels of the SI group was tracked at least every four months.
7

It should be noted that more recent evidence shows no impact of dietary cholesterol on serum cholesterol, which
has resulted in the USDA dropping dietary cholesterol recommendations from its guidelines. See p. 17 of the USDA’s
“Scientific Report of the 2015 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee.” Regardless, as shown in results reported
in this paper as well as prior research, MRFIT did achieve serum cholesterol reductions, presumably due to the fat
intake recommendations and changes to participant weight.
8
“Ideal weight” in this context is 0.9 times the average height-specific weight for men aged 18–34 in the National
Health Survey, 1960-1962. This makes ideal weight for a six-foot man approximately 162 pounds, and 1.2 times ideal
weight is just over 194 pounds. For most heights, 1.2 times ideal body weight amounts to a BMI in the range of 26
to 28.

8

2.3.2

Smoking Intervention

Smoking cessation for the 59 percent of participants that smoked was a key design goal of MRFIT.
Given the relatively high CHD risk among MRFIT participants due to other factors, smoking was
viewed as a particularly high risk to this population (Hughes et al., 1981).9 MRFIT clinics were
staffed with smoking specialists, psychological consultants, and health counselors to aid participants
in quitting. As in the dietary aspects of the intervention, participants’ wives were also engaged
to support smoking cessation. An initial intervention at baseline involved participants receiving
a “strong antismoking message from a physician” (Hughes et al., p.482) who provided tailored
information based on the participant’s health measures. This was followed by a meeting with
a smoking specialist, from which the specialist could identify preferred cessation techniques and
whether the participant appeared prepared to attempt cessation.
The smoking intervention from this point forward was structured around documentation created
specifically for MRFIT participants. The intervention group meetings highlighted the risks of
smoking and the benefits of cessation and encouraged participants to examine details of their
smoking behaviors. Meetings involved behavioral modification techniques and group discussions.
The smoking specialists followed up regularly to offer support to participants who reported they
had stopped smoking. Participants received feedback on a number of objective medical measures
including serum thiocyanate and expressed carbon monoxide. Over the extended intervention
period, those who had not quit or who had relapsed were considered for additional intervention.
These interventions were tailored more specifically to each individual and potentially involved more
information from physicians, additional types of group meetings, or further cessation therapies.

2.3.3

Blood Pressure Intervention

The blood pressure intervention in MRFIT targeted reducing diastolic blood pressure for hypertensive participants (Cohen et al., 1981). Blood pressure readings were taken throughout the screening
process, as part of sample selection, but categorization as hypertensive was initially based on the
third screening, when systolic and diastolic blood pressure readings were both taken. Participants
9
However, because the sample participants were selected to meet a CHD risk threshold, there is a negative withinsample correlation between smoking intensity and the other risk factors.

9

were categorized as hypertensive if they had a diastolic blood pressure reading of 90 mm Hg at
third screening and again at a confirmation follow-up. If a participant’s readings later exceeded
these thresholds at a regular visit and a confirmation follow-up, they were categorized as hypertensive at that point. Any participant on antihypertensive medication was considered hypertensive
throughout. Those who were taking such medication were given a diastolic blood pressure target
of 80 mm Hg. For participants not initially on medication, the specific target was 89 mm Hg or a
10 mm Hg reduction, whichever was lower.
Hypertensive participants were treated with a “stepped care” approach. This involved steady
increases in the level of hypertensive medication in a way that was standardized across clinics.
During a period of close monitoring, participants were put on increasingly potent blood pressure
medications if the desired blood pressure reductions were not observed. The medications used in
MRFIT were from a centralized source, prepackaged for participants, and provided free of charge
(Cohen et al., 1981). If blood pressure readings fell consistently below 80 mm Hg or weight loss was
achieved, participants’ medications were eligible to be stepped down. In addition to the medication,
dietary advice on weight reduction and reduced sodium intake were counseled for hypertensive
treatment.

2.4

Data and Measurement

Men in the UC group were invited back for annual visits and examinations after randomization.
Men in the SI group were invited for these visits as well as interim follow-ups approximately every
four months (Sherwin et al., 1981). The annual visits allowed MRFIT to record new information
on medical history, 24-hour dietary recall, leisure activity, smoking history, and other behaviors.
The annual examinations of all participants included, in addition to a physical examination, the
recording of a number of biomarkers. For tracking changes to health, this paper uses data from all
these annual visits. However, certain labor force information was only recorded at baseline and the
six-year follow-up. This includes reported earnings from participants’ main jobs as well as family
income, both of which are reported in categories. Other labor force information, including layoff,

10

firing, and disability over the prior year, are reported at annual visits.10
Participation throughout the experimental period was relatively high. Sherwin et al. (1981)
note that a “large majority” of men participated in the group sessions and that those who did not
were “usually” willing to participate in individual sessions. Nearly 75% of wives of the SI group
participated in at least some of the group sessions. Through the fourth year of the experiment, over
91% were either attending their annual visits or known to be deceased, with participation nearly
equal for the SI and UC groups. We discuss sample attrition in more detail in section 4.3.

2.5

Coronary Heart Disease (CHD) Risk

We follow previous MRFIT researchers in using calculated measures of CHD risk to summarize the
overall health of the participants and the intervention’s effects. These risk scores are generated using
estimates from the Framingham Study as reported in Neaton et al. (1981).11 Risk is estimated with
a logit model with the outcome being mortality due to CHD within a six year period and using serum
cholesterol, diastolic blood pressure, and cigarettes smoked per day as predictors.12 While other
participant characteristics (e.g., age) could be used in calculating risk scores, as in many publiclyavailable risk calculators based on the Framingham sample, we follow previous researchers and the
MRFIT organizers in using these risk scores that are based on key indicators for MRFIT’s targeted
dimensions of health. We control for additional characteristics of participants, including age, in our
empirical analysis as described in the following sections. Using serum cholesterol, diastolic blood
pressure, and cigarettes per day with the logit coefficients from Neaton et al. (1981), we calculate
risk scores at screening and at each follow-up year.13
Kernel-smoothed densities of baseline CHD risk by experimental status are displayed in the top
left panel of Figure 1. The magnitudes of the risk scores map directly into CHD mortality risk from
10

The original survey forms for MRFIT can be found at https://biolincc.nhlbi.nih.gov/studies/mrfit/
Forms/.
11
We deviate slightly from Neaton et al. (1981) in that we do not adjust self-reported smoking levels for the
respondent’s measured serum thiocyanate, which is a biomarker for smoking. To the extent that individuals in the
SI might be more likely to underreport their smoking behavior (perhaps because they are expected to reduce their
smoking levels), we will tend to overstate the CHD risk differences between the SI and UC groups. However, we show
below that serum thiocyanate levels are lower in the SI group than the UC group.
12
The logit coefficients in this model, found in Neaton et al. (1981, Table 18), are 0.0088 on serum cholesterol,
0.0464 on diastolic blood pressure, and 0.0286 on cigarettes per day, with an intercept of 11.0336.
13
All three variables were not recorded at the same screening visits, the estimates reported here use first-screening
serum cholesterol and third-screening blood pressure and cigarette smoking levels.

11

the original Framingham logit model. That is, a risk score of two percent indicates a two percent
probability of mortality due to CHD within six years. In addition to being statistically equivalent
at the mean (see Table 1), the densities for the SI and UC groups are quite similar across the entire
distribution (Figure 1a).14 Further, while the mean risk scores are just above two percent, both
distributions exhibit a noticeable positive skew.
In order to perform power calculations and determine the necessary sample size, MRFIT organizers anticipated the effects of the intervention on the SI and UC groups. They made these
predictions based on evidence from prior interventions. The predicted effects are shown in Appendix Table A1. While the organizers anticipated cholesterol and blood pressure impacts to be
concentrated among participants with high baseline levels of those risk factors, they anticipated
larger percentage reductions in cigarettes smoked for those at the low end of the smoking distribution. In examining possible heterogeneous effects of the intervention in section 4.5, we use these
subgroups defined by the MRFIT organizers based on baseline risk factors.

3

The Impact of MRFIT on Health Outcomes

Before turning to employment-related outcomes, we briefly document the impact of the MRFIT
intervention on health outcomes that were directly impacted by the three interventions: serum
cholesterol reduction, smoking cessation, and lowering blood pressure. The longitudinal impacts
of MRFIT on serum cholesterol (Caggiula et al. 1981), smoking behavior (Hughes et al. 1981),
and blood pressure (Cohen et al. 1981) have been previously shown for the first four years of the
experiment. We extend these findings to cover the first six years of the experiment and also present
findings for the longitudinal impact on CHD risk scores.

3.1

The Impact on CHD Risk Scores

The reductions in CHD risk were large and sustained as shown in Figure 1. After the first year
of the intervention, Figure 1b shows that the average CHD risk in the SI group is over 40 percent
14
We can compare the risk scores of the MRFIT sample to a nationally-representative sample from the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES I), which was in the field from 1971 to 1975. We find that the
average CHD risk score for men ages 35 to 57 in NHANES I was 1.26, consistent with MRFIT participants being
drawn from the upper end of the risk distribution.

12

lower than that found in the UC group. Consistent with the prediction that the cholesterol and
blood pressure interventions will affect those with the highest initial levels, the long right tail of
the SI distribution is particularly diminished. By year six of the experimental period, as displayed
in Figure 1c, the average risk scores for both groups had fallen further. Decreases in the UC group,
however, outpaced those in the SI group, leading to a smaller effect for the intervention on CHD
mortality risk by year six.15
To examine the longitudinal effects of the MRFIT intervention, we estimate the equation

yit = αt + βt SIi + γt Xi + εit ,

(1)

where yit is an outcome for participant i in year t, SIi is an indicator equal to 1 for those in the
SI group, and Xi is a vector of controls measured at baseline. These baseline controls include a
full set of indicators for age, an indicator for being white, indicators for four education groups, and
an indicator for being married. Inclusion of the controls is not expected to affect the estimated
experimental impacts as SIi is randomly assigned. Indeed, the intervention is balanced as shown
in Table 1 and, in practice, dropping the controls has a negligible impact on the experimental effect
point estimates. Rather, we include the controls to increase the precision of the estimates.
To produce confidence intervals displayed with these results, we cluster standard errors at the
level of the 22 clinics involved in the experiment. When examining individual health, the clustering
of the standard errors may be viewed as too conservative although the group meetings at the
beginning of the intervention may have led to correlated health outcomes among the SI participants
at the same clinic. When we subsequently turn to labor market outcomes, clustering is likely more
relevant as all participants at the same clinic are exposed to the same local labor market shocks.
Since we have relatively few clusters, we use the wild cluster bootstrap to construct confidence
intervals and test statistics (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2008). Our subsequent analysis of the
primary labor market outcomes of interest employ alternate variance estimation methods that are
robust to small numbers of clusters.
15

It should be noted that the MRFIT participants had aged six years beyond the sample used to estimate the
coefficients for CHD risk score. The CHD risk scores may no longer reflect actual six-year CHD mortality group for
the sample as it ages, however, the measure remains a time-consistent summary of the effects of the intervention on
key variables.

13

The evolution of the average experimental CHD mortality risk differences is shown in Figure 1d.
Each point in this figure represents the coefficient on the intervention indicator from a regression
based on equation (1) where CHD risk for different years is the outcome. The effects of the
intervention on risk scores are largest after one year and decay over time. The coefficients indicate
a relative initial decrease in CHD risk on the order of one-third for the SI group. The experimental
differences fade slightly over the subsequent years, but remain precisely estimated and meaningfully
different across the groups.

3.2

The Impact on Cholesterol

The effect of the intervention on serum cholesterol is displayed in the top two panels of Figure 2.
As shown in Figure 2a, we find that the intervention reduced serum cholesterol by approximately
8 mg/dl with the impact falling slightly in the later years of the experimental period. Figure 2b
displays the estimated intervention effects on serum cholesterol split by the baseline levels used
for the predicted impacts shown in Appendix Table A1. Among participants with baseline serum
cholesterol levels of 220 mg/dl, the intervention reduced serum cholesterol by 10 mg/dl, which is
smaller than the 10% reduction predicted for this group. This effect fades slightly during the last
two experimental years. The intervention significantly also lowered serum cholesterol levels for
those under 220 mg/dl at baseline, although the magnitude of the response is smaller for this group
relative to those with higher serum cholesterol levels at baseline.
The SI group self-reports a large initial reduction in total daily caloric intake of approximately
300 calories which grows to approximately 350 calories by year three of the experimental period
(Figure 2c). Given the baseline average caloric intake of 2,369 calories, these differentials represent
intake reductions of 12 to 15 percent.16 The calorie reductions remain in this range over the entire
sample period, suggesting long-term food-intake changes for the SI group relative to the UC group.
However, in spite of the large self-reported reduction in calories, the SI group only experiences a
small, but significant, decline in weight of two pounds (Figure 2d). Although this last result suggests
that the SI group may be overstating the extent to which they adhere to their food pattern, the
16

Additional results for the food intake categories explicitly targeted by the intervention (saturated fat, polyunsaturated fat, dietary cholesterol, and total fat intake) are are displayed in Appendix Figure A1.

14

serum cholesterol results clearly indicate that the intervention improves cholesterol levels.

3.3

The Impact on Smoking

The estimated impact of the MRFIT intervention on smoking outcomes is displayed in Figure 3.
The effects of the intervention can be seen most pointedly at year one, as shown in the top left panel
of the Figure, where the probability of smoking falls by nearly 20 percentage points or roughly one
third of the baseline smoking population. The experimental effect shrinks over subsequent years
which is due to more-rapidly decreasing smoking rates in the UC group (not shown here). A
similar narrowing of the gap in daily cigarettes smoked also occurs following an initial reduction
of more than 40 percent. The bottom left panel of Figure 3 displays the experimental effect on
serum thiocyanate which is a biomarker for smoking levels. Although thiocyanate is present even
among those who never smoke, its concentrations are dramatically higher among current smokers,
increasing with the intensity of consumption (Hughes et al. 1981). The experimental effect on
serum thiocyanate is negative and immediately apparent in the first year of the experiment and
only exhibits modest amounts of decay over time.
The bottom right panel of Figure 3 shows the experimental impact on smoking cessation across
the distribution of baseline smoking intensity. The groupings of baseline smoking intensity match
those used for predicting experimental responses shown in Appendix Table A1. The relative decrease of over 40 percentage points among the lightest smokers (fewer than 20 cigarettes per day)
is much larger is than the roughly 25 percentage point decline for the heaviest smokers (at least
40 cigarettes per day). This general pattern is in line with the predicted smoking effects described
in Appendix Table A1. While the experimental effect fades for all baseline intensity groups, this
happens most dramatically for the light-smoking group and becomes indistinguishable from the
moderate-smoking effect in later years.

3.4

The Impact on Blood Pressure

Figure 4 shows the impact of the intervention on blood pressure. Baseline diastolic blood pressure
is 91 mm Hg, indicating that the average participant is at the low end of stage 1 hypertension.

15

As shown in the top left panel, the intervention lowers the SI group’s diastolic blood pressure by
nearly -4.5 mm Hg in year two before decreasing to near -3 mm Hg by year six. Consistent with
the experimental predictions, we find heterogeneous effects when splitting participants by baseline
blood pressure based on Appendix Table A1 (Figure 4b). The intervention successfully lowers blood
pressure levels for those with the highest starting blood pressure although the decrease does not
quite reach the ten percent reduction predicted for this group. Both groups have effects that peak
in the middle years of the study and fade slightly in the later years.
A similar overall pattern appears in the systolic blood pressure effects displayed in Figure
4c. The treatment effect peaks in size at year two, with a decrease of approximately 7 mm Hg
on a base of 135 mm Hg. Much of these effects is likely driven by variation in the likelihood
of taking hypertension medication over time. At baseline, just under one-fifth of the sample is
taking hypertension medication. Blood pressure medication use is higher for the SI group in all
experimental years, with the relative difference peaking in year two as shown in Figure 4d. At that
point, the differential effectively doubles the medication rate in the SI group relative to baseline
levels.

4

The Impact of MRFIT on Earnings and Family Income

4.1

The Impact of MRFIT on Earnings and Income CDFs

Given the large and sustained impact of the MRFIT intervention on health, we next turn to
investigating the impact on labor market outcomes. We first examine the impact of the intervention
on the discrete earnings and income distributions. We use specifications similar to equation (1) to
measure the effects of the experiment on the discrete CDFs of observed earnings and income. This
approach provides insight into which parts of the earnings and income distributions are affected by
the intervention.
The top left panel of Figure 5 displays differences at baseline between the SI and UC groups in
1-CDF of earnings.17 That is, we examine the differences between the two experimental groups in
17

The results shown in Figure 5 condition on being employed. However, as we show below in section 4.3, the
rates of non-employment at year six in the SI and UC groups are identical. The PDFs for the earnings and income
variables, by experimental group, are shown in Appendix Figure A2.

16

the fraction of observations at or above a given earnings category. These estimates are generated
from a series of linear probability models similar to equation (1) using an indicator for having
earnings at or above the given category as the outcome and using baseline demographic and health
controls that we include in equation (2). Across most of the distribution, the point estimates are
negative and, in some cases, significant, which indicates that the SI group has slightly lower baseline
earnings than the UC group.
The impact of the intervention on the 1-CDF of year six earnings is shown in the remaining two
panels of Figure 5. We find a significant impact of the MRFIT intervention on the upper end of the
earnings distribution in year six (Figure 5b). As the inflation rate was high throughout much of the
sample period but the nominal thresholds for the earnings and income categories were the same in
year six as at baseline, much of the distribution shifted into the upper earnings categories in year
six.18 Given that we find that the SI group has slightly lower earnings at baseline, we also present
additional results in which we account for these initial differences by including a set of indicators for
the categorical baseline earnings outcomes.19 As displayed in Figure 5c, the intervention increased
the fraction of individuals in the top three earnings categories after accounting for baseline earnings.
Figure 6 presents the experimental impact on 1-CDF of family income. The 1-CDF differences at
baseline are not statistically different for the SI and UC groups although all of the point estimates,
except for one in the top left panel, are negative. The top right panel of the Figure shows that
at year six, there is a significant difference between the two experimental groups in three income
categories and is even more pronounced than what we found for earnings.20 The bottom panel
of the Figure finds slightly larger effects on year-six income when including indicators for baseline
family income as controls.
18

See the PDF for year six earnings in the upper right panel of Appendix Figure A2.
These estimates restrict the sample to participants employed both at baseline and year six. We provide a detailed
discussion of sample selection issues in section 4.3. As we discuss below, we believe sample selection has a negligible
impact on our earnings and family income results.
20
We discuss possible explanations for differences in the estimated impact between earnings and family income in
section 4.4.
19

17

4.2

Quantifying the Impact of MRFIT on Earnings and Income

We next quantify the impact of MRFIT on earnings and family income. To do so, we estimate a
variant of an ordered probit to account for the categorical reporting of these outcomes. In place of
actual earnings or income, inc∗it , we observe incit which contains J categories where
incit = 1 ⇐⇒ inc∗it ≤ µ1
incit = j ⇐⇒ µj−1 < inc∗it ≤ µj ∀ j ∈ {2, . . . , J − 1}
incit = J ⇐⇒ µJ−1 < inc∗it ,

Assuming that log earnings or log income is normally distributed, we could estimate a standard
ordered probit where the µj , j = 1, . . . , J − 1 are unobserved parameters to be recovered. However, since we know the actual thresholds for the categorical variables, we can modify the ordered
probit likelihood function to make explicit use of these thresholds rather than estimate the cutpoints.21 Specifically, we assume that the log of earnings (income) is normally distributed and use
the corresponding log cutpoints in estimation.
The equation we estimate using the modified ordered probit are
log(inc∗it ) = λt + δt SIi + θt Xi + νit ,

(2)

where inc∗it is (unobserved) earnings or income of participant i in period t, SIi is a binary indicator
which equals one for those in the SI group, Xi are baseline demographic and health controls, and
νit is a normally distributed error term. The baseline demographic controls are the same as we use
to estimate equation (1) while the health controls include continuous baseline measures of serum
cholesterol, diastolic blood pressure, and number of cigarettes smoked as well as an indicator for
being a smoker. The parameter δt is the impact of the intervention on log earnings or log income.
To conduct inference, we cluster at the level of the clinic. As we only have 22 clinics in our sample,
we use the procedure developed by Kline and Santos (2012), analogous to a wild cluster bootstrap,
21

In MRFIT, for both earnings and income, J=9 and and the thresholds are $4200, $7200, $10,000, $12,000,
$15,000, $18,000, $22,500, and $35,000. These thresholds are the same at baseline and at year six.

18

for M-estimators.

4.3

Sample Selection

Issues involving sample selection arise in three possible ways in our analysis: attrition between
baseline and year six, non-employment, and missing data. Table 2 shows the share of observations
that are dropped from the analysis for each reason, both at baseline and at year six, and does so
separately for the SI and UC groups. We show these rates separately for the earnings and family
income analysis both because family income is non-zero even when the participant is not employed
and because there are slightly different rates of missing data for earnings and family income.
The first two panels of Table 2 show the share of observations dropped from the baseline
earnings and family income regressions. As shown in Panel A, roughly four percent of observations
are dropped from the baseline earnings regressions in both the SI and UC groups. The rate of
missing earnings data due to non-employment at baseline is extremely low, although this can be
explained, at least in part, by the age restrictions on the MRFIT sample which limited participants
to ages with the highest employment rates. Information on labor force status at baseline is rather
limited which may also contribute to the high reported employment rates.22 The fact that the rates
of sample selection at baseline are almost identical across the experimental groups is not surprising
as participants learn the results of the assignment to the SI or UC group after the baseline interview
that collects labor force information. As shown in Panel B, the only source of sample selection for
the baseline family income analysis is missing data as the non-employed reside in households with
positive family income. Given these results, we do not account for sample selection in our analysis
of baseline earnings and family income.
As shown in the bottom two panels of Table 2, a much higher share of observations are dropped
from the year six regressions. However, the overall rates of dropped observations from the earnings
regressions, at roughly 29.5%, is essentially the same for the SI and UC groups (Panel C). The
22

Labor force status at baseline is determined from a question in which participants are asked whether they have
two or more jobs to which they can provide one of three answers: yes, no, or retired. Thus, the non-employed are
those who state that they are retired. In fact, the majority of those classified as having missing data in Panel A are
those who do not respond to this labor force question. If we were to treat all of these observations as non-employed,
the rates of non-employment are still quite low at baseline.

19

rate of attrition by year six is 9.8% in the SI group and is 11.6% in the UC group.23 These
attrition rates are substantially lower than what is found in a standard longitudinal dataset used
in economic research. For example, Zabel (1998) finds that roughly 25% of participants in the
nationally-representative portion of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics leave the sample by the
sixth year of the study. The non-employment rate at year six of those who remain in MRFIT
is 10.2% and is identical for the SI and UC groups.24 The share of observations dropped due to
missing data of 9.4% is slightly higher for the SI group than the 7.7% rate for the UC group. The
total share of observations dropped from the year six family income regressions (Panel D) are very
close for the SI and UC groups with slight differences in the rates being dropped for attrition and
missing data.
Applying the standard approach to modeling sample selection in economics (e.g., Heckman
1979), the selection equation is
s∗i = πt SIi + ωt Wi + it ,

(3)

where the observed selection indicator, si , equals one if s∗i > 0 and equals zero otherwise. Since
we have three different mechanisms for selection, in general using a single selection equation is
not appropriate. Moreover, finding one, much less three, valid exclusion restrictions in order to
estimate the corresponding system of equations is quite challenging.
However, if we are willing to assume that two of the three sources of selection are (conditionally)
random, then we can account for the remaining form of selection with a single equation. For
example, many studies using longitudinal data do not account explicitly for sample attrition, even
among studies with dramatically higher rates of attrition than are found in MRFIT. Similarly,
the rates of missing data in MRFIT are dramatically lower than in the Current Population Survey
where in recent years nearly one-third of earnings observations for employed individuals are missing
23

The differential attrition rates by year six are not due to differential mortality for the SI and UI groups. Seven
years after the beginning of the intervention, mortality was slightly higher for the SI group although this difference was
statistically insignificant (MRFIT Research Group 1982). Mortality was lower for the SI group when measured ten
years and again sixteen years after the intervention although both these differences were only marginally significant
(MRFIT Research Group 1990, 1996).
24
The question eliciting employment status at year six provides far more detail than the corresponding question
at baseline. Respondents are asked “What is your present job status?” to which they can respond either “working
full-time,” “working part-time,” or “unemployed.” Those giving the final option as a response are given a follow-up
question to determine whether they are laid off, disabled, retired, or other.

20

and subsequently imputed (Stephens and Unayama 2015). In these instances, researchers routinely
treat sample selection as (conditionally) random by not modeling sample attrition, by using imputed
values, or by dropping observations with imputed data.25
We can account for non-employment in multiple ways. Lee (2009) develops a method for
bounding the impact of a binary treatment when the outcome of interest is subject to sample
selection. If sample selection is based on a single index as in equation (3) and if whether a participant
works, as a function of treatment assignment, is consistent with a monotonicity assumption, then
bounds on the treatment effect can be constructed by trimming the highest and lowest outcomes
in the treatment group with the larger share of positively selected observations.26 If we treat
attrition and missing data as random and then apply Lee’s method, the fact that the rates of
non-employment at year six are essentially identical for the SI and UC groups means that there are
very few observations to trim when estimating the proposed bounds.27 Thus, the resulting bounds
on the treatment effect would differ very little from estimated treatment effect.
Non-employment at year six occurs for many reasons: just over half of the non-employed are
retired, nearly 30% are either temporary or permanently disabled, and the remainder give other
reasons including being laid off. The different factors that drive these multiple dimensions of nonemployment may invalidate the single index function approach to sample selection required for
applying Lee’s bounding method. Alternatively, as shown in Figure 7, there is an important age
component to the reason for non-employment in MRFIT.28 While rates of attrition and missing
data are fairly constant by baseline age, the rate of non-employment rises sharply for older MRFIT
25

Results from estimating a logit to predict who remains in the sample in year six show that those in better baseline
health, who are better educated, and who are married are more likely to appear in year six. However, we do not
find that experimental status is not quite marginally significant (p-value=0.101). Thus, below we present earnings
and income estimates which include controls for these baseline health and demographic characteristics to account for
attrition along these dimensions.
26
As Lee notes, the treatment effect that is bounded is for the specific sub-group that is always positively selected
regardless of treatment status. In our context, this effect is the impact of MRFIT on earnings for the sub-population
that would be employed regardless of being assigned to either the SI or UC group.
27
In the simple case where we ignore covariates and treat attrition and missing year six earnings as random, the
trimming proportion, which is the fraction of positively selected observations that need to be trimmed 0.0011. That
amounts to trimming 0.1%, or five, observations before computing the upper and lower bounds.
28
Although MRFIT participants were initially screened to fall between ages 35 and 57, inclusive, the baseline
ages used in Figure 7 are from the third screening visit at which time baseline earnings, income, and employment
information was collected. Hence, some participants may have had a birthday in the intervening period which is why
the oldest age displayed in Figure 7 is 58.

21

participants.29 The year six non-employment rates are highest for those who are ages 56 and older
at baseline as these participants reached the Social Security early retirement age by year six. Thus,
we also present results in which we limit the sample to those that are age 48 and under at baseline,
for whom the rates of non-employment do not exceed seven percent, in order focus on an exogenous
subset of the sample for which non-employment is a minor issue.
Before turning to the earnings and income results, we briefly note the impact of the intervention
on basic labor force outcomes at year six which we estimate using equation (1). Since MRFIT
participants were ages 35 to 57 at baseline, the vast majority of participants are still in their working
years at year six with an 88 percent employment rate for the UC group. The intervention has no
effect on employment at this horizon as the estimated impact is statistically and substantively zero.
A small minority (5.9 percent) of UC participants are retired by year six and there is no significant
difference in retirement status due to the intervention. Of those who are employed, 97 percent in
both groups are working full-time and there is no significant difference in this outcome. Moreover,
while 60 percent of working UC participants report a change in job title or kind of work over the
study period, this rate of job change is not significantly different than what we find for the SI
group.30

4.4

Earnings and Family Income Estimates

Estimates of the impact of MRFIT on earnings and family income using equation (2) are shown in
Table 3. Since we are modelling the impact on the log of the outcome of interest, we can interpret
the coefficient as the percentage effect on the outcome due to treatment assignment. The estimated
effects on earnings are shown in Panel A of Table 3. When we include only the treatment indicator
in estimating equation (2) for baseline earnings (column (1) of Table 3), we find that those in the
SI group have slightly lower earnings, consistent with the results shown in Figure 5.31 Including
29
The rate of missing data does decline slightly with age although the high rates of non-employment for these older
individuals reduces the share of them that can be at risk for having missing earnings data.
30
These results on year six labor force outcomes are based on linear regressions using equation (1) which include
baseline health and demographics as controls. The estimate effects for being in the SI group are: employment
β = 0.003 (p-value=0.645), retirement β = 0.003 (p-vaue = 0.603), full-time employment conditional on being
employed β = −0.0004 (p-value=0.918),and job change β = −0.001 (p-value = 0.946).
31
In Table 3 we report, in brackets, p-values for the test of the null hypothesis that the parameter equals zero based
on the Kline-Santos procedure for conducting inference when using a limited number of clusters with a non-linear
estimator.

22

baseline health and demographic controls (column (2)) shrinks the estimated difference in baseline
earnings between the experimental groups.
The next three columns of Table 3 show the impact of the intervention on earnings at year six.
When only a treatment indicator is included (column (3)), we find that earnings are roughly two
percent higher for the SI group, a difference which has a p-value of 0.025. However, as we have seen,
there is a small difference in baseline earnings between the SI and UC groups. When we also include
a complete set of indicators for the baseline earnings outcome (column (4)), the estimated impact of
the intervention on earnings rises to 2.7 percent with a p-value of 0.011. Further including baseline
health and demographic controls (column (5)) increases the estimated effect to 3.1 percent with an
even lower p-value.32 Thus, the MRFIT intervention has a significant impact on the earnings of
the SI group.
The intervention effects on family income are shown in Panel B of Table 3. As shown in column
(1), baseline family income is slightly lower for the SI group but this difference is not statistically
significant, a finding which remains with the inclusion of baseline health and demographic characteristics. At year six (column (3)), family income is 3.5 percent larger for the SI group and this
finding is highly statistically significant. Including controls for baseline family income categories
raises this estimate to 3.9 percent and including baseline health and demography controls further
raises it to 4.1 percent.
One possible reason why the impact on family income is larger than that on earnings is that,
recalling that the earnings measure is for the participants’ main job, the intervention induces effects
on the participants’ earnings beyond their main jobs. Using responses to the year six question “Do
you presently work for 2 or more employers?” we find that 9.6% of workers in the SI group answer
affirmatively while 8.6% of those in the UC group do so. However, this difference is not statistically
significant (p-value=0.152) and the one percentage point gap in having a second employer between
the groups is too small to explain the difference in the earnings and family income estimates.
Another possibility is that these changes are the result of intrahousehold reallocation of time and
resources, as in Thirumurthy, Graff Zivin, and Goldstein (2008), or they could reflect improved
32

In year six earnings and income regressions where we condition on baseline health and demographics, we also
require respondents to have non-missing year six health characteristics.

23

health and earnings of other household members. Given that wives were to be heavily involved in
the intervention itself, this latter explanation is certainly possible although no information on the
work effort of spouses was collected.
The final column of Table 3 limits the sample to those age 48 and under at baseline. As
discussed in Section 4.3, non-employment at year six is a very limited concern for this subset of
participants. As we see in Panel A, the estimated impact of the intervention on earnings for this
subset is only slightly smaller than that of the full sample. As shown in Panel B, the estimated
impact on family income falls from 4% to 3% when we limit the sample to this younger subset
of participants. However, since our family income estimates are not affected by non-employment,
the observed decline in this estimated parameter is due to the age restriction rather than sample
selection issues. These results, along with our earlier discussion of Lee’s bounding method, suggest
that our main results are not substantively affected by selection due to non-employment.

4.5

Earnings Impacts by Baseline Health

We next examine the heterogeneity in the impact on earnings by baseline health characteristics.33
We use the same categorizations that compose the predicted health impacts shown in Appendix
Table A1 in order to delineate baseline health.34 We use specifications analogous to those shown
in column (5) of Table 3 which include baseline earnings, health, and demographics as controls. As
we find little evidence that non-employment impacts our estimates in Table 3, we do not account
for sample selection in estimating the heterogeneity in the earnings impacts by baseline health.
The results are presented in Figure 8. Each panel of the figure shows the results from a different
regression.35 As such, we do not estimate the impact of the intervention by jointly including each
baseline health characteristic but rather do so separately for each health characteristic. The top
left panel of Figure 8 finds a three percent earnings impact for the high cholesterol group that is
33
The estimated heterogeneity of the impacts on family income are qualitatively similar to those found for earnings
and are not reported here. These results are available from the authors.
34
The one exception is for serum cholesterol. Since only 16% of participants are below under 220 mg/dl at baseline,
we raise the threshold to under 240 mg/dl for the earnings regressions at which point roughly one-third of participants
are below the threshold.
35
Following the discussion by Cameron and Miller (2015), each 95% wild cluster bootstrap confidence interval
shown in Figure 8 is the set of candidate null hypotheses for which the p-value of the test of that null hypothesis
equals or exceeds 0.05.

24

statistically significant. The impact for the low cholesterol group is nearly identical to that of the
high cholesterol group and we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the treatment effect is the
same for those with low and high cholesterol at baseline (p-value=0.932). We also find that the
impact by baseline blood pressure, shown in the center of the top row of Figure 8, is essentially the
same for both blood pressure groups (p-value=0.654).
The impact by baseline smoking status is shown in the top right corner of Figure 8. The
left two estimates show the earnings impacts by whether or not the participant was a smoker at
baseline. While the estimated impact is over two percentage points greater for non-smokers than for
smokers, the difference in the earnings impact between smokers and non-smokers is not statistically
significant (p-value=0.241). The estimated impact for smokers hides some interesting differences
across groups defined by the baseline daily number of cigarettes smoked. We also estimate a
specification in which we allowed the impact on earnings to depend upon whether the individual
is a non-smoker, smoked less than twenty cigarettes daily, smoked twenty to thirty-nine cigarettes
daily, or smoked forty or more cigarettes per day. As shown in the top right corner of Figure
8, we find a large and significant effect of the intervention on the earnings of light smokers (less
than twenty cigarettes per day), while the effect of the intervention diminishes as the number of
cigarettes smoked at baseline increases. Moreover, the test of the null hypothesis that the impact
of the intervention on earnings is the same for all three groups of smokers is marginally significant
(p-value=0.053). We cannot reject, however, that the impact is the same for non-smokers and light
smokers.
We also examine the earnings impact by baseline CHD mortality risk quartile. The estimated
impacts are roughly three and a half percent for the first through third quartiles. The estimated
earnings impact for the highest quartile is less than two percent and is statistically insignificant.
However, despite these patterns, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the earnings impact by
is the same across all CHD mortality risk quantiles (p-value=0.605).36 In addition, recall that a
condition for being enrolled in MRFIT is to have high CHD risk relative to the broader population
so that the results need to be interpreted in this context. That is, among individuals with relatively
36
However, we can reject the null hypothesis that the treatment effects for the four quantiles all equal zero (pvalue=0.045).

25

high CHD mortality risk, the point estimates suggest that the intervention raised the earnings for
everyone except those with the highest CHD mortality risk.
Finally, we examine the earnings impact by baseline BMI across three groups: normal weight,
overweight, and obese.37 The intervention raises earnings by three percent for overweight and by
five percent for obese individuals.38 The impact on the earnings of normal weight individuals is less
than one percent. However, we are unable to reject the hypothesis that the effects are the same for
all three groups defined by BMI (p-value=0.223).

4.6

Earnings Impacts by Baseline Occupation Characteristics

We also examine whether the impact of the intervention on earnings varies systematically with
occupational characteristics. Participant occupation information was collected both at baseline and
at year six and was coded using the 1970 Census three-digit occupation classification system. Not
surprisingly, we find that baseline earnings are higher for white collar workers relative to both blue
collar workers and farm/service sector workers.39 We estimate that the intervention increases year
six earnings by over four percent for white collar workers, a finding which is statistically significant.
The intervention increases earnings by less than one percent for blue collar workers. However, we
cannot reject the null hypothesis that the treatment effects are equal across occupation groups,
although when comparing just white collar and blue collar workers the difference is marginally
significant.40
In addition, we examine whether the earnings impact differs by the routine and non-routine task
content of occupations using the methodology of Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) to define task
37

We follow standard BMI based classifications in defining participants to be normal weight (18.5 ≤ BMI < 25),
overweight (25 ≤ BMI < 30), and obese (BMI ≥ 30). Roughly half of participants are classified as overweight at
baseline with roughly a quarter of participants falling into each of the other two groups. Very few participants in
MRFIT are classified as underweight (BMI < 18.5) and they are placed in the normal weight group for our analysis.
38
Our specification includes main effects for the BMI categories in addition to the interactions of the BMI categories
with experimental group assignment.
39
We use standard classification schemes based on the 1970 Census three-digit occupation system to defined white
collar workers (occupation code less than 400), blue collar (occupation codes greater than 400 but less than 800),
and farm/service workers (occupation code greater than 800).
40
The p-value for the test of the joint null hypothesis that the impact of the intervention is the same for all three
occupation groups is 0.135. The p-value for the test of the joint null hypothesis that the impact is the same for blue
and white collar workers is 0.054. Results by occupation group are not reported in tables but are available from the
authors by request.

26

content.41 We find that baseline earnings increase with higher levels of an occupation’s non-routine
cognitive tasks (proxied by quantitative reasoning, and direction, control, and planning of tasks) and
(insignificantly with) non-routine manual tasks (eye-hand-foot coordination) and with lower levels
of an occupation’s routine manual tasks (finger dexterity) and routine cognitive tasks (set limits,
tolerances, or standards). However, we do not find any strong evidence that interactions between
the intervention and the task content of occupations affect year six earnings as these interactions
are jointly insignificant while only the finger dexterity dimension is marginal significant.42

4.7

The Impact of MRFIT on Work-Related Health Outcomes

Our results indicate that the MRFIT intervention not only improved health outcomes but also
increased the earnings and family income of the SI group. However, while there is some suggestive evidence that the intervention has heterogeneous earnings impacts associated with baseline
characteristics, none of the differences we examine are statistically significant. Thus, the exact
mechanism(s) through which the improved health raises earnings and income is unclear.
The canonical framework for understanding the relationship between health and earnings is
Grossman’s (1972) model. In this framework, investments in health raise one’s stock of health
capital but do not increase worker productivity (i.e., human capital). However, more health capital
increases the amount of healthy time that one is able to devote to various tasks, most notably
market work, and thereby provides a link between health improvements and market earnings.
While we lack exact measures of worker productivity (e.g., hourly wages) and non-health human
capital (aside from educational attainment), MRFIT participants are asked about changes in their
health and labor market outcomes over the past year at baseline as well as at each of the first five
annual interviews. We examine two of these questions which shed some light on the mechanisms
described by Grossman.
The first question is “Within the past 12 months, have you experienced a physical illness which
kept you in bed for a week or more, or sent you to the hospital?” The top panel of Figure 9 shows the
41
We use male occupation specific task content based on the 1977 Dictionary of Occupational Titles linked to the 1970 Census codes from Autor, Levy, and Murnane found at
http://economics.mit.edu/faculty/dautor/data/autlevmurn03.
For twelve occupation codes used in MRFIT
but not found in the Autor et al. data, we use values averaged over from the same occupation subgroup.
42
Task content results are not reported in tables but are available from the authors.

27

impact of the intervention responses to this question for the SI group using equation (1) in which
baseline health and demographics are included as controls. While there is no difference in the
response to this question at baseline, the SI group is significantly less likely to report an affirmative
answer in four of the five experimental waves in which the question is asked. Cumulatively, 44
percent of the UC group report an affirmative answer to this question at least one time during the
first five years of the experimental period while the SI group is 2.3 percentage points less likely to
do so, a difference that is statistically significant.43
The second question is “Within the past 12 months, have you experienced not being able to work
because of a disability?” The bottom panel of Figure 9 examines whether the respondent reported
experiencing a work-limiting disability. We find that respondents in the SI group experience 15
to 30 percent lower rates of disabilities that prevent work during the experimental period with
these differences being significant for years two through four. Cumulatively, 15.5 percent of the UC
group report being unable to work at least one time during the first five years of the experimental
period while the SI group is 1.7 percentage points less likely to do so (although this difference is
marginally significant). Interestingly, over two-thirds of participants who give a positive response
to this question only do so one time which suggests that many of these reported work preventing
disabilities are transitory. Indeed, as we have noted above, there is no significant difference in
employment rates at year six between the two treatment groups which further suggests that these
periods of disability are mainly transitory. Overall, the findings from these two questions indicate
decreased rates of illness and injury for the SI group.

5

Discussion

This paper examines the labor market effects of a randomized health intervention of working-age
men which was focused on reducing mortality due to coronary heart disease, the leading cause of
death in the United States. MRFIT succeeded in improving the health of the Special Intervention
group along several dimensions. We find that the intervention also significantly increased earnings
by three percent and family income by four percent with no concurrent effect on labor force par43

These results are conditional on responding to the fifth annual interview. The estimated cumulative difference is
regression adjusted based on equation (1).

28

ticipation. Although there is some sample attrition and labor force exit, we find that accounting
for sample selection has no substantive impact on our results. Our findings suggest that there may
be differential impacts on earnings for groups defined by baseline health and occupational characteristics although these differences are only statistically significant in the case of baseline smoking.
We further show that a partial explanation for the effect of health on earnings is an increase in the
availability of healthy time for market work. This finding is consistent with the basic prediction of
the seminal model of Grossman (1972).
It is unlikely, given the magnitude of these results, that this increase in healthy time alone is
enough to explain the three percent earnings increase due to the intervention. While the available data constrain the number of other potential mechanisms we can examine, results presented
throughout this paper allow us to examine the roles of some mechanisms that appear to have limited effects. First, the weight loss of the SI group may represent an increase in their attractiveness,
which previous research has shown to be rewarded in the labor market (Hamermesh and Biddle
1994). However, Figure 2 panel (d) shows that the relative weight loss is only two-to-three pounds
(on a base of 189 pounds), which we consider to be too small to represent meaningful increases in
attractiveness that would generate the observed higher earnings.44 Second, other observed labor
market outcomes do not appear to be driving the results because, as discussed at the end of Section 4.3, there are not meaningful differences in employment or retirement between the two study
groups. Results in that section also show that the share of participants experiencing a change in
job title or kind of work is the same across the groups, so there is little reason to believe that
the effects are driven by promotions or career advancement for the SI group. Finally, while the
analyses in Sections 4.5 and 4.6 suggest larger effects for blue collar workers, participants with
higher levels of baseline BMI, and participants with lower levels of baseline smoking, we are not
able to statistically distinguish the effects for these groups from the effects for their complements.
Ultimately, there are surely additional mechanisms that we are unable to examine, but our results
indicate that the flow of healthy time is at least one contributing factor to the earnings and family
income differences that we observe.
44

There was slightly greater weight loss among participants who were obese at baseline, a group that had larger
estimated earnings effects as shown in panel (e) of Figure 8. Still, average relative weight loss for the SI group among
the obese was only four to five pounds.

29

If better health capital indeed improves labor market outcomes through a greater flow of healthy
time, we might also expect to see effects over the entire course of MRFIT. Almost all measures
of health capital improve by year one of the study and change over the subsequent five years. A
fully dynamic analysis would relate these changes over time to health working time and earnings,
which could differentiate between possible relationships between the interventions and labor market
outcomes. It is possible that the health changes at year one represent improvements in health capital
that immediately bring about a greater flow of available working time and, ultimately, earnings.
Alternatively, the relevant dimensions of health capital could evolve slowly as healthier behaviors are
maintained throughout the duration of the study. This would deliver gradual increases in healthy
time and corresponding gradual increases in earnings. Finally, a dynamic analysis might reveal
increases in earnings and income that are not associated with healthy working time at all. Such a
finding would suggest other mechanisms and aspects of health lead to greater income and earnings.
Unfortunately, the data limitations prevent us from further exploring the relationship between
health, healthy time, and economic outcomes throughout the intervention period as earnings and
family income are only available at baseline and at year six.
Much of the development literature on health and economic outcomes explores the role that
health plays in changing other measures of human capital. In US data, the model of Restuccia
and Vandenbroucke (2013) suggests that life expectancy gains over the last half-century were responsible for a quarter of the increase in education over the same period. Extending this logic to
MRFIT, it is possible that the SI group is not more productive due to health improvements but
simply accumulates more human capital in anticipation of lower future mortality. The endogenous
relationship between longevity and human capital, including health, is further highlighted in the
model of Ehrlich and Chuma (1990). If large adjustments to human capital or other behaviors are
at play, the results presented in this paper would not indicate the effect of health on labor market
outcomes. However, there are a number of reasons to think that this is unlikely in our context.
First, men in the age range of MRFIT are relatively less likely to make human capital adjustments
than, say, school-aged individuals. Second, if human capital is already optimized with respect to
health, changes to health will only induce second-order effects on human capital and earnings, as
argued by Bleakley (2010). If a MRFIT participant has already optimized his level of human capital
30

as a function of market forces and health, the envelope theorem would imply that innovations to
health should not produce first-order effects on earnings through human capital re-optimization.
On the other hand, direct effects of health on productivity, particularly for individuals who are
constrained by the flow of healthy time, could induce first order impacts on earnings. Finally, prior
research finds that the impact of MRFIT on mortality was generally small, with no detectable effects on mortality measured seven years after the intervention began and only marginally-significant
effects at the ten and sixteen year marks (Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial Research Group,
1982, 1990, 1996). While it is possible that perceptions of increased longevity may have induced
relatively large changes in the non-health behavior of the SI group, these perceptions would have
not matched the realized gains in longevity.
Ultimately, we find that MRFIT raised earnings and family income for the SI group relative
to the UC group. We identify reduced time lost to disability and illness as a possible mechanism
underlying this effect. As heart disease remains the leading cause of death in the United States
and the health dimensions addressed by MRFIT continue to be public health concerns today, our
findings are highly relevant for the current relationship between health and the US labor market.
While the available data preclude us from studying all other possible mechanisms, our findings
and the context suggest that other mechanisms, like individuals’ attractiveness or human capital
adjustment, are less likely. As such, we interpret our findings as demonstrating positive direct
effects of health on earnings and family income.

References
Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Namrata Kala, and Anant Nyshadham (2016) “Management and Shocks to
Worker Productivity” Unpublished Manuscript.
Alderman, Harold, John Hoddinott, and Bill Kinsey (2006) “Long Term Consequences of Early
Childhood Malnutrition,” Oxford Economic Papers, 58(3):450-474.
Almond, Douglas (2006) “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-Term Effects of In Utero
Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population,” Journal of Political Economy, 114(4):

31

672-712.
Aragón, Fernando M., Juan Jose Miranda, and Paulina Oliva (2016) “Particulate Matter and Labor
Supply: The Role of Caregiving and Non-Linearities” Unpublished Manuscript.
Basta, Samir S., Soekirman, Darwin Karyadi, and Nevin S. Scrimshaw (1979) “Iron deficiency
anemia and the productivity of adult males in Indonesia,” The American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 32(4): 916-925.
Benfari, Robert C. (1981) “The Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT): III. The Model
for Intervention,” Preventive Medicine, 10(4):426-442.
Bleakley, Hoyt (2010) “Health, Human Capital, and Development,” Annual Review of Economics,
2:283-310.
Caggiula, Arlene W., George Christakis, Marilyn Farrand, Stephen B. Hulley, Ruth Johnson, Norman L. Lasser, Jeremiah Stamler, Graham Widdowson (1981) “The Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT): IV. Intervention on Blood Lipids,” Preventive Medicine, 10(4):443-475.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller (2008) “Bootstrap-Based Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3):414-427.
Cameron, A. Colin and Douglas L. Miller (2015) “A Practitioner’s Guide to Cluster-Robust Inference,” Journal of Human Resources, 50(2):317-372.
Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson (2002) “Economic Status and Health in Childhood: The Origins of the Gradient,” American Economic Review, 92(5):1308-34.
Cawley, John, and Christopher J. Ruhm (2011) “The Economics of Risky Health Behaviors,”
Handbook of Health Economics, 2:95-199.
Cohen, Jerome D., Richard H. Grimm, Jr., and W. McFate Smith (1981) “The Multiple Risk
Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT): VI. Intervention on Blood Pressure,” Preventive Medicine,
10(4):501-518.
Currie, Janet and Brigette C. Madrian (1999) “Health, Health insurance and the Labor Market,”
in Ashenfelter, Orley C. and David Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 33093416.
Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile (2003) “Socioeconomic Status and Child Health: Why Is the
Relationship Stronger for Older Children?” American Economic Review, 93(5):1813-23.
32

Dillon, Andrew, Jed Friedman, and Pieter Serneels (2014) “Health Information, Treatment, and
Worker Productivity: Malaria Testing and Treatment among Nigerian Sugarcane Cutters,” Discussion Paper no. 8074, IZA, Bonn, Germany.
Dow, Will, Paul Gertler, Robert F. Schoeni, John Strauss, and Duncan Thomas (1997) “Health
Care Prices, Health and Labor Outcomes: Experimental Evidence,” Working Paper no. 97-01,
RAND, Santa Monica, CA.
Edgerton, V. R., G. W. Gardner, Y. Ohira, K. A. Gunawardena, and B. Senewiratne (1979) “Irondeficiency anaemia and its effect on worker productivity and activity patterns,” British Medical
Journal, 2(6204):1546-1549.
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Hiroyuki Chuma (1990) “A Model of the Demand for Longevity and the Value
of Life Extension,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(4):761-782.
Field, Erica, Omar Robles, and Maximo Torero (2009) “Iodine Deficiency and Schooling Attainment
in Tanzania,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(4):140-169.
Fink, Günther, and Felix Masiye (2015) “Health and agricultural productivity: Evidence from
Zambia,” Journal of Health Economics, 42:151-164.
Frankenberg, Elizabeth, Wayan Suriastini, and Duncan Thomas (2005) “Can Expanidng Access to
Basic Healthcare Improve Children’s Health Status? Lessons from Indonesia’s ‘Midwife in the
Village’ Programme,” Population Studies, 59(1):5-19.
Frijters, Paul, John P. Haisken-DeNew, and Michael A. Shields (2005) “The causal effect of income
on health: Evidence from German reunification,” Journal of Health Economics, 24:997-1017.
Glewwe, Paul, and Edward A. Miguel (2008) “The Impact of Child Health and Nutrition on
Education in Less Developed Countries,” Handbook of Development Economics, 4:3561-13606.
Graff Zivin, Joshua, and Matthew Niedell (2012) “The Impact of Pollution on Worker Productivity”
American Economic Review, 102(7):3652-3673.
Grossman, Michael (1972) “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health” Journal
of Political Economy, 80(2):223-255.
Haas, Jere D., and Thomas Brownlie IV (2001) “Iron Deficiency and Reduced Work Capacity: A
Critical Review of the Research to Determine a Causal Relationship ” The Journal of Nutrition,
131(2):676S-690S.
33

Hamermesh, Daniel S. and Biddle, Jeff E. (1994) “Beauty and the Labor Market,” American
Economic Review, 84(5):1174-94.
Heckman, James J. (1979) “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica, 47(1):
153-62.
Hoddinott, John, John A. Maluccio, Jere R. Behrman, Rafael Flores, and Reynaldo Martorell
(2008) “Effect of a nutrition intervention during early childhood on economic productivity of
Guatemalan adults” Lancet, 371:411-416.
Hughes, Glenn H., Norman Hymowitz, Judith K. Ockene, Nathan Simon, and Thomas M. Vogt
(1981) “The Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT): V. Intervention on Smoking,”
Preventive Medicine, 10(4):476-500.
Kline, Patrick and Andres Santos (2012) “A Score Based Approach to Wild Bootstrap Inference,”
Journal of Econometric Methods, 1(1): 23-41.
Kochanek Kenneth D., Sherry L. Murphy, Jiaquan Xu, and Betzaida Tejada-Vera. (2016) “Deaths:
Final data for 2014,” National vital statistics reports 65(4). Hyattsville, MD: National Center
for Health Statistics.
Lee, David S. (2009) “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on Treatment Effects,” Review of Economic Studies, 76(3)1071-1102.
Li, Ruowei, Xuecun Chen, Huaicheng Yan, Paul Deurenberg, Lars Garby, and Joseph G.A.J. Hautvast (1994) “Functional consequences of iron supplementation in iron-deficient female cotton
mill workers in Beijing, China,” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 59(4): 908-913.
Lucas, Adrienne M. (2010) “Malaria Eradication and Educational Attainment: Evidence from
Paraguay and Sri Lanka,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(2):46-71.
Maluccio, John A., John Hoddinott, Jere R. Behrman, Reynaldo Martorell, Agnes R. Quisumbing,
and Aryeh D. Stein (2009) “The Impact of Improving Nutrition during Early Childhood on
Education among Guatemalan Adults” The Economic Journal, 119(537):734-763.
Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial Research Group (1982) “Multiple Risk Factor Intervention
Trial: Risk Factor Changes and Mortality Results,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 248:1465-1477.
Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial Research Group (1990) “Mortality Rates After 10.5 Years
34

for Participants in the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial: Findings Related to A Priori
Hypotheses of the Trial,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 263:1795-1801.
Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial Research Group (1996) “Mortality After 16 Years for Participants Randomized to the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial,” Circulation, 94:946-951.
Neaton, James D., Steven Broste, Louis Cohen, Eugene L. Fishman, Marcus O. Kjelsberg, and
James Schoenberger (1981) “The Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT): VII. A
Comparison of Risk Factor Changes between the Two Study Groups,” Preventive Medicine,
10(4):519-543.
Newhouse, Joseph P., and the Insurance Experiment Group (1993) Free for All? Lessons from the
RAND Health Insurance Experiment, Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
ODonnell, Owen, Eddy Van Doorslaer, and Tom Van Ourti (2015) “Health and inequality,” In
Anthony B. Atkinson and Francois Bourguignon (eds.) Handbook of Income Distribution 2,
14911533.
Restuccia, Diego, and Guillaume Vandenbroucke (2013) “A Century of Human Capital and Hours,”
Economic Inquiry, 51(3):1849-1866.
Rivers, Douglas, and Quang H. Vuong (1988) “Limited Information Estimators and Exogeneity
Tests for Simultaeneous Probit Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 39:347-366.
Roseboom, Tessa J., Jan H.P. van der Meulen, Anita C. J. Ravelli, Clive Osmond, David J.P.
Barker, and Otto P. Bleker (2001) “Effects of Prenatal Exposure to the Dutch Famine on Adult
Disease in Later Life: An Overview,” Twin Research, 4(5):293-298.
Sherwin, Roger, Charles T. Kaelber, Paul Kezdi, Marcus O. Kjelsberg, and H. Emerson Thomas,
Jr. (1981) “The Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT): II. The Development of the
Protocol,” Preventive Medicine, 10(4):402-425.
Stephens Jr., Melvin and Takashi Unayama (2015) “Estimating the Impacts of Program Benefits: Using Instrumental Variables with Underreported and Imputed Data” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper # 21248.
Terza, Joseph V., Anirban Basu, and Paul J. Rathouz (2008) “Two-stage residual inclusion estimation: Addressing endogeneity in health econometric modeling,” Journal of Health Economics,
27:531-543.
35

Thirumurthy, Harsha, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Markus Goldstein (2008) “The Economic Impact of
AIDS Treatment: Labor Suply in Western Kenya,” Journal of Human Resources, 43(3):511-552.
Thomas, Duncan (2009) “The causal effect of health on social and economic prosperity: Methods
and findings” Unpublished Manuscript.
Thomas, Duncan, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Jed Friedman, Jean-Pierre Habicht, Mohammed Hakimi,
Nicholas Ingwersen, Jaswadi, Nathan Jones, Christopher McKelvey, Gretel Pelto, Bondan Sikoki,
Teresa Seeman, James P. Smith, Cecep Sumantri, Wayan Suriastini, and Siswanto Wilopo (2006)
“Causal Effect of Health on Labor Market Outcomes: Experimental Evidence,” Working Paper
no. 070-06, California Center for Population Research, Los Angeles, CA.
Torpy Janet M., Alison E. Burke, and Richard M. Glass (2009) “Coronary Heart Disease Risk
Factors,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 302(21):2388.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. (2015) “Control Function Methods in Applied Econometrics,” Journal of
Human Resources, 50(2):420-445.
Zabel, Jeffrey E. (1998) “An Analysis of Attrition in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the
Survey of Income and Program Participation with an Application to a Model of Labor Market
Behavior,” The Journal of Human Resources, 33(2):479-506.
Zukel, William J., Oglesby Paul, and Harold W. Schnaper (1981) “The Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT): I. Historical Perspectives,” Preventive Medicine, 10(4):387-401.

36

Table 1: Balance of Baseline Characteristics
SI

UC

Difference

Age

46.43

46.35

0.09
[0.50]

White

0.898

0.905

-0.007
[0.34]

HS Grad

0.211

0.208

0.003
[0.66]

Some College

0.358

0.350

0.008
[0.44]

College Grad

0.269

0.279

-0.010
[0.19]

Married

0.887

0.889

-0.002
[0.76]

254

254

0.22
[0.75]

Smoker

0.593

0.590

0.004
[0.65]

Cigs/Day (w/zeroes)

19.2

19.4

-0.13
[0.73]

Diastolic Blood Pressure

90.7

90.7

0.02
[0.85]

CHD Mortality Risk (%)

2.08

2.09

-0.016
[0.50]

Serum Cholesterol

Notes: The p-values reported in brackets are from using a wild cluster bootstrap which clusters at the clinic level.
See the text and Neaton et al. (1981) for the calculation of CHD mortality risk. The analysis sample contains 12,562
participants, 6,291 in the SI group and 6,271 in the UC group, who have non-missing data for age, race, education,
marital status, and employment status measured at baseline.

Table 2: Sources of Sample Selection
Share of Participants Dropped Due to:
Attrition

Non-Employment

Missing Data

Total

3.4%
4.0%

3.9%
4.5%

-

3.5%
3.8%

3.5%
3.8%

10.2%
10.2%

9.4%
7.7%

29.4%
29.5%

9.2%
7.6%

19.0%
19.2%

A. Baseline Earnings
SI
UC

-

0.5%
0.5%

B. Baseline Family Income
SI
UC

-

C. Year Six Earnings
SI
UC

9.8%
11.6%

D. Year Six Family Income
SI
UC
Notes: Authors’ calculations.

9.8%
11.6%

-

Table 3: Earnings and Family Income Regressions

Baseline
(1)
(2)

(3)

Year Six
(4)

(5)

Year Six
Age≤ 48
(6)

A. Earnings
SI

-0.015
[0.025]

-0.010
[0.074]

0.020
[0.025]

0.027
[0.011]

0.031
[0.004]

0.027
[0.010]

N

12,326

12,321

9,508

9,215

9,077

5,881

SI

-0.013
[0.111]

-0.010
[0.183]

0.035
[0.006]

0.039
[0.004]

0.041
[0.004]

0.031
[0.043]

N

12,399

12,395

10,899

10,577

10,410

6,340

X

X
X

X
X

B. Family Income

Additional Controls:
Baseline health
& demographics
Baseline outcome

X

Notes: This table reports ordered probit estimates in which the cutpoints are known and the unobserved latent outcome is assumed to be log normally distributed. The baseline health and demographic controls are serum cholesterol,
diastolic blood pressure, number of cigarettes smoked, an indicator for being a smoker, a full set of indicators for age,
an indicator for being white, indicators for four education groups, and a marital status indicator. The baseline outcome controls used for the year six outcomes in columns (4)-(6) are a set of indicators for the corresponding outcome
at baseline. The earnings regressions are restricted to those who are employed for the relevant survey waves. Column
(6) further restricts to participants who were 48 or younger at baseline. The outcomes are nine-group categorical
earnings and income measures with cut points at $4200, $7200, $10,000, $12,000, $15,000, $18,000, $22,500, and
$35,000. Kline-Santos wild cluster bootstrap p-values for the null that the parameter is equal to 0 are reported in
brackets clustering at the clinic level.

.5

.4

Density
.2
.3

.1

0

1.5

1

Density

.5

0

0

8
UC (mean=2.09)

(a) Baseline CHD Risk

SI (mean=2.08)

4
6
CHD risk at baseline

2

8
UC (mean=1.24)

(c) Impact at Year Six

SI (mean=0.84)

4
6
Actual CHD risk

SI vs UC at Year 6

Actual Impact on CHD Risk Score

2

SI vs UC

Baseline CHD Risk Score Distribution

10

10

0

0

2

3
year

4

5

(d) Longitudinal Impact on CHD risk

1

(Baseline = 2.09%)

8
UC (mean=1.73)

(b) Impact at Year One

SI (mean=1.03)

4
6
Actual CHD risk

Framingham CHD Risk Score

2

SI vs UC at Year 1

Actual Impact on CHD Risk Score

Figure 1: Experimental Impact on CHD Risk

6

10

Notes: See the text and Neaton et al. (1981) for the calculation of CHD mortality risk. Risk score levels are calculated using observed risk factors in each
year. The densities are smoothed with an Epanechnikov kernel. Treatment effect estimates are the estimated coefficients on an indicator for being in the
SI group from linear regressions of the form of equation(1). The regression controls include a full set of indicators for age, an indicator for being white,
indicators for four education groups, and a marital status indicator. The 95% confidence interval bars shown in the bottom left panel are from using a wild
cluster bootstrap which clusters at the clinic level.

0

1
.8
0

.2

.4

Density
.6
0
-.2
-.4
-.6
-.8

5

0

-5

-10

100

0

-100

-200

-300

0

0

2

3
year

4

1

2

(c) Calories

3
year

4

(Baseline = 2,369 (in levels))

Calories

(a) Overall Serum Cholesterol

1

(Baseline = 254 mg/dl)

Serum Cholesterol

5

5

6

6

0

0
Baseline: Below 220

2

3
year

5
Baseline: At/Above 220

4

1

3
year

(d) Body Weight

2

(Baseline = 189 lbs)

Weight

4

5

(b) Serum Cholesterol By Baseline Levels

1

Split By Baseline Levels

Serum Cholesterol

Figure 2: Experimental Impact on Serum Cholesterol, Calories, and Body Weight

6

6

Notes: Each point is coefficient from a different regression of the form of equation (1). The 95% confidence interval bars are from using a wild cluster
bootstrap which clusters at the clinic level. The regression controls are baseline measures and include a full set of indicators for age, an indicator for being
white, indicators for four education groups, and a marital status indicator.

-400

5
0
-5
-10
2
0
-2
-4

0

-.05

-.1

-.15

-.2

5

0

-5

-10

0

0

1

1

3
year

(Baseline = 131)

Thiocyanate

(a) Smoker

3
year

4

4

(c) Serum Thiocyanate

2

2

(Baseline = 59%)

Current Smoker (%)

5

5

6

6

0

0

1

1

3
year

4

3
year

4

5

5

(d) Smoker

Baseline: Light (1-19 Cigs/day)
Baseline: Moderate/Heavy (20-39 Cigs/day)
Baseline: Very Heavy (40+ Cigs/day)

2

By Smoking Intensity at Baseline

Current Smoker (%)

(b) Cigarettes/Day

2

(Baseline = 19)

Cigarettes/Day (w/Non-Smokers)

Figure 3: Experimental Impact on Smoking

6

6

Notes: Each point is coefficient from a different regression of the form of equation (1). The 95% confidence interval bars are from using a wild cluster
bootstrap which clusters at the clinic level. The regression controls are baseline measures and include a full set of indicators for age, an indicator for being
white, indicators for four education groups, and a marital status indicator.

-15

0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
0
-.1
-.2
-.3
-.4
-.5

0

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5

0

-2

-4

-6

0

0

1

1

3
year

4

3
year

4

(c) Systolic Blood Pressure

2

(Baseline = 135 mm Hg)

Systolic Blood Pressure

(a) Diastolic Blood Pressure

2

(Baseline = 91 mm Hg)

Diastolic Blood Pressure

5

5

6

6

0

0
Baseline: Below 95

2

3
year

5
Baseline: At/Above 95

4

2

3
year

4

5

(d) Taking Blood Pressure Medication

1

(Baseline = 19.3%)

Taking Hypertension Medication (%)

(b) Diastolic Blood Pressure by Baseline

1

By Baseline Levels

Diastolic Blood Pressure

Figure 4: Experimental Impact on Blood Pressure

6

6

Notes: Each point is coefficient from a different regression of the form of equation (1). The 95% confidence interval bars are from using a wild cluster
bootstrap which clusters at the clinic level. The regression controls are baseline measures and include a full set of indicators for age, an indicator for being
white, indicators for four education groups, and a marital status indicator.

-8

0
-2
-4
-6
-8
.2
.15
.1
.05
0

.01

0

-.01

-.02

8600

13500
16500
inccat

20250

28750

>=35K

5700

8600

13500
16500
inccat

8600

11000

13500
16500
inccat

20250

28750

>=35K

(c) (1-CDF) at Year Six Conditional on Baseline Earnings

5700

Impact on 1-CDF

20250

(b) (1-CDF) at Year Six

11000

Year Six Main Job Earnings Conditional on Baseline Earnings

(a) (1-CDF) at Baseline

11000

Impact on 1-CDF

28750

>=35K

Note: All three panels display estimated coefficients on an indicator for being in the SI group. Each point is a coefficient from a different regression of the
form of equation (1), where the outcome is a binary variable for having earnings at or above the given earnings group at baseline (Panel (a)) or year six
(Panels (b) and (c)). The 95% confidence interval bars are from using a wild cluster bootstrap which clusters at the clinic level. In both Panels (a) and (b),
the regressions include baseline health and demographic controls: serum cholesterol, diastolic blood pressure, number of cigarettes smoked, an indicator for
being a smoker, a full set of indicators for age, an indicator for being white, indicators for four education groups, and a marital status indicator. Panel (c)
further includes a set of indicators for each of the baseline earnings categories.

5700

Impact on 1-CDF

Year Six Main Job Earnings

Figure 5: Experimental Impact on Earnings

Baseline Main Job Earnings

.06
.04
.02
0

-.03

.06
.04
.02
0
-.02

.02

.01

0

-.01

5700

8600

13500
16500
inccat

20250

28750

>=35K

5700

8600

13500
16500
inccat

8600

11000

13500
16500
inccat

20250

28750

>=35K

(c) (1-CDF) at Year Six Conditional on Baseline Income

5700

Impact on 1-CDF

20250

(b) (1-CDF) at Year Six

11000

Impact on 1-CDF

Year Six Family Income Conditional on Baseline Income

(a) (1-CDF) at Baseline

11000

Impact on 1-CDF

Year Six Family Income

Figure 6: Experimental Impact on Income

28750

>=35K

Note: All three panels display estimated coefficients on an indicator for being in the SI group. Each point is a coefficient from a different regression of the
form of equation (1), where the outcome is a binary variable for having family income at or above the given income group at baseline (Panel (a)) or year six
(Panels (b) and (c)). The 95% confidence interval bars are from using a wild cluster bootstrap which clusters at the clinic level. In both Panels (a) and (b),
the regressions include baseline health and demographic controls: serum cholesterol, diastolic blood pressure, number of cigarettes smoked, an indicator for
being a smoker, a full set of indicators for age, an indicator for being white, indicators for four education groups, and a marital status indicator. Panel (c)
further includes a set of indicators for each of the baseline income categories.

-.02

Baseline Family Income

.06
.04
.02
0
-.02

.06
.04
.02
0
-.02

0

0.10

Fraction
0.20

0.30

0.40

Figure 7: Sources of Sample Selection at Year Six by Age at Baseline

35

40
Attrition

45
Age at Baseline

50

Non-Employment

Notes: Missing data calculations are for year six earnings regressions.

55
Missing Data

60

.08

.06

.04

.02

0

.08

.06

.04

.02

0

High
Cholesterol

2nd

3rd

4th
(Highest)

(d) By Baseline CHD Risk Quantile

1st
(Lowest)

By Baseline CHD Risk Quantile

(a) By Baseline Cholesterol

Low
Cholesterol

(Below/Above 240 mg/dl)

By Baseline Cholesterol

High
Blood Pressure

Overweight

Obese

(e) By Baseline BMI

Normal Weight

By Baseline BMI

(b) By Baseline Diastolic Blood Pressure

Low
Blood Pressure

(Below/Above 91 mm Hg)

By Baseline Diastolic Blood Pressure

Moderate
Smoker

Heavy
Smoker

(c) By Baseline Smoking Status

Light
Smoker

By Baseline Smoking Status

Non-Smoker Smoker

Figure 8: Heterogeneous Earnings Impacts By Baseline Health

Notes: Each panel displays coefficients from a different regression of the form of equation (2), with the exception of Panel (c) in which the left two and right
three coefficients are from different regressions. The displayed coefficients are SI-group indicators that are permitted to vary by the displayed baseline health
groups. The group definitions for Panels (a) and (b) are defined in the panel subtitles. In Panel (c), light smokers are defined as smokers who self-report
19 or fewer cigarettes per day, while heavy smokers are those who self-report 40 or more cigarettes per day. In Panel (e), normal weight is defined as BMI
< 25 and obese is defined as BMI ≥ 30. The 95 percent wild cluster bootstrap confidence interval bars contain the set of candidate null hypotheses for
which the p-value of the test of that null hypothesis equals or exceeds 0.05.. The regressions include baseline health and demographic controls: linear serum
cholesterol, linear diastolic blood pressure, number of cigarettes smoked, an indicator for being a smoker, a full set of indicators for age, an indicator for
being white, indicators for four education groups, and a marital status indicator. The regressions further include a full set of indicators for baseline earnings
categories. Because BMI does not appear in the general set of controls used throughout this paper, indicators for baseline BMI group are also included in
the regression for Panel (e).

-.02

.06
.05
.04
.03
.02
.01
0
.1
.05
0
-.05

.1
.05
0
-.05

Figure 9: Experimental Impact on Health Outcomes in Last Year

Physical Illness/Injury in Last Year

-.03

-.02

-.01

0

.01

Week or More in Bed or Hospitalization (Baseline = 0.124)

0

1

2

year

3

4

5

(a) Physical Illness

Not Able to Work Because of a Disability

-.02

-.01

0

.01

in Last Year (Baseline = 0.031)

0

1

2

year

3

4

5

(b) Disabled

Notes: Each point is coefficient from a different regression of the form of equation (1). The 95% confidence interval
bars are from using a wild cluster bootstrap which clusters at the clinic level. The regressions include baseline health
and demographic controls: serum cholesterol, diastolic blood pressure, number of cigarettes smoked, an indicator for
being a smoker, a full set of indicators for age, an indicator for being white, indicators for four education groups, and
a marital status indicator.

Table A1: Predicted Percentage Change in Baseline Outcomes
SI

UC

Serum Cholesterol:
≥220 mg/dl
<220 mg/dl

10
0

0
0

Diastolic Blood Pressure:
≥95 mm HG
<95 mm HG

10
0

0
0

Cigarettes Smoked:
1-19 Cigarettes/Day
20-39 Cigarettes/Day
40+ Cigarettes/Day

55
40
25

15
10
5

Notes: Sourced from Sherwin et al. (1981, Table 1). The Table presents the percentage changes in key CHD risk
factors anticipated by MRFIT organizers as a function of baseline levels of the risk factors. The predicted serum
cholesterol effects were informed by experimental results from the National Diet-Heart Study, the New York AntiCoronary Club, and the Chicago Coronary Prevention Evaluation Program. The diastolic blood pressure predictions
were informed by the Hypertension Detection and Follow-up Program. Anticipated effects of the anti-smoking
intervention were less firm but were informed by prior studies suggesting that greater percentage reductions were
possible among lighter smokers (Sherwin et al., 1981).

0

-1

-2

-3

-4

0

-50

-100

0

0

1

1

3
year

4

3
year

4

(c) Dietary Cholesterol

2

(Baseline = 384 mg/dl)

Dietary Cholesterol

(a) Saturated Fat

2

(Baseline = 13.7%)

Saturated Fat (% of Calories)

5

5

6

6

0

0

1

1

3
year

4

3
year

(d) Total Fat

2

(Baseline = 37.8%)

4

Total Fat (% of Calories)

(b) Unaturated Fat

2

(Baseline = 6.3%)

Unsaturated Fat (% of Calories)

Figure A1: Experimental Impact on Cholesterol-Related Food Intake

5

5

6

6

Notes: Each point is coefficient from a different regression of the form of equation (1). The 95% confidence interval bars are from using a wild cluster
bootstrap which clusters at the clinic level. The regression controls are baseline measures and include a full set of indicators for age, an indicator for being
white, indicators for four education groups, and a marital status indicator.

-150

2.5
2
1.5
1
.5
0
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

.25

.2

Fraction
.15

.1

.05

0

.25

.2

Fraction
.15

.1

.05
<4200

<4200

8600
UC

SI

11000 13500 16500 20250 28750 >=35K

8600
UC

SI

11000 13500 16500 20250 28750 >=35K

(c) Baseline Family Income PDF

5700

Baseline Family Income PDF

(a) Baseline Earnings PDF

5700

Baseline Earnings on Main Job PDF

<4200

<4200

8600
UC

SI

11000 13500 16500 20250 28750 >=35K

8600

UC

SI

11000 13500 16500 20250 28750 >=35K

(d) Year Six Family Income PDF

5700

Year Six Family Income PDF

(b) Year Six Earnings PDF

5700

Year Six Earnings on Main Job PDF

Figure A2: Distributions of Earnings and Family Income at Baseline and Year Six

Notes: These figures present the discrete probability density functions, by experimental group, for the categorical earnings and family income measures at
baseline and year six.

0

.4
.3
Fraction
.2
.1
0
.4
.3
Fraction
.2
.1
0

