NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RECONCILING RESULTS ON RACIAL DIFFERENCES IN POLICE SHOOTINGS
Roland G. Fryer, Jr
Working Paper 24238
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24238

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018

I would like to thank Tanaya Devi, Hannah Ruebeck, and Damini Sharma for exceptional
research assistance. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Roland G. Fryer, Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Reconciling Results on Racial Differences in Police Shootings
Roland G. Fryer, Jr
NBER Working Paper No. 24238
January 2018
JEL No. J0,K0
ABSTRACT
Police use of force – particularly lethal force – is one of the most divisive issues of the twentyfirst century. To understand the nexus of race, criminal justice, and police brutality, academics
and journalists have begun to amass impressive datasets on Officer-Involved-Shootings (OIS). I
compare the data and methods of three investigative journalism articles and two publications in
the social sciences on a set of five rubrics and conclude that the stark differences between their
findings are due to differences in what qualifies for a valid research design and not underlying
differences in the datasets.

Roland G. Fryer, Jr
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 208
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rolandfryer@edlabs.harvard.edu

Reconciling Results on Racial Differences in Police Shootings
By Roland G. Fryer, Jr.∗

data and that assembled by The Post or
Guardian is that it counts all OIS – fatal or non-fatal – whereas The Post and
Guardian data count fatal shootings only.
VICE catalogs 4,400 individuals involved in
OIS between 2010 and 2016. Two-thirds
of the individuals shot by police survived.
Twenty percent of people involved in OIS
were unarmed – four times as large as
the rate of unarmed people documented in
The Post/Guardian data of fatal shootings.
Moreover, blacks were 55 percent of shooting victims, which is more than double the
share of the black population in these jurisdictions. Black subjects shot by police
were more likely to be shot during encounters that began with a traffic or pedestrian
stop. They were no more likely to be armed
with a gun than whites but less likely to be
armed with any weapon (VICE, 2017).
Among social scientists, the literature is
surprisingly thin. Ross (2015) estimates
racial differences in county-specific relative
risks of being shot by police, using crowdsourced data from the US Police-Shooting
Database. He estimates that the probability of being black, unarmed, and shot by
police is nearly 3.5 times larger than the
probability of being white, unarmed, and
shot by police.
In stark contrast, Fryer (forthcoming)
finds that, conditional on a police interaction, there are no racial differences in OIS
on either the extensive or intensive margins.1 Using data from Houston, Texas –
where I have both OIS and a randomly chosen set of interactions with police where
lethal force may have been justified but was
not used – I find, after controlling for suspect demographics, officer demographics,
encounter characteristics, suspect weapon
and year fixed effects, that blacks are 27.4

Police use of force – particularly lethal
force – is one of the most divisive issues
of the twenty-first century. When an officer discharges a weapon, it’s a life changing
event. A single bullet – which weighs about
.02 pounds and is 10mm long – can end a
life, erase a pension, or change the image of
those who are sworn to serve and protect.
To understand the nexus of race, criminal
justice, and police brutality, academics and
journalists have begun to amass impressive datasets on Officer-Involved-Shootings
(OIS). The Washington Post (2015) provided important stylized facts about individuals killed at the hands of police officers
in one calendar year. Police fatally shoot
nearly 1,000 individuals a year in the U.S.
As the report argues, the incidents that
have ignited protests – white police officers
killing unarmed black men – represent less
than four percent of fatal police shootings.
The Guardian (2015) collected similar
data in their much publicized series, The
Counted, and tallied 1,134 deaths of Americans at the hands of police in 2015.
And, similar to The Post’s database, The
Guardian emphasizes that although black
males aged 15-34 make up 2 percent of the
population they comprise 15 percent of all
deaths logged in 2015 – five times the comparison number for whites. One in every
sixty-five – or 1.5 percent – deaths of a
black man in the US is a killing by police.
Roughly twenty-five percent of blacks that
were killed were unarmed, eight percentage
points higher than whites (Guardian, 2015).
More recently, VICE News collected data
on OIS from 47 of the 50 largest police departments in the U.S (VICE, 2017).
The major difference between the VICE
∗ Fryer:
Harvard University and NBER,
1805 Cambridge Street, Cambridge MA 02138,
rfryer@fas.harvard.edu. I would like to thank Tanaya
Devi, Hannah Ruebeck, and Damini Sharma for
exceptional research assistance. All errors are my own.

1 Goff, et al. (2016) reports similar findings on the
application of lethal force, but their data is not available
for public use and thus cannot be included in this review.

1

2

PAPERS AND PROCEEDINGS

percent less likely to be shot at by police
relative to non-black, non-Hispanics. Investigating the intensive margin – who shoots
first in an encounter with police or how
many bullets were discharged in the endeavor – there are no detectable racial differences.
The key takeaway suggested by The Post
(2015), The Guardian (2015), VICE (2017)
and Ross (2015) is that there are large
racial differences in OIS that are evidence
of racial bias or, at the very least, problematic. As the Post writes, “Although black
men make up only 6 percent of the U.S.
population, they account for 40 percent of
the unarmed men shot to death by police
this year.” The Guardian begins their article remarking, “Young black men were nine
times more likely than other Americans to
be killed by police officers in 2015,” and
VICE exclaims, “Black people were shot
more often and at higher rates than people
of any other races.” Ross (2015) concludes,
“There is evidence of significant bias in the
killing of unarmed black Americans relative
to unarmed white Americans.”
Yet, these descriptive statistics, while
poignant, do not prove racial bias. Indeed, when I compare the different data sets
described above using a common estimating equation I conclude that the “evidence
for bias” in some studies and not others is
mainly a result of misspecified regression
equations, not inherent differences in the
datasets.
I.

The Simple Econometrics of
Estimating Racial Differences in
Officer-Involved-Shootings

Conceptually, estimating racial differences in OIS is very similar to the large
and well-established literature in labor economics designed to understand whether
racial differences in wages is due to discrimination.
Borrowing extensively from that literature and simplifying to the extreme, let’s
suppose there are only two races: black and
white. Let Ri = 1 if individual i is black
and Ri = 0 if they are are white. And, suppose that Yi1 denotes the value of Y (e.g.

MAY 2018

probability of being involved in an OIS)
if individual i is black and Yi0 denote the
value of Y if individual i is white. Then, the
“race effect” for individual i is τ = Yi1 − Yi0
– that is, the difference in Y that can be attributed to an individual’s race. This quantity is the proverbial “holy grail” – the parameter that we are all attempting to estimate but never quite do.
Consider the following linear regression
equation: Yi = β0 +τ Ri +β1 X1 +...+βn Xn +
i . One can trivially demonstrate that this
regression recovers the “race effect” if any
difference between the groups that we’d observe in the absence of bias is zero. To see
this formally, write Yi as Yi0 + Ri (Yi1 − Yi0 ).
Note: τ measures E[Yi |Ri = 1] − E[Yi |Ri =
0]. Using these two facts:
τ = E[Yi1 − Yi0 ] +
|
{z
}
Race Effect

E[Y 0 |R = 1] − E[Yi0 |Ri = 0].
| i i
{z
}
Selection Effect

It is straightforward to see that estimating Equation (1) recovers the race effect
when the selection effect is zero. This
happens when Yi1 , Yi0 ⊥ Ri |Xi , which ensures E[Yi0 |Ri = 1] = E[Yi0 |Ri = 0]. In
words, a linear regression can recover the
“race effect” if race is “as good as randomly assigned,” conditional on the covariates (X 0 s). When the selection effect is
not zero then one can misinterpret the mismeasurement of X 0 s (e.g. omitted contextual variables) as racial bias. One way to
ensure that race is “as good as randomly
assigned” is to implement an experiment
(see Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) for
a classic example). None of the studies
mentioned above meet this threshold.
II.

Analyzing the Literature

In this section, using the above conceptual framework, I analyze the growing literature on racial differences in OIS on a set of
five rubrics: (1) Reliability of Police Data;
(2) Representativeness of Data; (3) Endogeneity of Police-Civilian Contact; (4) Relevant Counterfactuals; and (5) Quality of
Covariates.

VOL. 2 NO. ISSUE

RACIAL DIFFERENCES IN POLICE SHOOTINGS

The brilliance of the datasets constructed
by the staffs at The Post and Guardian is
that they do not rely heavily on descriptions by police. Their goal is to provide
a more accurate number of American citizens whose lives were ended as a result of
a police shooting. Because of their exhaustive search process – which included news
reports, public records, and original reporting – the data seem representative for what
it is: a count of the fatal shootings by police
in America in a given year. The Post and
Guardian documented more than twice as
many fatal shootings in 2015 as the annual
average annual reported by the FBI over
the past decade.
These data do not deal with the endogeneity of contact by police, but assuming
blacks are more likely to be unfairly targeted than whites, the racial differences exhibited in their data would only be larger
if one did account for the fact that policecivilian interactions are themselves (potentially) biased.
However, two of the most important
rubrics for internal validity are not consistent with The Post and Guardian datasets
– having a relevant counterfactual and the
quality of covariates. Theoretically, The
Post’s data is rich enough to account for
several different potential counterfactuals.
For instance, one could estimate the probability of being killed if unarmed and black
relative to the probability of being killed
if unarmed and white, after accounting for
the context of the fatal encounter. Yet, the
more relevant counterfactual – given it is
less likely to be plagued by selection into the
sample – is to estimate when police decide
to pull the trigger. For this, one needs to
catalogue situations in which police would
have been legally justified in using lethal
force but chose not to – along with the race
of the suspect and other contextual factors.
Both The Post and Guardian collect
manner of death, whether or not the suspect was armed, weapon type, demographics, and the city in which the shooting
took place. The Post additionally collects
whether there were signs of mental illness,
the threat level to officers, and whether the
officer was wearing a body camera. The

3

Guardian additionally records the address
at which the shooting took place and the
name of the law enforcement agency responsible.
To draw firm conclusions about the “race
effect” one needs to assume that once this
sparse set of variables is accounted for, race
is “as good as randomly distributed” and
that there are no other differences in suspect behavior or any other potential contextual factor that is important. With tremendous respect to the herculean efforts of The
Post and Guardian for collecting new data
on one of the most important social issues of
our time, this assumption is ludicrous and
one can make no such claims of any “race
effect” using this data.2
A typical retort to the lack of rigor when
employing descriptive statistics is to observe the size of the racial difference and
posture that such large disparities are not
likely to be explained by differences in context. That type of argument is more about
clinging to deeply held beliefs than clinging
to a valid research design. There is no way a
priori to understand how much of the variance in an outcome might be absorbed by
covariates without first analyzing the data.
The VICE data has similar advantages
and disadvantages, but is more comprehensive in that it includes both fatal and nonfatal shootings from 47 of the 50 largest police departments in America – which is in
itself phenomenal – but less representative
than The Post or Guardian datasets. Their
set of potential covariates, which includes
whether or not the suspect was armed, suspect and officer demographics, the nature
of the stop, and number of officers, is quite
limited and they do not have any data on
situations in which lethal force would have
been justified but was not used.
Recall, Ross (2015) estimates racial differences in county-specific relative risks
of being shot by police, controlling for
whether or not the civilian was armed,
and concludes that the results provide
evidence of significant bias.
An issue
2 Nix et al. (2017), using the data in Post (2015),
employ this approach – accounting for a small set of
covariates and claiming the residual is “implicit bias.”

4

PAPERS AND PROCEEDINGS

with the crowdsourced U.S. Police-Shooting
Database used in Ross (2015) is that it
omits large fractions of shootings that occurred and it’s not clear which types are
recorded. To illustrate this, there are 10
locations in Ross (2015) that are also in
Fryer (forthcoming). Of the 606 officerinvolved shootings in these locations, between 2011 and 2014, noted in Fryer (forthcoming), only 102 of them (17 percent) were
reported in Ross (2015). He cannot account
for the endogeneity of police-civilian contact, but again, this is likely to only increase
estimates of racial differences in the countyspecific relative risk. A strength of the Ross
analysis is that the crowdsourced data may
be less likely to be biased by police department reporting practices.
To assemble the database utilized in
Fryer (forthcoming), I requested police narratives for all OIS from 10 large police
departments. Houston Police Department
also provided a random sample of narratives for events that did not end in an OIS
but in which justifiable force could have
been used. Narratives were twice-coded by
research assistants for relevant variables.
This database addresses many of the issues that plague the literature – there is a
relatively comprehensive set of contextual
variables (290, for instance, hand-coded
from Houston arrest data), and the counterfactuals are less likely to be biased by
selection into sample – but the data are not
nearly as representative (only 10 police departments) as data collected by The Post,
The Guardian, or VICE. Indeed, the analysis in Fryer (forthcoming) is tantamount to
trying to estimate discrimination in a labor
market by analyzing data from firms willing
to supply it to researchers. Put differently,
while the estimates in Fryer (forthcoming)
are more internally consistent, their external validity is unknown.
There are two important fault lines in
Fryer (forthcoming): (1) the endogeneity
of police-civilian contact and (2) reliability of police department reports. To the
extent that there are racial differences in
the probability of an interaction with police, the data in Fryer (forthcoming) may

MAY 2018

omit a very important margin.3 One may
discover no differences in use of lethal force,
conditional on an interaction, even if there
are large racial differences in the probability
of the types of interactions in which lethal
force may be used.
Understanding racial differences in the
probability of police interaction is difficult.
One has to account for differential exposure to police, race-specific crime participation rates and perhaps most importantly,
pre-interaction behavior that civilians exhibit. Ideally, one might set up a field experiment that randomly assigns similar individuals (across all physical dimensions except race) to the vicinity of the same patrolling officers in a neighborhood and instruct them to behave identically. Conditional on random assignment, identical behavior, and race-specific crime rates, any
differences in the probability of interaction
could be interpreted as racial bias in police stopping behavior. Without ideal data,
researchers often compare the racial distribution of stopped civilians to the racial distribution of various “at risk” civilians that
could potentially be stopped. Determining
the probability of an interaction is essentially a search for the correct “risk set.” The
evidence in Fryer (forthcoming) offers the
following rough rule of thumb – if one assumes that police are non-strategic in their
stopping behavior, then there is clear bias.
Conversely, if one assumes that police are
stopping individuals they are worried will
engage in violent crimes, the evidence for
bias is small.
A second concern is the reliability of police department reports. There are two
types of potential bias. First, police officers may bend the truth about the context of a particular interaction so as to
justify their own actions; for instance, indicating a suspect was threatening when
they were calmly following an officer’s commands. This type of bias is less of a concern
in Fryer (forthcoming) because the qualitative results are identical whether or not
one includes contextual factors about the
3 This is also true of all other datasets collected, but
is more of an issue when one does not find bias.

VOL. 2 NO. ISSUE

RACIAL DIFFERENCES IN POLICE SHOOTINGS

encounter recounted by police. A second
type of bias is that officers may be more
likely to charge black suspects with crimes
such as resisting arrest or attempted assault
on a public safety officer rather than misdemeanors, relative to whites, for identical
behavior. This type of bias is an important
limitation of Fryer (forthcoming) because it
implies that the counterfactuals coded from
arrest data may themselves contain bias. It
is unclear how to estimate the extent of such
bias or how to address it statistically.
III.

Reconciling the Literature

Datasets created by The Post, Guardian,
VICE, or the US Police-Shooting Database
provide important descriptive statistics
about OIS in America, but have severe
limitations for determining whether those
statistics are due to racial bias. Fryer
(forthcoming) is better suited for this type
of analysis, but whether and how much one
should extrapolate from 10 cities willing to
supply data is unknown.
I replicate some of the key findings in
each of the publications discussed throughout with the data from the alternative data.
That is, I recreate the descriptive statistics
used by The Post and Guardian, VICE, and
Ross (2015) using the data from each publication and Fryer (forthcoming). This allows one to better understand whether differences across datasets are due to different
statistical decisions or inherent differences
in data. For instance, if the data used in
Fryer (forthcoming) – the most detailed but
least representative – shows less bias when
one estimates the fraction black unarmed
who are killed by police relative to the fraction white unarmed, then this further calls
into question the generality of the data.
Table 1 presents these estimates. The descriptive statistics presented by The Post
(2015), The Guardian (2015), VICE (2017),
and Ross (2015) are remarkably consistent across all datasets – including Fryer
(forthcoming). For instance, The Guardian
(2015) shows that the likelihood of black
men between the ages of 15-34 to be killed
by police, relative to all other races, is 9.82.

5

Using the data collected by VICE this number is 9.82, 15.93 when using the data in
Ross (2015), and 14.87 when using the data
in Fryer (forthcoming).
Perhaps the most striking finding is when
one replicates the analysis in Ross (2015)
across all five datasets: calculating the
probability of being black, unarmed, and
shot by police divided by the probability
of being white, unarmed, and shot by police. A quantity greater than one is consistent with racial bias. Using the data from
Ross (2015), this ratio is 3.28. Using the
data from the Post database I get 6.20 and
5.99 if using the data in Fryer (forthcoming). In other words, if I ignore the detail
available in the Fryer data and simply report the descriptive statistics reported in
Ross (2015), I could conclude that the data
provided evidence of even more racial bias
than that reported in Ross (2015). Yet,
when using the simple statistical framework
that economists have used for more than a
half century to analyze racial differences on
myriad dimensions – from wages to incarceration to teen pregnancy – the evidence
for bias disappears. The differences in results on police shootings in America seem
to be driven by differences in what qualifies
for a valid research design and not differences in datasets.
IV.

Conclusion

We are in the midst of a national reckoning on race and policing in America (Post
2015). But, the issues are thorny and the
conclusions one can draw about racial bias
are fraught with difficulty. The most granular data suggest that there is no bias in
police shootings (Fryer (forthcoming)), but
these data are far from a representative
sample of police departments and do not
contain any experimental variation. We
cannot rest. We need more and better data.
With the advances in natural language processing and the increased willingness of police departments to share sensitive data, we
can make progress.
For those of us who desire a more perfect union, police use of force has become
our Gettysburg. Of course, black lives mat-

6

PAPERS AND PROCEEDINGS

MAY 2018

Table 1—Reconciling Results on Racial Differences in Police Shootings

Post
(1)

Guardian
(2)

Vice
(3)

Ross
(4)

Fryer
(5)

39.56

34.25

52.82

38.71

43.84

Guardian: Likelihood of black men
between the ages of 15-34 to be killed
by police compared to others

9.67

9.82

9.82

15.98

14.87

Vice: Percent unarmed in sample
Percent black civilians in sample

9.45
26.80

20.42
27.21

21.31
54.59

28.29
34.95

20.50
45.70

Ross (2015): Prob. of being black, unarmed
and shot by police relative to prob.
of being white, unarmed, and shot by police

6.20

3.44

3.21

3.28

5.99

Paper: Statistic
Washington Post: Percent of black civilians
among unarmed men killed by police

In row (1), I calculate the likelihood as the ((Fraction of 15-34 black men killed by police/Fraction of 15-34 black men in population)/(Fraction of
everyone else killed by police/Fraction of everyone else in population)). In row (2), I calculate the percentage of black civilians among unarmed
men killed by police. In row (3), I calculate the percentage of unarmed civilians and black civilians in the sample. In row (4), I use the companion
program to Ross (2015), available in R, to calculate the county-level risk ratios. To calculate this statistic, I collapse each OIS-level dataset to the
county level (Post and Guardian) or the police department level (VICE and Fryer (forthcoming)). To collapse cities to the county level (Post and
Guardian), I assign cities to the county that they fall the majority in. The VICE and Fryer (forthcoming) datasets provide the police department
responsible for the OIS. I collapse these counts by police departments and assign each police department the population of the city or county that
it has jurisdiction over. I take city and county populations by race from the 2011 ACS 5-year estimates. The Ross (2015) estimates may contain
simulation error but are replicated using the exact program used in Ross (2015). In addition, the exact results are not reproducible because the
program does not set a seed.

ter as much as any other lives. Yet, we
do this principle a disservice if we do not
adhere to strict standards of evidence and
take at face value descriptive statistics that
are consistent with our preconceived ideas.
‘Stay Woke’ – but critically so.
REFERENCES

Arthur, Rob, Taylor Dolven, Keegan Hamilton, Allison McCann, and
Carter Sherman. 2017. “Shot by cops
and forgotten.” VICE News, December
11. news.vice.com/en us/article/xwvv3a/
shot-by-cops
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “Are Emily and Greg
More Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination.” American Economic
Review 94 (4): 991-1013.
Fryer, Roland G. Forthcoming. “An Empirical Analysis of Racial Differences in
Police Use of Force.” Journal of Political
Economy.
Goff, Philip A., Tracey Lloyd, Amanda
Geller, Steven Raphael, and Jack
Glaser. 2016. “The Science of Justice:

Race, Arrests, and Police Use of Force.”
Center for Policing Equity.
Kindy, Kimberly, Marc Fisher, Julie
Tate, and Jennifer Jenkins. 2015.
“A Year of Reckoning: Police Fatally
Shoot Nearly 1,000.” The Washington
Post, December 26. www.washingtonpost.
com/sf/investigative/2015/12/26/a-yearof-reckoning-police-fatally-shoot-nearly1000/
Nix, Justin, Bradley Campbell, Edward Byers, and Geoffrey Alpert.
2017. “A Bird’s Eye View of Civilians
Killed by Police in 2015.” Criminology &
Public Policy 16 (1): 309-340.
Ross, Cody. 2015. “A Multi-Level Bayesian
Analysis of Racial Bias in Police Shootings
at the County-Level in the United States,
2011-2014.” PLoS ONE 10 (11).
Swaine, Jon, Oliver Laughland, Jamiles
Larteyand, and Ciara McCarthy.
2015. “Young Black Men killed by
US Police at Highest Rate in Year
of 1,134 Deaths.” The Guardian, December 31. www.theguardian.com/usnews/2015/dec/31/the-counted-policekillings-2015-young-black-men

