                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           ADJUSTMENT IN THE WORLD ECONOMY




                                    Paul Krugman




                               Working Paper No. 2424




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 1987




This paper was prepared for the Eighteenth Plenary Meeting of the Group of Thirty,
New York, October 1-3, 1987. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                           NBER Working Paper #2424
                                                           October 1987



                         Adjustment in the World Economy




                                        ABSTRACT



      Thr is a    wi despreari    view that                                           be
remedied through 3. ncr eased demand in Burp 1 us countr es and reduced
demand in deficit counitnie      s
                                w.thout any need for real exchange rate
changes. In fact shifts in demand and
are necessary c:ompiemerits       not   SU   bti tut5,
      The essential reason       for t hi s coffipiementanity is that       a much
hither fraction of a marq in a 1 do]. lan o-f US than of for-ci cn speridi ng
falls on US output. (s a r e su it, a redistnib..ition of world spending
away from the US leads to        an Cx Ce ss   supp].y of US coods Un 1 CBS
accompanied by a decline     a   nt. heir relative price,        ci though some
economists bel ieve that th Ci n t eqration o-f world capital m a r k e t s
somehow elimin ates this pr
accounting idntities wi. th behavi or
      Th paper also addr Cs ses a number of nd ated issues, such as the
role of budget defijts i. n
effec:ti veness of nominal exchange rates changes in producing
depreci ation,



                                                         Paul Krugman
                                                         NB ER
                                                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
         There is    widespread    though not universal agreement that the large
 i mbaj ances   in   industrial—c Ountry    current     accounts that emerged in the
 1980s should be narrowed. Among those who want a reduction of
                                                               cur rent—
 accou nt irbal ances, howeve      r, th ere   is consi derabi • disagreeme nt 0 ver

what    medicine will cure the ailment              Now that the dollar has         decl med
 to   r oughly its 1980     effecti ye   echang e     rate, shoul d   we   focus on

cor r ecting fiscal diver;enc mc, while stabilizing c
                                                      urrency val ues7
Shou Id   the   dollar be   driven   still low er, since its decline so              far   has
had d isappointing       results   in t urni ng trade around? Or should n at on;

focus    fiscal   and monetary pal i cy on d omest i c targets, adopting at

least for    the time being a pos ition          of benign neglect        toward exchange
rates?
        Uke most p01 icy debates, the debate over exchange rate
                                                                                    policy
stems in part from conflicts of i nterest                   in part from legit i mate

disagreements over empirical para meters. H owever, it also ap pears to

stem to an importa nt degree from confusion pure and simple a bout how

the mechanism of i nternationaj a djustment works. The purpose of this

paper is to cut th rough as much of this co nfusion as
                                                                         possible,
clearing the way f or       debate over    the      truly   disputable    Issues.
        The current d iscussion of t he interna

is an    unusually mu rky one, becau se        it   is n ot a debate between two

c herent p051 t ions •    Instead, wha t we have        is a coherent (but not
necessarily corr ect) standard vi ew that is

of directions. This standard view holds in brief                   that (1) current
                                   —2—

account imbalances are the result of divergent fiscal policies; that

(2) this fiscal divergence led to current acc ount divergences via a

rise in the relative price of US goods and fa ctor     5   of product ion

i.e., a real appreci   ati on;   and that na rrowing t he imbalances requires

both reversal of the fiscal divergence and (3) a nominal depreciation

of the dollar against other industrial —country currencies. Challenges

to this view e ither deny th at fiscal p olicy dri yes the current

account, deny that real exc hange rates have any thing to do with

current accoun ts, or deny t hat nominal exchange rate movements have

anything to do with real ex change rate s. These challenges to the

standard view do not add up to a coher ent alter native; indeed, some of

them are mutua Ily contradictory. That is why attempts to sq ueeze the

debate into a Keynesi an—monetari st or sup ply—side/demand—si de mol d

only add to th e confusion.

     The paper is in five par tm The first part elaborates on the

standard view of the sources of and cure for current account

imbalances, an d suggests that challenges to this view can be viewed as

originating in negative answe rs to any one of three key questions that

the standard v jew answers in the affirmative. The second part examines

the rationale and empirical evidence bearing on the question, does

fiscal policy drive the curr ent account? The third part similarly

evaluates the proposition th at real exchange rate changes are a

necessary part of balance of payments adjustment, and the counter—

argument that in the modern integrated world economy this linkage is

gone. The fourth part asIs whether the orthodox vie. that real
                                            —3—

exchange rate change; are most                easily achieved        through nominal

exchange rate adjustment         is vii Id.            final part draw; the argument;

together for an asses smen t of w hat we know about the i nternati anal

adjustment me chin   i Sm,    and what       our     kn owledge say s abou t policy.

      To previ ew the c onc lu ci       on 5:     the weakest un k      in t he standard view

is actually t he par t that has achi eve d the most public
                                                           acceptance: the
link from bud get im balance S          to   trade imbalances. While a plausible

case for this    1k
                  in      can be made           ther e is enough contr a ry evidence to

give us pause. On t he othe r ha nd, ch al lenges to other part; of the

standard view are a S        close   as any po si ti Ofl       in   economic debate can be

to being just plain wrong. The               vi ew   th at real exchange rates have

nothing to do with t rade ba lan ces is                 in   the form in w hich it is often

stated, a cont u5i   on   bet ween ac count I        ng 1dentities and behavior. There
are certain ci sec in which          in     princi pie balance of pay ments adju St ment

need not be ac conipan ied by rel           ati ye   price changes, but these cas Es can

be empirically   rej ec ted.    Si mi   I   any, the view that relat ive price
changes w ould not be facili tat ed by nominal exchange ra te adjustment

is often stated in a way that misstate; the issue, and
                                                       a logically
coherent   statement of the view can be rejected on the basis of the
evidence




THE STANDARD VIEW OF THE ADJUSTMENT MECHANISM
                                                     —4—

           The standard view of the source of the current account imbalances

of the I 980s takes as                      its   starting point the famous identity



           S—I=Y—EX—M

where 5, I ar e national savings and investment; Y,E national income and

expendit ur     e;       and X,M national exports and imports of goods and

services        An       external           deficit must have as its       counterpart   an excess

of domes      tic    investment over domestic savings, which makes it natural

to look for the sources of a deficit in an autonomous change in the

nati onal say ings rate. The identity may be further rewritten as




       S     + S3    —
                          I    =    X
                                        —
                                            M




where Sp, So             are       private and government savings respectively. This

immediately suggests how the budget deficit gets into the story. A

rise in the budget defl cit ——                           that   is, a fall in government saving ——

must, unless offset by                          a rise   in private saving, be reflected either

in a decline in investeent or a rise in the external deficit. It seems

plausible to expect the external deficit to bear part of the burden,

so a       budget deficit can lead to a trade deficit.
           While an economy mu st respect accounting identities, however,

looking at these identit ies can never be the full analysis; we must

ask hw the accounting i dentity is translated into incentives that

af1et individual behavior. The                             standard view of how a budget deficit
                                                —5—

translates into a trade def icit emphasizes the channel that runs

through interest rates and the exchange rate• This view was most

i nfl uenti ally    expo sited by Martin Fel dstei n during his tenure as

Chairman of the US             Courici   1    of Economi c Advis erst. Subsequent

expoci t i 0 ns,   such as that              of Bran5on            (1985)      have refined the

analysis,    but not changed                 the essenti al           char acter of the story.

      In the sta ndard view,                  a budget d efict                is not offset by an

increase    in pri   vate       saving. I nstead                   it lead s to a reduction in

aggregate natio nil saving rel ati ye to                            invest ment    demand. This f all in

saving leads to a rise in the                    real         in   terest     rate. The rise in t he real

interest rate, i      n       turn, by sak       i ng        cia ims on the deficit country

attractive to for eign investor 5,                       1   ead S to     a   rise in the real exchange

rate. With home p roduction mor e                    e x pen sive         re lative to foreign, imp orts

rise and exports          fall,    leading          to       an ex terna 1 deficit. The counter part

of this external deficit                 is a c api tal            inf I ow    that fills the

between domestic          investment          and    Si vi ng.

      This standar d analysis has ac hi eyed remarkably broad acceptance.

It was also remar akably success ful a t icc ounting for ItS                              external
economic developm ents up until abou t two years ago. Table 1,

abstracting from the             interveni ng           bu S i     ness   cycles, shows how the

savings—investmen         t    identity he ld in 1979 and 1985. The sharp decline

in government say ing was essen tlally matched one—f or —one by a decline

in national Savin ;s; the decli ne                      in     nati   onal savings     was primarily

reflected in a ri se in the ext ernal defi                            cit     rather th an in domestic

crowding cut; the external                   deficit was accompanied by and therefore
                                 —6—

presumably largely caused by a huge real appreciation of the dollar,

and a sharp rise in (iS real interest rates was in turn associated with

this rise.

     The match between theory and experience seemed almost too good to

be true, and s ince 1985 sever al      puzzl i   ng devel opeents have spoiled the

perfection of the picture. As Ta ble 2 shows, s ince early L985 the US

exchange rate has fallen shar ply , to       r   oughly i ts pre—Reagan 1 evel   ,   and

the real inter est rate has al 50 fallen consi de rably. These changes

have taken pla ce with little cha nge Pi ther in the presumed source of

the original d isequilibrium, the US bu dget def icit, or in the external

deficit itself • As the predictiv e powe r of the standard view has

seemed to erod e, advocates of    al tern   at jve   views have become

increasingly v ocal. However, the challenges come from several

different and often contradic tor y directions, so th e net effect of the

discussion has been confusing to lay audiences and even to many

professionals. To clarify thi sd iscussion, we need to systematize

challenges to the standard vi ew around several key questi ons.



Key Questions about the standard view



     The standard view explains the US external deficit as the result
of a budget deficit that operated through a real appreciation,

effected by a nominal exchange rate change. Challenges to this view

question one or more of the links            this process. Thus the debate

over the international adjustment process is really three debates,

over three separate questions.
                                             —7—




       1. Does 41cc al          policy drive        the   current   account' While the budget
i denti ty I     inking savi ngs, iflve stment             and the exter nal balance cannot

be den i    ed   a decline in govern ment sa vi ngs need not
                                                             always be
ref 1 ec   ted in a    corres ponding       C hinge i n the curre nt account. One

influe nt i a 1 school of         thought holds t hat changes in government saving
will   be offset by equal and opp osi                te   changes in private saving. On

this view, nat ion al savings              4 el   I for reasons in dependent of the budget

deficit. An al        t er   native view          backe d by consi derable albeit

controversial evi dence —— ho I             ds that       the normal effect of a change in

national savin 95 is           primaril ya        chang e in natia nal investment, not a

change in the ext ernal defic it, so th at the app arent one—for—one

effect in the fir st half of the 19905 was an ab erration that needs a

special explan at i on. Finally, some commen tat                or S   have blamed both the
decline in US nat ional saving s and the ex ternal deficit on tight

monetary rather than loose fiscal policy.



       2. Does the real exchanQe rate have anything to do with the trade

balance' There is            a widespread though not formalized view among
policymakers that            fiscal   policy affects th e trade de ficit directly,

rather than through the channel of real ex change rat e changes. Indeed,

this view often stands Feldstejn on his head; where the standard view

holds that the US budget deficit caused the strong dollar and hence

the trade deficit, one often now hears the view th at correction of the

US budget deficit is an alternative to further dol lar decline. This
                                           —8—

practi cal       mens view overlaps at its edges              with   two quite distinct

alternati ye        views,     one that sees faster growth in export markets as

the only cure for the trade defic it, and anothe r that de nies any need

for rela t ive price adjustment as a counterpart to trade adjustment.



         3.     oes nomj nal exchange r ate adj ustment help smooth the path of

rea I adju stment1 In a world of perfect ly flexible prices, nomi nal

ex c   hange rate ch anges could nei ther pr oduce nor facilitate changes in

rel ative goods p rices, and thus could have no role in the

i nt er nat i   onal ad justment mechan ism. Th e apparent lack of real effects

from the dollar' s depreciation so                 far has    led   monetar ist advocates of

fixed ex change r ates to reemphasi              ze the n eutra lity    of money and thus

the usel essness of exchange rate changes.



         It shou Id be clear even from             this   brief presentation that the

var i 0 us    crit i   ques   of the standard view do not add up to           a   common

alter native        vi si   on • Clearly the r I   ght    way to proceed is to address

each of the i ndi           vi dual   questions separately, and then try to draw

together what we have learned.




DOES FISCAL POLICY DRIVE THE CURRENT ACCOUNT?



         Challenges to         the presumed role of the US internal deficit in

causing       its   eterna1 deficit are not central to the current debate,
                                           -9—

where the challenges to the standard view mostly go the other way

that is, the        budget deficit is given a direct role in            causing   the

trade defici t, inde pendent of the exchange rate. However, criticism

the emphasis on the budget deficit has been a stea dy rumble since

1982, and ad ds to the atmosphe re of uncertainty ab out how the

i nternati ona   Ia djst   men t mechan ism works. Thus it i s important to be

clear about the       valid    grounds for questioning the conventi onal view,

as expressed by       Br an so ns   (19 85) often cited reniar k that the budget

deficit did      it
        One ch all e nge her   e   comes   f   rom t he supply— si de/new classical camp,

the other f rom a more tradition al vi ewpoint th at questi ons the

closeness of world captaI market integration. We consider each in

turn.




Do budget deficits affect nat3onal savinos?



           ex tensive   debate with in the economics profession has swirled

around the issue of whether government deficits reduce the national

savings    ra te.   This debate is far too elaborate to summa rize here;

however, t he key issues are fairly simple, Against the prima facie

case that government dissaving reduces national saving, an influential

  i c a r di a n view argues that government deficits will be offset by

 ceases      in private saving. Suppose that the governmen t cuts taxes

without a ny prospect of future reductions in spending. Then households

should know that in the            future the government will have to raise taxes
                                        —10—

again, both to restore the original cut; and to service the increase

in its debt. In present val um the total expected tax liabilities of

the pri vate sector will not have changed; thus the private sector will

not inc rease its consumption            i.e., all of the tax cut will be s aved.

        Th e the oretical       rejoinder to this argument has several stra nds.

First, some of the tax liabi lity              resulting from a temporary tax       cut
will fa 11 on unborn generati ons;             those currently consuming will

therefo re        ex perience some reduction in their lifetime tax burden

Second, some households may be liquidity constrained: unable to borrow

at   the same rate at which th ey can lend, they prefer a marginal                  dollar
of cons umpti on to a marginal dollar of saving, but are not willi ng to

borrow to sp end more than th eir income. For these households an

i ncr eas e     in     current income w ill be spent even if the present valu e of

their    1    i feti   me income has no t changed. Third, the assertion that tax

cuts    wi 11 be        fully saved req uires a high degree of sophistication on

the par t of all households; they must understand the future tax

i tp ii c a   t ions    of the current budget. If a sizeabie fraction of

househo lds b ehaves in a less sophisticated way, using some rul e of

thumb r ether than a careful calculation of future government f i scal

prospects, much of a tax cut will similarly be spent rather than

saved.

        The facts of the 1980s certainly do not provide any support to

the Ric ardian view; as Table I showed, the US fiscal deficit was

reflect ed fully in a decline           in national savin gs, wit h no of f   set       from

the pri vate sector. This cou ld,          of course, be a coinc i dence;     nat   i   onal
                               —Il—

savings might have fallen for other reasons, such as expectations

about future Cuts in gover nment spending on goods and services or      a


future surge in pr oductivi ty and output. I find such explanati ons

wildly unconvin cm g, and t he continuing popularity of the Rica rdi   an

view a triumph of theoreti cal nicety (of a kind that happens t o se rye

a political pur 05 e as wel 1) over both macroeconomic evidence and any

plausible descr ipt ion of i ndividual behavior. However, the Ric ard ian

challenge need not occupy much space in this paper, because it is not,

as we have note    central to the international debate.




National savings and the current account



     Whether or not the budget deficit is responsible for the fall

the US national savin QS rate, there is a legitimate question over

xhether the equal and opposite movement of US savings and the current

account was a normal occurrence, and whether a reversal of the budget

deficit should be e pected to lead to an unwinding of the trade

deficit. Changes in budget deficits can in principle be reflected in

changes in domestic investment rather than in changes in the external

account; was it just chance that the US budget deficit spilled over

entirely into the trade deficit? There are several pieces of evidence

that might lead one to suspect this

     First, even wi t h p erfect capit al mobility one should not expect

the US budget defic it to crowd out only the trade balance, with no

effect on domestic investment. The US is rou ghly a third of the world
                                         —12—

market economy, so that even in a world in which crowding out is

completely gI obal we would cx pect US investment to absorb about one—

third of the fall in national say ings, with the external balance

absorbing the other two—thirds .1 n fact much of the world is not open

to free capit al mobility, so t ht
                                 a the external side should absorb less

of the defici t. Furthermore, i           ft he   appreciation of the dollar is

perceived as temporary, it mus tb e sustained by a rise in US real

interest rate s relative to tho S e abroad; this further concentrates the

crowding out on US rather than foreign investment (a point made by

Frankel (198ó I). A back—of—the envelope calculation suggests that

something les s than half       of   a   chan ge in the US budget defici t should

be reflected in the trade bal ance, and that correspondingly something

more    than hal +   should be reflected in domest ic crowding out (Krugmaa

198b)

        To explain why virt ually        all of t he deficit was ref lected in the

e t ernal      balance, it is necessary to i nvoke special fact ors. The

eff ect of US fiscal expa nsion          on the c urrent account was    r ei nf   or ced by

      ny     equal fiscal cont ract ion in the rest of the OECD (see Na nchard

and Summers 1984). There may hay e been an increase in in vestment

dem and in      the US as a res ult of     tax cu ts and increased o ptimism.

Fin ally, "safe haven" mat i     vat i a ns     may have helped push t he dolla r up.

Wh   i le   these additional fa C tors are p1 a usible and do not contradi ct the

bas ic conventional view a bout the say the world works, t hey do

i nd icate     that the perfect cor r elation       between budget and external

deficits was indeed too good to be true, and in part a coincidence.
                                        -13—

       A deeper criticism of the fiscal—external link                 is that   the

                                       the 1980s is pretty much unique for

industrial countries. Histor ically, the link between national savings

rates and the current accoun t has been at best weak, and the link

between national budget posi tions and the current account

nonexi stent
       Fel dst em    and Hon oka (1980) sho

correlation between the national savi ngs rates of OECD countries and

their curre nt accounts ——          or, equival eritly,       that differences in

savings rat es seem to h ave been refle cted primarily in differences in

investment, Wh ile these results have been extensively critiqued and

elaborated     (se e Frankel      1986) ,   the   b   asic point still stands: the

cross—secti on evidence suggests that capital mobility among industrial

countries i    S    fairly Ii mited. As for the link between budgets and

trade,   the cr oss—sec   t i   onal evidence is not present at all: Japan

during the     fi   rst half of the 1980s c ombined the largest current

account cur p1 us      of the G7 countries with the largest inflation—and—

unempi oymen t corrected budget defici ts (see 6ordon 1986).

      gai n        this cross —sectional evi dence can be rationalized. High

savings rate s and high investment ra tes might arise from the same

causes; fart her, since saving is mea cured by investment plus external

balance, a b ias in the measurment of investment would weaken the

apparent cor relation b etween saving a nd the external balance. However,

it   must be r ecogni zed that the assumption that capital markets are

vrtualIy perfectly integrated, which has become conventional wisdom
                                  —14—

in much discussion of international issues, is a view maintained in

the face of substantial contrary evidence rather than an established

fact.




Did monetary policy do it?



        Some supply—side defenders of the US tax cuts of 1981, such as

Roberts (1987), argue that the US current account defic it is the

result, not of the fiscal deficit, but of excessively t ight monetary

policy. This argument can actually be rationaliz ed with in a perfectly

standard demand—side macroeconomic view2. In the standa rd Mundell—

Fleming model with high capital mobility and sti cky pri ces, a monetary

contraction will lead to a real appreciation and a trad e deficit. The

savings—investment identity will hold because the fall in net exports

produces a contraction of national income, leading to a fall in both

government revenues and private income; hence both private and

government savings fall.

        Many economists would agree that this is a good story for the

early stages of the rising dollar and the emerging external imbalances

in 1981 and 1982. However, it is a difficult story to maintain for the

persisting imbalances of 1984 and after. The reason is that an

unavoidable side implication of the story is that the country

experiencing a monetary contraction must also be experiencing a

decline in output ——    if   not in absolute terms, at least relative to

the rest of the world. This flies in the face of the fact that the
                                                    —15—

widening of external imbalances con tinued during the US recovery of

1982—5, which was dramati cal ly more rapid than that a f other

industri al     cou ntri es and has brought the US close to most estimates of

the mini mal un empl Dyment rat e consistent with stable inflation.

         In the st anda rd               view of the sources of the US ex ternal deficit it

somet i me s   seem S as if econom ists have forgotten about money and

monet ary p01 C y. I t would be more accurate, however, to say that what

proponent 5     of       the standard v jew assume is that moneta ry policy in each

economy i s tar gete d on keepi ng the economy near what the monetary

authority b eli eves is its fu 11-employment level, so t hat the analysis

of fiscal p ol       i   cy ca n proceed as if the economy were i n fact

cont I nuousl   ya t          f   Ui   I employm ent. This seems to be a r easonable

descripti on of th e Si                  tuati on   in the mid—l8Os, though not of the early

yerars of t he           d   ec a de.    Monetar y policy of course could have been

di fferent      but to say that "rn onetary policy failed ful ly to

accommoda te fis cal                   expansion, and therefore the dollar rosen is very

far from assign i             ng       monetary p olicy per sean independent role in

causing t he ext ernal imbalances3.



Significance of the critique



        The view that monetary policy was responsible for the US external

def I   cit in the mid-1980s can be rejected as inconsistent with the

basi c facts. However, this does not demonstrate that fiscal policy did

it.     There is an important debate over the relationship between the
                                    —16—

budget deficit and savings and an equally important debate over

whether savings rates normally spill over into trade balances. Thus it

is important to acknowledge the uncertainites over these links1 which

have become closely identified with the standard view about the

sources of and cure for current account imbalances. However, it is

important to notice that critiques of the fiscal—external linkage have

no bearing on the puzzling trade developments since 1985. The point is

that the US fiscal deficit has not changed much since 1985, nor has

the   US natonul   savings rate. The puzzle is how it was possible, given

the lack of change in these factors, for the dollar to move so much ——

and how it was possible for the dollar to decline so much without much

effect on   external   imbalances




DO REAL EXCHANGE RATES HAVE TO CHANGE?



      We next turn to the key issue of the current debate over the

process of international adjustment: the role of real exchange rates

in the adjustment process. In the standard view, fiscal imbalances

work through the real exchange rate: a budget deficit leads to a real

appreciation, which reduces the competitiveness of a country's

industry and thus leads to a trade deficit. US critics of the

conventional wisdom, however, have argued that no real exchange rate

change is necessary, that a shift in savings rates can change the

trade balance at constant relative prices. European and lapanese
                               —17—

commment ators often go further, seeming to argue that deficit

correcti on is an alternative to real depreciation, and that the

deficit needs to fall in order to keep the dollar from declining

further    Thus in a recent article Wakasugi (1987) writes that




     The fundamental causes of the dollars depreciation are the U.S.
budget deficit and an unfavorable balance of payments which shows no
sign of improving. Only the 11.9. itself can recover the dollars
status as an international key currency. Therefore, in the long run,
decreasing the budget deficit and enhancing productivity are vital
steps.




     The fact that the US advocates of the view that real depreciation

is unecessary are more or less monetarist in their views on

macroeconomic policy, and that their skepticism of the need for real

depreciation is tied to a denial of real effects of nominal

depreciation, makes it seem to casual observers that this dispute is

yet another monetarist—Keynesian argument that hinges on the issue of

price flexibility. Eowever, this is a misperception. This is a replay

of an old debate, but it is Keynes versus Ohlin, not Tobin versus

Friedman; it is the old question of the relative price effects of an

international transfer of resources.

          see the nature of the issue, it is useful to consider a

rudimentary model that reveals the conditions under which a real

depreciation is or is not necessary as part of current account

adjustment. (A more formal treatment of thi; mode) is given in

appendix 4). We can then examine the empirical evidence that bears on

the question.
                                          —18—




RedistributinQ expenditure and the real exchange rate



      Suppose that the world consists of only two count ries, US and

ROW. US is assumed initially to be runn ing an undesira ble current—

account deficit. We initiall y suppose t hat each of the countries

produces only a single good,               S   o that th e real exchange rate may be

defined as the price of the               US    good rel ative to the ROW good. Fi nal ly,

suppose for the sake of arg ume nt that b 0th countries ar e initial ly at

full employment, so that a bal                 anc e   of payme nts adjustme nt cannot

involve an expansion in ei ther coun trys ou tput.

      P'ow let us try to red uce US s current account deficit. Can we do

this at a constant real ex c             han ge   ra te? It is useful here to writ e the

balance of payments identity in its alternate form



      X—M'Y—             E




i.e., the    external balance is the difference between income and

ependi tur   e     Since the real exchange rate is bei ng held constant, we

can mea sure t he ter ms i n this equati on in terms of                 ei the r   goods more

con yen   enti y still,        it    does no harm to suppose t hat nomi nal prices are

held co ast an t    50       t hat   we can simply measure inc ome and expenditure in

nominal terms

      The first pain t to notice is that there is no channel that links

the budget deficit to the trade deficit other than through its effect
                                                  —19—


on expenditure. A shift in                   fiscal p01 icy                      reduces US expenditure and

raises foreign expenditure, and that is                                      all;           there is no direct way in

which it makes US goods more competitive. The issue, then, is whether

it is possible to reduce US expenditure and raise foreign expenditure,

while keeping the relative price of the US and the foreign good

constant.

     Suppose th at throu gh fiscal contraction                                              the US reduces           its

expenditure by $1 00 bil lion, wh                         ile t he       rest             of      t   he world in creases     its

expenditure by th e same amou nt                              The   fal 1        in US            e   xpendi ture   will

directly reduce 5 p       end in g   on us goods by                          1   00 1—rn)              billion do lIars,

where m is the     fr action of              a    m   argina 1 dol I ar of US spending that is

spent on import 5. On th e            ot he r             hand,      t he nc e in                      foreign sp ending will

raise spending on US go ods by lOOm* bi                                lii on             doll arc,        where ml is the

fraction of a mar g inal doll ar of for                                gn sp endin g                    that fal is on

imports. Th e   net c hange         on sep nd i ng on                    US          g   oods is therefo re

100(m +   * —1) bil       lion doll          ars      •       I f m+     ml               1—           which we will see

below is ce rtai ni   y   the case               in       p   ra ctice           —       t h en       the redist ribution     of
world epen di    ture will       redu c e th e                  demand for US goods and increase the
demand for foreign •900 ds.              To       car rect           t..e excess supply of US goods and

the excess demand          or   ROW      Q   oods, the relative price of US goods must
fall: the c orrecti on of the current account deficit must be effected

via a real deprec i       at ion.


     The ke y   cnit enion here is a famil lar                                       one          it is the c r     it er ion f or
a terms   of   trade effect         of       a transfer.                 A       redi stribution              of    world
expenditure must be accompanied by a change in relative prices unless
                                     -20—

the marginal spending patt em         of th e   countries   increasing their

expendi ture i s the same as that of the country reducing its spending.

If    the    US has a higher m arginal pr open city to spend on i ts own goods

than ot her cou ntries do, which is the case where ii + ml < 1, then a

fall in the US share of world spen ding must be acco nip an        i   ed by a fall

in the US real ex change rate.

        It is imp ortant     to avoid two confusi ons that can obscure this

point.       First i s the idea that the issue i s somehow tied to the degree

of    cap ital mob ility. Ron aid McKin non has argued strongly that the real

ex c han    ge rate needs to c hange to adjust t he trade balance only when an

econom y is "i nsular", th at is, ci osed to capital movement. He argues

that w hen cap ital is mob ile, savi ngs—inve stment gaps are directly

ref 1 ec    ted in trade balan ces, with no need for relative price changes.

"With smooth y functioni ng capital mar ket s, little or no change in the

'real        excha n ge rate is necessary t o tran sfer saving from one country

to another"4.

        It    should b e immediately clear what is wrong with this argument.
It    confuses the question of whether a change in the savings rate will

be reflected in a change in the distribution of world expenditure with

the question of whether a change in that distribution necessitates a

change in relati ye prices. The latter question is a question about

goods       markets, n ot   capital markets, No matter how mobile capital may

be,    if    Japanese residents spend much less on US goods at the margin
than do US resid ents, a redistribution of world spending from the US

to Japan will reduce the demand for US goods at constant relative

prices.
                                —21—

     The other confusion that can obscure the issue is to mix up the

necessity for a change in rel ative prices with the question of whether

changes in nominal exchange r ates help produce such changes. If prices

are flexible1 a currency depr eciation by itself has no relative price

effects, and a real depreciat ion can be achieved with a constant

nominal exchange rate via def lation in one country and/or inflation in

the others. However, this has nothing to do with the question of

whether the real exchange rat e needs to change.



Empirica' evidence



     We have no seen that external adjustment requires real exchange

depreciation to the extent that the marginal propensi ty to spend on a

countrys goods   is   higher for domestic than f oreign r esidents. Casual

observation certainly suggests that this must be the case: average

consumption has a very strong domestic bias in every country1 so that

marginal spending would have to be radically d i fferen t in order to

make m +   me   1. This conclusion may be confir ned by looking at

econometric evidence. Econometric estimates of trade flow equations

are not usually presented in this form, but it is pos sible to recast

them in such a way as to yield estimates of m a nd ml.     (Appendix B

explains how this is done). Table 3 presents a number of recent

estimates of the demand effects of redistribu ting wor id expenditure

from the United States to the rest of the world. Whil e there is

considerable divergence among estimates, all estimates show m + ml
                                       —22—

much less than one. That Is, a             fal I   in US expenditure matched by a

rise in rest        of world expendi tur,     would represent a net decline            in the
demand for US        goods; a rise i n     Japanese expenditure matched by a               fall
in the rest        of the worlds sp ending woul d represent            a   rise in   the

demand for Jap ans goods.

       Consider, for       example, t he   est imate from Kru gean and         Faidwin
t987) ,     which    actually   gives the hi ghest estimate of r +            me   reported.

According     to    this estimate, a fall of           US expendit ure by $100 billion
would reduce spending on US g oods            b   y $67 billion, while a

corresponding rise in rest—of -world expenditure w ould provide an

offsetting inc rease in export deman d of only $12 billion. The

remaining $55 billion would show up as an excess Supply of US goods,

which would ha ye to b e        elimi nated   b y a fall in th e their relative

price.

       Why shoul d this be the case? I he answer pres umably lies in the

still highly i mperfect I ntegrati on of markets for goods and services.

Much   of the e pendi      ture of   even ye ry open economi es falls on goods and
servi ces    that are nontra deable due           to   perishabili ty or prohibitive

trans port   cost s. Trade r estr    i Ct ion S turn potentia Ily tradeable goods
into   de facto nontraded ones. And there are also probably significant

Linde r effects       in which countries          tend   even with in the set of traded

goods to produ ce goods m ost suitab le for               domestic   tastes. Thus while

it is possible       in   princi ple that a redistribution of world expenditure

could eliminate a trade deficit wi thout any need for a change in the

real exchange rate, the reality of world markets for goods and
                                       4w

service;   that are   far   from perfectly integrated make; this observation

purely academic.



Some caveats



      The argument just presented shows         that   the view that integrated

capital ma rket; somehow eliminate the need for real cxc hinge rate

adjustment to accompany a       reduction    of current account imbalances is

misconceiv ed. There is a      valid    argument that g iven suff iciently

integrated Qoods ma(ket s no real exchange rate changes would be

needed, bu t this argume nt can be decisively re jected on the basis of

both casua I observation an d econometric eviden cc. Before closing this

di scussi on   however, it is necessary to tie up some loose ends.

      The f irst caveat is t hat even with m + m* (< I         Ii ttl   e real

exchange r ate change would be necessary if g          oodc pro duced in di fferent

countries were very close substitutes. Howev er, like the altern ate

argument for a lack of nec essity for real cx change r ate change, this

can be r ejected both on th e basis of casual obser vat ion and on

economet nc evidence. The casual observation is that the huge swings

in real exchange rates       si nce   1980 would have been impossible if goods

from dif ferent countries were close subs titut es. The econometric

evidence is that estimate d pri ce elastic ities in trade are fairly low,

typically between 1 and 2 (see Goldstein and Khan 1q85, and Brook i              ngs


1987).   The fall in the relati ye price of imports to the US from 1980

to 1985 provides a natural ex periment: a lthough i mport volume soared,
                                         —24—

the shar • of imports in GNP actually fell slightly, from 11.7 to 11.2

percent; whi le lags and special factors complicate the picture, this

clearly   i ndi   cates a demand elasticity that cannot be much more then

one.

       The second caveat is that countries do not in 4 act produce only a

single good, and relative price cha nges make take place among goods

that a c ountry p r      odu ces.   I n particu I   ar   a reduction in the US current

account deficit will to so me extent requ ire a fall in the price of

tradeabi es relat i      ye    to non tradeabl e 5 as well as a fall in the price of

US expor ts relat i      ye    to US imports. Empir ical evidence for the US

suggests that in the long run the US is more like the one—good economy

of our s imple mo del than t he 'smal 1 open economy' whose terms of trade

may be t aken as give n. How ever, ev en if the tradeable—nontradeable

price al ters sig nifi cantly in the adjust ment process there is no

question that a count ry that reduces its external deficit must reduce

its wage 5     relati ye      to those of trading p artners. Since many

competi t i   veness   i ndi c   ators 4 ocus on unit labor costs rather than

export p rices, a nd si nce the appropriate role of nominal exchange

rates may hinge more on wages than on prices (see below), this wage

adjustmen t is important whether or not it is reflected in a change in

the terms of trade.



The role of growth in surplus countries
                                                 —25—

        A more import ant objection to the vi ew                             that    real depreciation by

deficit count r        i es    is     necessary to reduce                i ebal an ces   is that      the

necessity of          real     dep r   mci at i on   may be avo ided if the surpi U c countries

start From a posi             t ion    of excess capaci ty.               In tha t ca    se it   i   s possible

for expenditu re t 0            ri se      more in the surpi us coun trim s                than it falls in
the deficit c Duntry, wh ich could per mit a reduction in external

deficits with out any re al d epreci                    at i   on.

        A contin uat ion of our numer i cal ii lustrati on may make the point.

We p re V iously note d that according to the Krugm an—Baldwin estimate a

fall    i   n US mx pendi ture by $100 bill ion would re duce spending on US

good s by         $7
                   6 billi on         dolla rs. Now s uppose that instead of rising by

only $10 0 b 1lion, expendi ture in t he rest of the wor id were to rise

by e flDLi h s0 that this red uction in US demand for its own products

were    off set      by exp ort dema id. Given an ml of 0.12                             th is would require

that res t—of—worl d speridi n g rise by $558 bil                            lion.    Of this spending,

       bill ion would fall on US goods, exactly off se ttin g the decline in

dome st     i C   US demand • The o ther $491 b illion w ould fall on rest—of—world

goods, f ar exceedi ng              th e $33 billion fall in US i mpor t demand.5
        Thi s increase in              f   oreign expendi tur        e    is 05 si bi e     only if there is

enough e xcess capacity in the rest of the wor id to ac comodate the

requi red increase in pr oduction. Spec ifica lly                                to reduce the US

external deficit by $100 billion in thi s way would require that rest—

of-world output rise by $459 billion                             =   491 i ncrease in domestic

demand less the 33 fall in US imports).
                               —26—


     If   surplus countries have mx cess capacity, then, it becomes

possible in principle to reduce the current account deficit without

any real depreciation. However, the numerical example also makes it

clear how limited the prospects for doing this are in practice. The

income of market economies outside the US is approximately $8 trillion

dollars. Thus an increase in output of $458 billion would represent a

5.7 percent increase in output. To eliminate the whole 1986 US current

account deficit of $140 billion at constant relative prices would

require an even larger output increase, approximately 8 percent. Few

if any countries believe that they have that much excess capacity',

and it is hard to believe that the world as a whole outside the US

would be willing to risk a demand—I ed expansion of output of more

than, say, two percent. This means that a willingness of surpluç

countries to risk faster growth can play at best a distinctly

secondary role in correcting external imbalances



     In contrast to the debate over whether fiscal policy drives

external imbalances, the debate over the r ole of real exchan ge rate

adjustment has a clear resolution. Th ose w ho deny the need f or real

exchange rate adjustment are wrong—— many of them wrong at a basic

logical level, the rest wrong in thel r an thmetic. The view that

because capital is mobile changes in    savirt g   and investment c an somehow

move the trade balance without moving the real exchange rate is based

on a fundamental conceptual confusion   ,
                                            and the case in which this view

could turn out to be correct all the same can be decisively rejected
                             —27-

empirically. If surplus countries have excess capacity, a willingness

on their part to grow faster can substitute for real exchange rate

adjustment, but in practice only liaited help can be expected from

this Source.

     There remains3 of course, the puzzle of why the real exchange

rate changes since 1985 have thus far produced such modest results.

What this discussion shows is that the trade puzzle cannot be resolved

by arguing that the savings—investment balance somehow directly

determines the trade balance, without a role for the real exchange

rate, There is a real puzzle, but its resolution must be sought in the

behavior of markets for goods and services, not in the fact of capital

market linkages.

     Adjusting external deficits, then, requires real exchange rate

adjustment. The remaining question is whether nominal exchange rate

changes have a valuable role to play in this process.




THE ROLE OF NOMINAL EXCHANGE RATE ADJUSTMENT



     While the key analytical debate about the international

adjustment mechanism is probably about the role of the real exchange

rate, the immediate policy concern is with nominal exchange rates——

whether the dollar should be encouraged or at least allowed to decline

further, while the yen rises higher. The idea of promoting exchange

rate movements in pursuit of external balance has come in for
                                  —
                              S


extremely chirp criticism from advocates of a return to some form of
fixed rate;. For example, Plundell' writes that



The claim that (favorable consequences] will follow from depreciation
is sheer quackery. It is closer to the truth to say that a policy of
appreciating the yen and the European currencies relative to the
dollar will cause deflation abroad, inflation at home, a larger dollar
deficit, and vast equity sales to foreign investors. Ownership of
factories, technology, and real assets will be exported to finance an
even larger trade deficit without there being much, if any real
expansion in exports or reduction in the dollar value of imports. US
assets will be sold abroad at bargain—basement prices. If the American
dog get; fed better, it will be by eating its own tail.




      s this negative assessment at all Justified? To rake sense of

the di spute, we need to consider two issues. First is the question of

whether nominal exchange rate movements are intended to produce real

exchange rate changes that would not have happened otherwise, or to

facilitate real exchange rate changes driven by other forces. Second

is the q..estion of whether it is indeed easier to adjust relative

prices via exchange rate changes than via inflation and deflation,



The facilitatinQ role of exchange rate changes



     Suppose that the world economy started from a position of

equilibrium, and that a sudden depreciation of the dollar were somehow

engir.eered. Nearly all economists would agree that in the long run the

effect of this depreciation would be some combinat ion of inflation in

the US and deflation abroad, with the original rea 1 exchange rate
                             —29—

being eventually restored, and no long run effect on external

balances, To the extent that prices and wages adjust slowly, there

would be a temporary period of higher US output and a larger US trade

surplus, but few would view this transitory effect as worth seeking

through an exogenous depreciation.

      Suppose, however, that the world economy does no start from a

position of equilibrium. In particular, suppose that an adjustment of

US and rest—of—world fiscal policy requires a real US depreciation

against the rest of the world. Then the situation is very different.

If the dollar does not depreciate, there will have to be some mix of

deflation in the US and inflation abroad. To the extent that prices

are slow to adjust, this need to change internal price levels will

lead both to a delay in the adjustment of external imbalances and a

period of unemployment in the US. An exchange rate adjustment can

facilitate the process of adjustment by eliminating this need for

changes in internal price levels.

     The critics of dollar depreciation, such as Mundell, have

portrayed the situation as being our first case, where exchange rate

changes are simply imposed on an equilibrium situation. This view in

turn goes back to the argument that current account adjustment does

not require any real exchange rate changes. However, we have seen that

this argurnent is fallacious. There is no reasonable quarrel with the

view that narroxing current account divergences does require a fall in

the relative prices of goods produced in deficit countries. A

depreciation of the dollar and appreciation of the currencies of
                               -30—

surplus countries looks much more favorable when it as viewed, not as

an at tempt to conjure up a real exchange rate change out of thin air,

but a s an attempt to achieve more rapidly and with less cost a

rd at ive price change that would have happened anyway.

     While there may be some in the US who expected doll ar

depr eciation to someh ow solve the trade problem without any change in

dome stic expenditure, the standard view has always been clear on this

poin t. The underlying problem is to narrow the gap between investment

and savings; however, dollar depreciation is supposed to facilitate

the adjustment of the real exchange rate to its new equil ibrium level.

To reject this role f or the exchange rate out of hand on the grounds

that exchange rate ch anges are neutral in the long run may not be

"sheer quackery", but it is a misrepresentation of a carefully

thou;ht—out position.

     Nw there are some reasonab le practical doubts about the current

situation: has the exchange rate adjustment that has already taken

place been enough? Should exchang e rates be encouraged to fall ahead

of fiscal policy in stead of waiti ng for fiscal action? We turn briefly

to these questions in the last pa rt of the paper. Meanwhile, however,

there is the genera 1 question of how important it is to adjust nominal

exchange rates. If it is almost as easy to change real exchange rates

with fixed as with flexible exch ange rates, then one might argue

against exchange rate adjustment on grounds of monetary stability even

if real   exchange rates do need t a change.
                                           -31—

How useful is exchange rate adjustment



     Even if prices were perfectly flexible, there would be a good

case for   preferring           exchange rate change; to general       def I at ion   in

deficit c ountries a nd/or inflation in surp lus countr i              es   The ci assi    C



case in d efense o f using exchange rate adj usteent wa 5               tha t   of M i iton

Friedman (1953)            who made     the   analogy wi th changing to da yl ight

savings t ime; i t         is   easier to change one price1 the excha nge rate,

than to c hang e th e prices of e verything an economy produc es, just as

it is eas i   er   for everyone's ci ocks to be set back an hour than for

everyone to chang e his or her schedule.

     How eyer, it is hard to cr edit the c ase that prices of goods, and

especial I y wage r ate;, are so flexible t hat the huge real exchange

rate cha ng es need ed to elimina te current ex ternal imbalances could

have bee n accompl ished quickly through i nfl ation and deflation. The

probl em is essent ially one of c oordi nati on within an economy; although

the disc ussi 0 n of this problem i s familiar in macroeconomics, it is

perhaps    less     fami   liar in the mt ernati onal context, and so will bear

one more di; cuss ion.

     Sup pose       that,       as typical est imates suggest, to balance the US

current acco       unt it       was   necessary that   US wage s 'fall 30 percent

relative to        foreign       wages from their 1985 pea k. For any individ ual

worker    a 30 percent           wage cut is very drastic; one would imagine that

bringing wag es down by that much woul d requir e a protracted and bitter

struggle between employers and employees. However, if all US wages
                                     —32—

(all by 30 percent , the real wage rate will fall much less, say only               3


percent, since the bulk of US consumption is           domestically   produced.

This means that if all wages could change simultaneously, and each

worker    could know    that other workers would take the same wage cut, it

might be possible to get         such an adjustment fairly quickly and

painlessly.    However, this would happen only in a world of hyper—

rational agents, with no long term contracts. In the real world

nominal    wages never   fall    that much except in the face of a     collapsing
economy,

        What a currency depreciation does is to solve the coordination

probl em, by   lowering all domestic wages relative to        foreign wages at

the   same time. Figure 1       shows the behavior of US uni t labor cost

relative to its competitors, and of         the   nominal doll ar effective

exchange rate, both as calculated by the IMF. The fi gure surely shows

that ther e is a prima facie case that exchange rate changes do produce

short    run changes in relative labor cost, and thus c an facilitate such

a change w hen one is necessary. The figure also show s the huge

ma9ri tude of the fall in US relative wages that has already occurred

since    the dollar's peak. If one believes that a rela tive wage change

of this ma gnitude was necessary, it is worth imagini ng what it would

have requi red to achieve this with a fixed exchange rate.

        As ye ars of debate in closed—economy macroeconomics have shown,

it    is inpo ssible   to convince someone committed to the be    Ii ef   that

prices    are perfectly flexible of the existence of some i nerti a on the

basis of    evidence, since evidence can always be rationalized away.
                                 —33—

However, for those less committed the prospect of attempting to

achieve I arge real exchange rate movements without changing nominal

exchange rates mus t surely look unappealing.



Exchanqe rates and capital flows



     A final point that needs to be discussed regarding nomi nal

exchange rate changes is their effect on capital flows. The quotation

from Mundell above puts t he case in purple prose, but t here is fairly

widespread concern among the financial community that a che ap dollar

leads to a "sell—off" of US assets      at   bargain pri c   es.


     The first point to notice about this argumen t is             that   it

contradicts the bas2c pr emise    of the critique of nominal deprecia t            ion,


namely, that it produces only inflation with no r eal effects. It makes

no sense to argue that do liar depreciation cannot do anything to

reduce the relative price of US goods and services but that it makes

US stocks, capital, and r eal estate cheap on world markets ——                 unless
one has an   implicit   model in which goods prices an d wages are

perfectly flexible but as set prices are sticky!

     Second, the argument that devaluation leads t o ex cessi ye selling

off of assets to foreigne rc must be made consisten t Wi th the

accounting identity that capital inflows have as t heir counter part

current deficits. If dep reciation leads to capital inf lows, It must

lead to a widened trade deficit ——      as Mundell recognize;. However, we

have seen that there is no direct channel by which the savings
investment balance somehow gets translated into the trade ba lance

without affecting the real exchange rate. A for eign transfer of

savings to a    deficit   country must be associated with a rise in the

relative price of that countrys goods and serv ices, One d oubts

whether the claim is actually being made that nominal depre ci    at ion


leads to real appreciation. In any case, thefacts clearly contradict

this, since the depreciation of the dollar and the rise of the yen

have, as Figure 1 showed, been associated wit h approximatel y equal

real exchange rate changes in the same direction.




CONCLUSIONS ND IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICY



Conci usi ens




      This paper has arrived at one definite conclusion, one strong

presumption, an d one probabi lity. These are the followings



1. Reducing external imbalances reguires real depreciation by deficit

countries, real appreciation by surplus countries. The only exception

is where there is large excess capacity in the surplus countries, and

this caveat is of only modest importance in the current situation. The

widespread belief that integrated world capital markets somehow bypass

the need for real exchange rate adjustment is a misconception pure and

simple.
                                 —35—




2. Nominal exchange    rat • changes can help facilitate necessary real

exchange rate adjustmen t.   One hesitates to say      that   evidence

demonstrates   conclusive ly that prices are    imperfectly     flexible ——

there are too many econ omists   committed    to undermining such evidence,

Nonetheless, it is true • As a practical precautionary stance, in any

case, it seems hard to argue with the view that countries should rely

on changing currency vi lues rather than deflation and inflation to

achieve the real exchan ge rate changes that are        needed to correct
external imbalances.



3. Fiscal imbalances contributed to the widening of external

imbaiances in the 1BOs, and fiscal policy can contribute to narrowing

these irnbalances. As we saw, there are some        reasonable grounds for
skepticism about the standard view that the US deficit is the root of

the whole international imbalance. However, focussing on the 115 budget

de4icit remains the best game in town, and it is likely that fiscal

correction would make a significant contribution to narrowing current

account imbalances.



Implications for policy



     The purpose of this paper is       primarily   to discuss how the

international adjustment mechanism works, rather than prescribe

policy. However, it is important to discuss at least briefly the
                                        —36—

policy implications of this d iscussion, since it might seem that the
paper qives a clear—cut case for" further dollar- depr eciati.on and                        yen

appr ec: iation. While a goad case c an be made for such a movement,                        it is
war tI•i pci. nti ng out several import ant sources of un c er t a i n ty.
        One source of unc:ertai nty is that we do not k now what the

CqUi   1   ibrium pattern of war-id curr ent account i iribal ances               really is. In
part i c::ular'      there is a   retsonabl e   case   for ar g u in g that high—saving
Japan has a structural current ac count surplu s                     of   2—3 percent of GNP
that wi. 1 endure + or' many years just as Erit
                 1                                                    '5 5     percent surplus
did 4 - 40 years before World               War I    Thus     we   canno t be sure that the
rEal exchange rate adjustment t hat would undoub tedly be needed to
cii ml. nate Japan 's surplus wi 1 tak e place anyti me in the foreseeable
                                        1


+ ut u r   E?.


           A second source of u ncertai ri ty       is th e   fact that        r eal exchange
 at E S  have changed shar p1 y aireac:i y since the dollar  1985 peak.    s
i1 mos t. surely the current account i mbal an ces of 1986 w    narrow over     ill
time even at present real exchange rates, as lagged e-f fects work their
way through the pipeline. Al most al 1 econ ometric anal yses of the
trade posi t ion sugnest that the r cal doll a r depreciati on from 1985 to
the summer of 1987 was t.i 11 not enough to move the (iS anywhere close
to c:urr"ent account hal ancc , but one              canno    t definitely rule out the
po";s'.ibility that the econometrics is wrong and that a sharp narrowin
of external i mbal ances is just ar(3Ufld the corner.

     f:'j rial ly , to the extent that fiscal ad jutient is th :ey to
cor'recLi ng tlie extr,ernal i mbai anc:es , the apparant paralysis of acti on
                                 —37--

on fiscal policy in the United States and elsewhere poses a problem.

There is a reasonable case that, given the long lags in the effects of

exchange rates on trade, exchange rate adjustment should precede
fiscal change. If fiscal action is still 6 years away, however, one
would not want to anticipate it with exchange rate adjustment now.

     Does this mean that nothing can be said about policy? On the
contrary, on the basis of what we do know about the international

adjustment mechanism one quite clear piece of advice can be given: fl
can be cost lv to lock nations    inpotentially_unsustainable eychang
cates.   It is highly likely that when fiscal policy finally is fixed,
further real depreciation by the US and further real appreciation by
the surplus countries will be required. If polcymakers nonetheless
decide that nominal rates should be stabilized at current levels, they
should not do so on the basis of a misguided belief that fiscal policy

somehow fixes trade imbalances without real exchange rate changes.
          Table 1: SavinQs, Investment, arid The External Balance



                                   1979                1985

Xo GNP:



     Gross investment               18.2                16.5



     Gross private saving           17.8                17.2



     Government saving               0.5                —3.4



     Net foreign investment          0.1                —2.9




Real exchange rates                 98.9               142.8



Real interest rate2                 —1.3                 3.6



1IMF index of normalized relative unit labor costs



2Treasury Bill rate less previous years CPI increase




Source: Economic Report   of the President, 1987 and IMF International

Financial__Statistics
                Table 2: Experience since the dollar's peak



             Exchange rate'   Real   interest   Government    Net foreign
                               rat,2             saving        investment

es i             160             7.0              -96.6           -83.8

85:2             156             6.3             —155.6          —112.0

85:3             148             5.9             —138.0          —121.2
be,
Q.J.             137             5.8             —155.1          —143.8

86:1             129             6.0             —125.1          —128.6

86:2             124             5.9             —173.3          —143.0

86:3             119             5.5             —133.3          —148.3

86:4             118             5.0             —129.4          —147.7

87:1             111             4.2             —122.9          —145.7


'IMF IIERM index, 1980:100

2Treasury bill rate less previous year's inflation



Source: Sur vey of Current Business and IMF, International Financial

Statistics
       Table 3: Estimates o m and ml   implied   by some recent studies


Study                  Implied m           Implied me          Sum

Krugman—Baldwin          .33                 .12               .45

DRI                      .14                 .05               .19

NIESR                    .19                 .05               .23

OECD                     .23                 .05               .28

EPA                      .24                 .11               .35

MCM                      .28                 .11               .39

Taylor                   .33                 .11               .44

Marris                   .24                 .11               .35


Source: See Appendix 8
                                 Table 4: Derivation of m and m*

                            Elasticity of US   Implied   m   Elasticity of US Implied m*
                            import demand                    export demand
       rid   i t u re   —


based estimates

Krugman—Baldwin                2.9               .33            2.4             .12
DRI                             1.2              .14             1.0            .05

NIESR                          1.6               .19            1.0             .05

DECO                           2.0               .23             1.0            .05


Output—based
estimates

EPA (Japan)                    1.8               .24            1.2             .11

MCM (Federal                   2.1               .28            2.1             .11
Reserve Board)

Taylor                         2.5              .33             1.3             .11

I'arris                        1.8               .24            1.5             .11



Source: Kru;man and Baldwin (1987); Marri (1985); Brookings (1987); and
authors calculations.
NOTES



1. Feldstei n's exposition was the one that brought the link between

budget and trade deficits to public attention, but this thesis was

suggested by many people, so that no one individual can claim sole

responsibility.



2. Which is no doubt why other supply—siders have attacked Roberts'

views as dangerous and demand—side in origin. See "Supply—siders

suffer a decline in demand for their policy ideas   ",   Wall Street

Journal, August 18, 1987.



3. One possible way to expand the role of money i   s to   suppose that the

tight US money of 1980—2 generated a speculative belief in a

permanently strong dollar that the subsequent monetary easing somehow

failed to dispel. Although this is a pretty much untestable

hypothesis, I have some sympathy with it, since it helps explain both

why the dollar rose to levels that were higher than real interest

rates could justify (Krugman 1985a) and why so much of the decline in

national saving was financed by capital inflows.



4. McKinnon (1984), p. 14.



5. In a standard Mundell—Fleming model this differential growth with a

constant exchange rate could be accomplished through a monetary—fiscal
                                         -N2—

mix. Assume, for example, that the US engages in fiscal contraction

while the rest of the world keeps its fiscal policy unchanged. Then

the desired combin ation of foreign growth with constant US Output and

a stable exchange rate c ould be achieved b y assigning US mc netary

policy the task of raint aining constant US                    emp I   oyment while foreign

monetary policy is used to peg the exchang e rate. It is

straightforward to show that to accomplish                     these     goals th e US money

supply would have to exp and (because world interest rates fall,

increasing money d emand) but that the rest of the worlds money needs

to expand by more       (b ec a u   se it must support not only the i ncrease in

demand due to lower interest rites but also an expansion in income).



6. The IMF's 1987 World Economic Outlook finds th at "the degree of

cyclical si ack in Cthe industrial] countries is c amp aratively small at

the present time's. 1apan, France, and the UK are est imated to have

negligible ability to expand their economies with out generating

inf lit iona r y   pressures; Germany to have only abou t3                   percentage points

of GNP gap     Only Canada and Italy are believed to hay e                     excess capacity
exceeding 4 percent. (See World Economic Outlook, pp. 57—8,) One may

quest ion   the se   estimates, especially the pessimis tic view for Europe.

However, for at       least   the medium term the crucial pci nt is                that
p01 icymak ers in the major countries are at least this pessimistic, if

not more so — —      the Germans, for example, do not beli e ye that they have
even as m uch room to expand as the ItIF does. Thus the idea that rapid

growth in the surplus countries can be expected to do much to close

external imbalances i S        simply     unreal i   st i C.
                              -N3-




7. Mundell (1987), p.3.



B. Or a rise in domestic output, if there i   5 excess capacity;      but the

implicit model of those who deny favorable effects from devaluation is

one in which monetary shocks cannot induce output expansion.



9. For a recent survey of resul ts   see Bryant and   }lolth am   (1987 I; also

see Krugman and Baldwin (1987). The re are several major sources of

uncertainty about how far the do liar would have to fall to achieve

current account balance. For one thing, exchange rates have been well

away from equili brium levels for almost the whol e of the 1980s, so

that it is diffi cult to disentan gle exchange rat e effects from other

factors, such as changes in the US technological position, the rise of

East Asian NICs, or the debt cri sis, that might have altered the

equilibrium rate   Further, there are some major anomalies in recent

behavior, notabi y in pricing, th at suggest some kind of structural

charie and cast doubt on the rel iability of all econometric estimates.

See in particular Mann (1987).
REFERENCES



Blanchard, Olivier and Summers, Lawrence (1984>: Perspectives on hi;h

world real   interest   rates",   Erookins   Papers on Economic Activity

1984:2.




Branson, William (1985): 'Causes of appreciation and volatility of the

dollar", in Federal Reserve Bank of kansas        City,   The US Dollar ——

Recent Developments, Outlook, and Policy Options.



Brookings rnstitution (1987): "Workshop on the US cuurent—account

imbalance: comparative tables and charts", Brookings Discussion Papers

in triternationul Economics no.58.




Bryant, Ralph and Hoitham, Gerald (1987), "The external deficit: Why?

Where next? What remedy?", Brookings Review, 5, 28—36.



Feldstein, Martin and Horioka, Charles (1980): "Domestic saving and

international capital flows", Economic Journal 90, 314—29.



Franke], Jeffrey (1986): "International capital mobility and crowding—

out in the US economy: Imperfect integration of financial markets or

of goods markets?', in R.W. Hafer, ed., How Open is the US Economy,

Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
                                -R2-

Friedman, Milton (1953): "The case for fleKible exchange rates" in

Essays in Positive Economics, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



Goldstein, Morris and Khan, Mohsin (1985): "Income and price effects

in foreign trade", in R. W. Jones and P. 8. Kenen, eds. , Handbook of

International Economics Amsterdam: Elsevier.



Gordon, Robert (1986): "US    fiscal   deficits and the world imbalance of

payments", Hitotsubashi Journal of Economics, 27, 7—41.



Krugman, Paul (198a): "Is the strong dollar sustainable?", in Federal

Reserve Bank of Kansas City, The US Dollar ——Recent Developments1

Outlook, and Policy Options.



Krugman, Paul (1985b): "Fiscal policy, interest rates1 and exchange

rates: some simple analytics", mimeo, MIT.



Kru;man, Paul and Balth'in, Richard (1987): "The persistence of the US

trade deficit", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1987.



Mann, Catherine (1987): "Exchange rates and import prices", presented

at NBER Summer Institute in International Economics, August 1987.



Marris, Stephen (1985): Deficits and the Dollar: The World Economy at

Risk,   Institute   for International Economics Policy Study in

International Economics no. 14.
McKinnon, Ronald (1984)i An International Standard for Monetary

Stabilization, Washington: Institute for International Economics.



McKinrion, Ronald and Ohno, Kenici (1986): "Getting the exchange rate

right: insular versus open economies", presented at American Economic

Association meetings, New Orleans, Dec. 1986.



Mundell, Robert (1962): "Capital mobility and stabilization policy

under fixed and flexible exchange rates", Canadian Journal of

Economics and Political Science, 29, 47—48.



Mundell, Robert (1987): "A new deal on exchange rates", presented at

the MIT! symposium "The Search for a New Cooperation", Tokyo, January

1987.




Roberts, Paul Craig (1987): "The dollar crisis changes its spots',
Wall    Street   Journal, Jan. 23, 1987.



Wkasugi, Ryuhei (1987); "Attack the problem at its source", Look

Ja_pj, July 1987, p.3.
APPENDIX A: THE TRADE BALANCE AND THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE



     In the text the conditions under which a redistribution of world

expenditure requires a change in the real exchange rate were explained

verbally and through a numerical example. This appendix briefly

presents an algebraic model, first presented in Kru;man and Baldwin

(1987), that makes the same point in a more rigorous way.

     Consider a world economy consisting of two countries, US and ROW.

Each country will be assumed to produce a single good that is both

consumed domestically and exported. We let ROWs output be numeraire,

and define p as the relative price of the US good. Initially let us

assume full employment, so that the US produces a fixed output y and

ROW produces a fixed output y*. We also leave the detereination of

expenditure in the two countries in the background, simply treating US

expenditure in terms of its own good as a parameter, a. For the world

as a whole income must equal expenditure. Thus if a* is ROW

expenditure, rresured               in   terms of the ROW good, it must be true that



(1) pa +    a'    =
                      py   +   y*


or a' =    yl    + p (y—a)




     Now it is certainly true as an accounting identity that the trade

balance is equal to the excess of Income over expenditure, so that the

US trade balance, in terms of the US good, is simply
                                   I.. S




(2) t ' y—a,




an expression in whch the       relative   price of US goods does not

directly appear.

      This does no t, hciever, allow us to forget about relative prices.

There is   still a requirement that the market for US output clear (in

which case the ea rket for ROW output clears as well, by Wairas's Law).

Each country will divide its expenditure among the two goods. For

simplicity, let u s make the Cobb—Douglas assumption that expenditure

shares are fi..ed, with the U S spending a share rn of its income on

imports and 1—rn on domestic output, ROW spending me on imports and 1—

me on domestic goods, Then we can write the market—clearing condition

as




(3) py      (1—m)pa + m*a'



     or pty — U—m)a]     m*aI




                                 + p(y—a))




implying



(4) p      m*yi/D
                                    -A3—

where D = (1—m)y — (l—m—m'}a



        The implications of thi; small model are illustrated in Figure 2,

which is much more general than the e amp le. On the horizontal ais is

the US I eve! of real expenditure a, wh le on          th e vertical axis is the
mel a t i ye    price of US output p. The line I t is a n iso—trade—balance

line      th at is, it represents a locu s    of p oints consistent with some

give n tr ade balance in term; of US output • The accounting identity

that equ ates the trade balance to inc Dee minus ewperditure, regardless

of r elat ive prices, is reflected b y the f act th at TI is vertical.

ean whi I e, the line UU represents        poi nts of mar ket—cleartrrg for US

outp ut        It is here drawn with a po sitive slope, which will be the case

if     I-rn)    > m*, i.e.1 US residents have a higher marginal propensity to

spen d on US ouput than ROW resider, ts do. Point E is the equilibrium

for a gi yen trade balance.

          f    the picture is as we have dr awn it in Figure 2, a reduction in

the US t rade deficit will necessaril y be accompanied by a decline in

the rela tive price of US ouput. A re duction of US real exp endi ture

shifts I I inward to TT'; this requi res that the equilibri um            shift
from E t o E', which involves a fall in the relative price           p.

        Now there are two circumstances In which this relativ e price

adjust me nt need not take place. First is the case where US and ROW

goods ar e perfect substitutes, i.e., we are effectively ii ving in a

one—good world.         The other is the ca se where spending patt ems are

identical between the countries, so that (1—rn)            m*. In either case,
                              —A4—

the effect is to make UU horizontal (Figure 3), so that a reduction In

US e%penditure need not be accompanied by a decline in the relative

price of what the US produces.

     It is also possible for the trade deficit to fa I wIthout real

depreciation if foreign output expands. From (4), an in crease in

foreign Output y* will shift ULi up, so t hat if th ere is excess

capacity in ROW it is possible to have a scenario in wh ich US

expenditure falls without any real deprec iation (Figure   4:'.
APPENDIX B: DERIVING ESTIMATES OF P1 AND N'



     The text and Appendix A showed that the need for a real            exchange
rate change as   part   of world payments adjustment   depends crucially       on

the fraction of a marginal dollar of expenditure that goes to imports

in surplus and deficit countries. Eco nometric trade fi ow equations,

however, rarely produce results in th is form; instead, they yield

elasticities of imports with respe Ct to expenditure or more usually

income. To extract the key paramet ers a and m' we need to perform a

transformation on these results.

     First consider the case of an     estimate of   the   elasticity    of

imports with respect to expenditur e. Let N denote total imports, E and

V expenditure and income. Then for changes in E we have



dM r edE   or, multiplying and dividing,



    (N/El (dM/M)/(dE/E>




     But   dN/M) / (dE/E)   is the elasticity of Imports with respect to

experdi tur e; thus m may be derived by multi plying an est imate of          this

elasticity by the share of imports in expen di ture.

     If th e estimated e lasticity is instead with respect to income,

this poses difficulties of interpretation, since in general there need

not be a unique relati onship between output and imp orts even at a

coast ant relative pric e. In particular, an i acre ase in output to moet
                                   8—2

increased ix port demand need not br ing with it an        increas,   in imports

(EXcept of i ntereediate goods1 whic h pose a further complication).

However, if output fluctuations and rhanges in domestic expenditure

are closely correlated (as they hay e       usuall y been), we can view output

as a proxy f or expenditure. Note th at other things equal an increase

in domestic expenditure will be ref lected i a an increase in inccme:



dY    (1—m)dE




      At the same time, it is still true that dPI = adE. By substituting

out E and rearranging, we eventually arrive at the formula



a    e(M/Y)/tl —   (MIY)]


whe re e =   (dM/M)/CCY/Y), the elasticity of imports with respect to
j rcome.

      Table 4 reports elast

respect to expenditure or income from eight recent studies. Six of the

studies were presented at     a   Brookings Workshop on the US current

account deficit in January 1987 (Brookings 1987)j In addition the

estimates from Krugrnan and Baldwin (1987) and Marris (t9B) are

included.

      To convert elasticities into marginal propensities to import,

values of E and V for 1984 were taken for all market economies from

the Wor id Bank World Development        Report of 1986.   Values of H and Mm
                             B—3

were the 1984 values of imports and exports of goods and services from

the 1987 Economic Report of the President. These were then used1

together with estimated elastic ities, to construct the table. For

example, Krugman and Baldwin (1 9871 estimates a US expenditure

elasticity of import demand of 2.9; since the share of imports in US

expenditure in 1984 was 0.115, this yields a   marginal propensity to
import of 0,33.
      US EXCHANGE RATE & RELATIVE LABOR COST
                          Indices, 1980 a
160



150



140



130



120



110



IOU



90
        1981       1982     1983            1984           i985   1986

        O ExcPxire rate                     1-     Pdative cost



       Figure 1
                   T
p




                           U




                       E




    U
                   T



                               a

        Figure 2
p




               TI        T




    U
                    E'   —   E




                         T



                                 a


    Figure 3
p



                    T'   T




                                 U,




                                      U




                             E




    U,




              U
                         T
                    T'


                                          a

         Figure 4
