NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HIGH-PRICED DRUGS IN MEDICARE PART D:
DIAGNOSIS AND POTENTIAL PRESCRIPTION
Richard G. Frank
Richard J. Zeckhauser
Working Paper 24240
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24240

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018

We are grateful to Louise Sheiner for detailed comments, to Chris Avery, Maciej Kotowski and
to participants in the May 2, 2017 Brookings meeting on prescription drug pricing and regulation
for numerous helpful suggestions. We are grateful to the Brookings Institution for financial
support of an earlier version of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Richard G. Frank and Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

High-Priced Drugs in Medicare Part D: Diagnosis and Potential Prescription
Richard G. Frank and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 24240
January 2018
JEL No. I11,I18
ABSTRACT
Drug pricing in the U.S. is a persistently vexing policy problem. While there is agreement among
many policy analysts that supra competitive prices are necessary to promote innovation;
significant disagreements arise over how much pricing discretion prescription drug manufacturers
should be permitted, and what portion of the sum of producer plus consumer surplus in the
prescription drug market should be claimed by manufacturers relative to consumers and other
payers. This paper focuses on an extremely costly component of the Medicare Part D program the
region of coverage that kicks in once a consumer has spent $4,950 on drugs in a calendar year
(roughly $8,100 in total drug spending). At that point there are high levels of insurance for the
consumer and reinsurance for the prescription drug plan. Consumers pay 5% of costs; plans pay
15% and the government 80%. That design generates serious inefficiencies. The significant
subsidies to plans in the reinsurance region combined with the launch of unique high cost
prescription drugs could be expected to lead to and has led to substantial departures from costeffective outcomes in treatments delivered.
We investigate two, possibly complementary, strategies for reducing these inefficiencies. The
first follows on the MedPac recommendation that the government reduce its share of risk bearing
for the Part D reinsurance benefit. The second focuses on curbing price inefficiencies. It has two
components: eliminating monopolistic overpricing, and rewarding the quality of drugs brought to
market. It is grounded in the economics of two part tariffs, research on innovation prizes,
performance-based contracts, and draws on the mechanism design literature.

Richard G. Frank
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
frank@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Richard J. Zeckhauser
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu

I.

Introduction

Drug pricing in the U.S. is a persistently vexing policy problem. High drug prices stress
consumers, payers, employers and “budgeteers”. At the same time the public demands
new and better treatments, and the scientific advances that make such treatments possible.

The pharmaceutical industry insists, with merit, that delivering new improved treatments,
and in some cases cures, entails high costs and risks, and that without adequate
compensation, promising new drug products will not be forthcoming. Thus, there is
substantial agreement across economic analyses of the prescription drug industry on a
central issue: Supra competitive prices (prices that exceed those that would result from a
competitive market), and/or other forms of payments to producers, are necessary to
promote innovation in the prescription drug business, where large research, development
and human testing expenditures produce average costs that vastly exceed low marginal
costs. Significant disagreements arise, however, over how much pricing discretion
prescription drug manufacturers should be permitted, and what portion of the sum of
producer plus consumer surplus in the prescription drug market should be claimed by
manufacturers versus the paying parties, consumers, prescription drug plans, employers,
and government.

This paper focuses on an extremely costly component of the Medicare Part D program
the region of coverage that kicks in once a consumer has spent $4,950 on drugs in a
calendar year (implying roughly $8,100 in total drug spending). At that point there are
high levels of insurance for the consumer and reinsurance for the prescription drug plan.
Consumers pay 5% of costs; plans pay 15%. Government pays the remaining 80%. In
this high-expenditure region, market power, initially created by patents and now
reinforced by extensive insurance, leads to extremely high drug prices. As would be
expected, spending has been growing rapidly in this so called “reinsurance region”, as is
well known. What is less well known is that a small number of high-cost drugs account
for almost all of this growth.

1

Insurance and reinsurance dampen the incentives to economize by either consumers or
Part D prescription drug plans. Compounding the problem, the federal government is
precluded by law from negotiating with drug companies. Thus, the usual restraints on
prices hardly restrain. Given the severe distortions that arise in this reinsurance region, it
is a place where policy innovations have the potential to significantly improve social
welfare.

We first analyze current incentives in the reinsurance region and the responses by
consumers and pharmaceutical plans that they induce. We then examine the resulting
patterns of drug purchases and government expenditures within this region. We conclude
by identifying a framework for negotiating prices that simultaneously preserves
incentives for high-value innovation and allows the government to limit the extent of
supra competitive prices in an area where market forces play little role.

The paper is organized into four sections. Section II provides some background on the
Part D program and on the nature of the policy problem related to the reinsurance benefit.
Section III focuses on the problem of extreme market power in the reinsurance benefit
range, and offers a framework for targeted temporary price negotiations. Sections IV and
V present concluding observations.

II.

Diagnosis of the Problem

Medicare Part D, Structure and Consequences: The Medicare Part D program provides
insurance coverage for the costs of self-administered outpatient prescription drugs. About
41 million people were enrolled in Part D coverage in 2016. To keep the program
affordable, Medicare significantly subsidizes Part D coverage. In 2016, the government
directly subsidized nearly 75% of the premiums that would otherwise be required of
beneficiaries; beneficiaries covered the other 25% of program costs. The combination of
heavy subsidies and extensive insurance to beneficiaries at time of purchase makes
effective control of the cost of prescription drugs in the program highly challenging,
despite mechanisms that seek to control those costs.
2

The Part D program relies on three components to promote the cost-effective delivery of
its prescription drug coverage. First, it relies on competing private plans to hold down the
prices of their inputs (drugs), insurer profits, and administrative costs. Prescription Drug
Plans (PDPs) submit bids that determine the premiums they charge. Enrollees must pay a
subsidized base premium ($35.63 in 2017) plus the difference between a plan’s bid and
the nationwide average premium. (The differential results in a reduced premium if they
select a plan with a below average premium bid or an increased premium if the selected
plan has a bid is above the national average.) Those premiums plus the benefit designs,
formulary structures, pharmacy network and client services that the plans offer are the
basis that enrollees are expected to employ when choosing a plan.

Second, Part D seeks to promote competition among prescription drug products that are
offered to the plans. Prescription drug plans capitalize on such competition to obtain
favorable prices for the prescription drug products that they buy. In addition, formulary
design is the key tool used to foster price competition among drug manufacturers seeking
to obtain favorable formulary placement (e.g., so as to offer consumers lesser cost
sharing). Drug companies commonly offer rebates to plans for favorable placement on
their formularies.

Third, given the difficulties that enrollees would have in choosing among complex and
disparate products, and the element of market power that differentiated plans would
create, Medicare defines a standardized Part D benefit design. That design sets a
minimum actuarial value for prescription drug coverage in Part D. Currently it prescribes
a $400 deductible, and 25% coinsurance up to a spending level of $3,700. After that,
enrollees enter the so-called donut hole where they pay a substantially higher share of
costs until out-of-pocket spending exceeds $4,950 (or $8,071 in total drug costs). 1 Once
that limit is reached, enrollees pay 5% coinsurance, with the remaining 95% covered by a

The donut hole is being phased out according to provisions in the Affordable Care Act. Currently in
the donut hole for brand name drugs the enrollee pays 40%, the plan pays 10% and manufacturers
provide a 50% discount. For generic drugs the enrollee pays 51% and the plan pays 49%.

1

3

combination of the plan and the government. 2 The segment of Part D coverage beyond
the $4,950 level is termed the reinsurance benefit. In that range, enrollees are close to
fully insured.

MedPac reports that government spending on Part D of Medicare reached $80.1 billion in
2015 (MedPac, 2017). This represents a roughly 74% increase over 2007 spending levels,
indicating an annual rate of growth of 7%. The growth in total program spending has
been driven almost completely by the rapid growth in the reinsurance region feature of
the Part D program. In 2007 the reinsurance component accounted for 25.2% of Part D
per enrollee costs, in 2016 the corresponding share had soared to 56.4%. Total Medicare
expenditures for reinsurance increased 4.3-fold in less than a decade. This rapid
escalation has prompted policy interest in mechanisms to constrain the forces driving
these changes.

Diagnosis of the problem should come before prescription. Thus, the first step is
assembling the data, and analyzing the sources of this rapid escalation in costs. Both
MedPac and the Department of Health and Human Services’ Inspector General (OIG)
have analyzed a number of the sources of spending increases in the reinsurance segment
of the Part D program (OIG, 2017). MedPac has consistently reported on the experience
of the reinsurance benefit.

Patterns and Causes of Spending: Some salient spending patterns emerge from these data
and analyses. The share of Part D enrollees entering the reinsurance coverage segment of
Part D has remained quite stable over time. In 2007, 2.3 million enrollees or 9.5% of
program participants entered the reinsurance segment. In 2015, 3.6 million enrollees or
9.2% of program participants made claims under the reinsurance benefit. Thus the
dramatic growth in the share of spending accounted for by the reinsurance benefit did not
come from growth in the share of enrollees making claims against that segment of the

The standardized cost sharing is used to define the actuarial standard for each plan but plans have
discretion in setting copayments and coinsurance.

2

4

Part D benefit. MedPac (2017) parceled out the growth in reinsurance spending between
the price and volume of prescription growth. Its analyses show that between 2010 and
2014, 96% of the growth in reinsurance spending came from price growth. That contrasts
with the non-reinsurance portion of Part D, where gross drug spending per enrollee per
month and the average price for a 30-day prescription actually fell. 3 This shows that the
increase in the average price of the drugs utilized by individuals in the reinsurance benefit
range dramatically outpaced price increases for drugs consumed outside that range.

What explains the rapid escalation in the average price of a prescription in the
reinsurance benefit range? Such price increases can come about for a number of reasons.
They include the introduction of new high-priced products, price increases from existing
products and compositional changes in the mix of drugs used. A recent analysis of
overall U.S. spending growth by IMSHealth (2016) indicates that about 44% of the net
growth in overall invoice drug spending was due to price increases from existing branded
drugs and 42% from the introduction of new products. Yet new products represent only a
small fraction of drug prescriptions filled. And within that fraction, a few new products
aimed at Hepatitis C drugs and some cancers accounted for the majority of the recent
increase in spending in the reinsurance benefit. Their role is reflected in the escalation of
the price index for Part D drugs. 4

The analysis conducted by the OIG (2017) offers further insights into these
developments. 5 The OIG analysis shows a marked increase in spending associated with
so-called high-priced drugs. There are a variety of definitions of high-priced drugs
currently in use. 6 The OIG defined high-cost drugs as those costing $1,000 per month or
more. Its analysis of Medicare Part D claims shows that in 2015 65% of reinsurance
benefit spending was on high-cost drugs using this definition, double the 32% figure for

See MedPac March 2017 Report to Congress Table 14-14.
We calculated a Fisher price index for all Part D drugs that was anchored on 2007. Through 2014
the annual increase rate had been 12%.
5 It is important to note that there are differences between the estimated spending levels in the OIG
and MedPac analyses for 2015. Nevertheless the large spending patterns are quite consistent.
6 CMS defines specialty or high cost drugs as those costing $600 per month or more.
3
4

5

2010. 7 Moreover, the percentage of beneficiaries paid under the reinsurance segment that
use high cost drug has doubled from 2010 to 2015 (14% to 28%).

Several additional factors have been identified as contributing to the growth in spending
under the reinsurance benefit. They include the “shrinking” of the donut hole, the growth
in employer group waiver plans (EGWPs), and a slight increase in the number of
prescriptions per enrollee per month (MedPac, 2017). 8

In sum, the Part D cost problem is largely a problem generated by high-cost drugs, and
high-cost drugs are a problem largely due to the rapid escalation in their prices. What
factors have led to that rapid escalation?

Drugs themselves are not the problem. And the heavy subsidy through insurance of
consumers’ purchases, a source of moral hazard, is not the main problem, since the
elasticity of demand for most high-cost drugs is low. (For example, only people with
Hepatitis C are interested in taking Solvaldi.) But when drug manufacturers have
significant market power (due to lack of close substitutes) and purchases are heavily
subsidized by insurance, excessive prices can result, and have resulted. Finally, the
heavy subsidy of purchases by PDPs when their clients are in the reinsurance range
dramatically reduces their incentive to fight for lower drug prices. In addition PDPs have
an incentive to place high cost drugs on their formularies because enrollees and their
physicians want such new products to be available to them, and Medicare is covering
80% of the cost. Moreover, plans can command higher premiums when they present
richer product offerings. The challenge of this “triple whammy” is the focus of this essay.

As the data referenced earlier highlights, much of the problem of excessive pricing lies in
the Part D reinsurance region. That is where insurance plans as well as enrollees are
heavily subsidized, paying respectively only 15% and 5% of the cost. Neither party has a
If the CMS definition of high cost drugs were used the 65% estimate would be higher.
EGWPs are Employer Group Waiver Plans that permit an employer to contract with a Medicare
Advantage plan to serve their Medicare eligible retirees in a way that coordinates Medicare
Advantage with retiree health benefits.

7
8

6

strong incentive to combat market power. Under those circumstances traditional market
forces cannot be expected to be effective. Price discipline is lost. That is the situation for
high-cost drugs that are relatively unique, such as the many biologic products, which
have only recently been introduced. Recent evidence shows that specialty drugs like
biologics now comprise an increasing share of new products. As noted, a substantial
portion of the growth in total pharmaceutical spending from 2014 to 2015 was due to the
launch of new drugs (IMS Institute, 2016). Specialty drugs accounted for 75% of the new
drugs. 9

Formulary design incentives: Given that plans carry only 15% of the cost risk in the
reinsurance region, mal-incentives flourish. 10 If in addition a plan can negotiate rebates
for including high-cost drugs on their formularies, as they frequently do, and if including
such drugs results in beneficiaries overwhelmingly making claims on the reinsurance
benefit, then the combination of a high price, a sizable rebate, rules about allocation of
rebate dollars and low risk sharing in the reinsurance scheme can create an incentive for a
plan to grant high cost drugs favorable placement on its formulary. 11 So it is entirely
possible that if a plan is deciding between a lower priced drug with no rebate and a higher
priced drug that offers one, and if the latter will generally be purchased in the reinsurance
region, it may opt for the higher priced drug. The combination of the rebate, the
reinsurance payment and other allocation adjustments may mean that the prescription
drug plan faces lower costs from the higher priced drug. 12The big step up in Medicare’s
subsidy to insurance plans, going from 0% to 80% once an insured reaches $8071 in total
drug spending or $4,950 in out of pocket costs, significantly distorts incentives to plans.
Not surprisingly, there have been proposals to increase the risk sharing by plans in the

Express Scripts reports that 28% of spending in Medicare prescription drug plans stem from
specialty drugs.
10 In an effort to reduce the risks and to promote participation in the Part D program the government
decided to bear most of the risks. The participation rates by plans remains at a high level 10 years
later and so it is likely safe to alter the risk sharing to address the inefficient incentives discussed
below.
11 For example, Medicare rules require plans to allocate a portion of the rebate to reinsurance based
on the portion of plan spending above the reinsurance threshold. Even if rebates are generated by
drugs that push people over the threshold.
12 For an example, see MedPac’s March 2017 Report to Congress, p. 404.
9

7

reinsurance region. 13 Accepting that affordability concerns require subsidizing the plans,
directing subsidies to lower expenditures in exchange for reduced subsidies to higher
ones, would notably reduce distortions. This type of policy change – in effect
significantly leveling the subsidy schedule -- would complement other policies we
discuss below. A more forceful approach would offer a risk adjusted per capita subsidy
to plans, with no subsidy for drug purchases; it would reward plans fully for securing
lower drug prices. 14

Market Power and Nearly Complete Insurance, The Role of MISCs: As mentioned, the
ballooning costs of Medicare Part D are largely due to high-cost drugs being consumed in
the reinsurance region. Indeed, relatively small numbers of exceedingly high-priced drugs
play a major role (Table 1 offers examples that are discussed below). Their prices are due
to the combination of a monopoly and insurance-subsidized consumption. We denote
such drugs by the acronym MISC. MISCs do more than produce inefficient outcomes;
they create severe political tensions. If insurers tried to control costs by keeping drugs off
their formularies – and we explain below why they might not even try -- patients who
need specific drugs, and their supporters, would push extremely hard to have them
covered. Drug companies that seek monopoly prices, prices that can be exceedingly high
given the combination of extensive insurance and understandably hyper-eager consumers,
suffer severe criticisms and pressures from the press, the public, insurers and the
government. In many cases they absorb these pressures, and despite them opt for high
prices and the accompanying profits.

With prices decoupled from either benefits or production costs, decisions on drug
development and drug pricing drift far from what a cost-effectiveness analysis would
prescribe.

For a more complete discussion of this incentive issue see MedPac (2017) pages 404-405.
Note that currently premiums are risk adjusted in Part D and subject to risk sharing around
defined risk corridors so moving to risk adjusted capitation would increase the degree of risk borne
by prescription drug plans significantly. This suggestion is similar to one made by MedPac in its
March 2017 Report to Congress.
13
14

8

This constellation of forces produces outcomes that depart from valuations predicted for
markets where there is competition, even if tempered by product differentiation. Drugs
with equivalent health impacts and production costs sometimes sell at vastly different
prices. From the manufacturers’ standpoints, uncertainty reigns, a very unwelcome
phenomenon, and one that discourages undertaking the development of valuable new
drugs. In fact, manufacturers appear to respond to demand shocks, such as the growth in
the size of markets, by bringing to market products that represent modest changes in
treatment capabilities as much as products offering major improvements in the ability to
treat disease (Dranove, Garthwaite, Hermosilla, 2015; Chambers et al, 2017). Thus in a
world for pharmaceuticals where insurance enables MISCs to potentially thrive, as
mentioned, pricing gets unmoored from the value of the drugs produced.

The combination of monopoly and nearly complete insurance produces well-known
distortions. In the pharmaceutical arena, temporary monopoly power is granted by the
patent system, and is reinforced by the FDA’s establishment of periods of market
exclusivity. The general goal of the patent system is to allow for economic profits in
order to support the expenses of innovation, a justifiable second-best solution. However,
the design of the patent system was developed to apply to the entire innovation economy
and does not take account of special circumstances that appear in the pharmaceutical
context, most importantly generous insurance arrangements. (Imagine the price
consequences if the purchase of iPhones were 80% subsidized by the government so that
retailers paid 15% of the price and consumers paid 5 %.)

To see the impact of having clients extensively insured in a context where a seller has
considerable market power, as is conveyed for example by a patent system, consider
Figure 1. (For now, to simplify, we are assuming that pharmaceutical plans operate as
simple “pass throughs”.) It displays the standard profit maximizing monopolist’s output
and pricing decisions for drugs first where there is no insurance. The demand function is
reflected by D0, the marginal revenue schedule by MR0 and the constant marginal cost
curve is the horizontal line C MC 15. The profit-maximizing price and quantity under
15

Marginal costs have typically been assumed to be constant in the literature on drug pricing.

9

these circumstances are respectively P0 and Q0. Now consider the introduction of
substantial insurance for consumers. The figure is drawn so that the copayment rate is
50%. (This rate, rather than the 5% actual rate in the reinsurance region, makes the graph
easier to interpret.) Such insurance largely insulates consumers from the cost of care.
This magnifies demand and makes it much less responsive to price. This situation is
illustrated on Figure 1 through the insured demand function represented as the curve DI.
The corresponding marginal revenue curve is MRI and the marginal cost remains as
before. The graph shows substantially higher prices and sales when the MISC
circumstances prevail.

If the copay is a mere 5%, the demand curve will be 20 times steeper than it would be
without insurance, and ten times steeper than shown in the 50% rate in Figure 1. Berndt
and Newhouse (2010) show that one likely equilibrium in a MISC environment is for the
price difference between the insurance and uninsured case to be PI = P0/s where s is the
coinsurance rate. In the case of the reinsurance benefits s = 0.05 and so the difference is
20 x P0. -- (To facilitate exposition, the initial demand curve was drawn flatter than
would be expected for drugs. For similar purposes, the copayment rate was set at 50 %.)

In considering the welfare implications of the situation illustrated in Figure 1, it is
important to recognize that the uninsured competitive result would imply an equilibrium
quantity Qc at a price Pc. The patent system absent insurance raises the price to P0, while
reducing quantity to Q0. This reduces welfare in the short run in the service of dynamic
efficiency, in the form of increased innovation.

Now introduce insurance to address the case of MISCs. This will compound the losses
due to high prices, but will push quantities closer to the competitive outcome, Qc. If
insurance is extensive, e.g., covering 95% of the patient’s cost, it will likely over correct
the quantity, implying that QI > Qc. Therefore we identify three sets of potential net
welfare losses from MISCs: excessive prices and burdens on public and private budgets,

10

overuse of high cost drugs, and (though overuse is not able to be displayed in this
diagram) distorted incentives on the types of products to bring to market. 16

There is a second-best approach to the vast increases in prices and purchases that result
from extensive insurance. The prescription drug plan itself, seeking to save on costs,
could exclude a drug from its formulary, or impose a variety of restrictions that make
purchase difficult. After all, the plan will ordinarily be paying for the drugs. There are
three impediments to this “solution”. First, the government restricts the tools that plans
can employ to limit the utilization of drugs. For example, in the case of psychotropic and
HIV medications, protected classes have been identified to prevent plans from restricting
their availability. In the protected classes prescription drug plans are required to list and
cover all drugs in the therapeutic class. Plans are also required to list at least two drugs on
their formularies for each of the non-protected therapeutic classes. Second, plans may
suffer significant pushback from their enrollees, including a substantial loss of
enrollment, if they do not cover key drugs. Third, once patients are in the reinsurance
region, the plan gets an 80% subsidy from Medicare and thus covers only 15% of the
incremental cost of a prescription (recall enrollees are responsible for the other 5%).

Thus, if a plan sponsor is concerned with political pushback or enrollee pushback it has
just a modest incentive to take actions to reduce access to drugs that are mostly used by
individuals in the reinsurance region. What is worse, plans may wish to include such
drugs as a way to attract enrollees, given that they pay just 15% of the cost, and reap
100% of any increases in premiums. This third factor helps explain why so much of the
recent problem has occurred with drugs being consumed in the reinsurance region.
Individuals are relatively unconcerned with their costs. The individuals’ pharmaceutical
plans are also relatively unconcerned with their costs, but vitally concerned with the
demand for their plan, hence with the premium they can charge and volume of
enrollment.

These observations are consistent with concerns about inefficiently high R&D discussed by Garber,
Jones and Romer (2006)
16

11

Distorted Incentives for the Pharmaceutical Plan: So as to focus on the incentives for the
pharmaceutical plan, we leave aside at the outset moral hazard on the part of the insured.
Take an extreme case where individuals stand behind a veil of ignorance and know
neither the illnesses they will confront nor the drugs they will need. Moreover, assume
that they are effective expected utility maximizers. Simplify also and assume that the
pharmaceutical plan has the power to determine what drugs are on its formulary, what
copayments and coinsurance it will charge depending on total expenses and the drug
purchased, and what premiums it will charge. A rational plan will compete by choosing
effectively on each of these dimensions. The fact that Medicare picks up 80% of drug
costs in the reinsurance range will significantly distort the optimal offering for a plan.
Basically, when there are goods where the government picks up 80% of the tab, and other
goods where it contributes nothing, a self-interested plan will surely offer those 80%
goods to its clients as part of the portfolio that it offers.

Accordingly, drug plans, following normal competitive instincts, should be generous in
covering drugs that are disproportionately purchased in the reinsurance region.
Assuming this to be the case, quite contrary to deterring the use of the very high cost
drugs that are predominantly purchased in the reinsurance region, plans may even foster
access to such drugs. These dynamics suggest that a company producing a drug that is
relatively unique and thereby has few if any close competitors, and that treats a
significant medical condition will have a strong incentive to price that drug so that it is
more likely to fall under the reinsurance benefit. Analyses of the composition of the
reinsurance benefit support this characterization of the prevalence of MISCs in the
reinsurance benefit region.

Static versus Dynamic Efficiency: Considerable policy debate on drug pricing has
centered on questions of static versus dynamic efficiency. That is, how the trade-off
should be made between offering consumers lower prices for drugs today against the
potential benefits that the promise of higher prices will allow for robust innovation
tomorrow. The United States faces this tradeoff most starkly, as it is by far the world’s
12

major producer of new pharmaceuticals. Countries from Argentina and Australia to New
Zealand and Zimbabwe can be cheap riders when it comes to fostering drug innovation.

Nevertheless, even in the United States, there is now broad recognition both across the
political spectrum and within the health care marketplace that exorbitant pricing,
particularly in the pricing of new drugs, has become a significant policy issue.

The evidence on the relationship between profitability and innovation is clear: expected
profitability is positively associated with higher spending on research and development
(R&D) and the number of new drugs marketed, as measured by the number of new
molecular entities. Classic studies by Scherer (1982, 2001) and more recent work by the
Congressional Budget Office (2006); Acemoglou and Linn (2004), Dubois et al (2014)
and Yin (2008) establish that relationship empirically. Recent evidence also shows that
the effect of profitability on the supply of new drugs diminishes as profitability grows
(Dubois et al, 2014).

The empirical literature offers only limited insights about the welfare improvements
brought by an increase in the supply of new drugs. That is because it typically measures
innovation as a count of new drugs independent of their contributions to improved health
and well-being. Dranove et al. (2015) focuses on indicators of the potential changes in
welfare that arise as new drugs are brought to market due to increases in expected
profitability. Their empirical analysis of the demand shock created by the implementation
of Part D shows that much of the increase in inventive activity occurred in areas where
related treatments already existed. It also reports little increase in the number of products
designated by the FDA as “novel”. While these indicators are crude, they led the authors
to conclude that the substantial upward demand shock that Medicare Part D produced
yielded only modest gains in welfare.

Together these findings from the literature suggest the Willie Sutton approach to drugpricing policy: focus attention on drugs where prices, hence economic profits, are
highest, because that is where the money is. For those drugs, skillful intervention on
13

pricing may be able to yield significant gains in allocative efficiency at little cost to
dynamic efficiency.

Before proceeding, we should make clear that the key question is not whether the current
patent system is net beneficial for pharmaceuticals, but rather whether adjustments to
reimbursement arrangements for a small number of high-priced drugs, our MISCs, might
yield equal benefits from drug innovation with much lower efficiency costs and
distributional concerns due to perverse incentives?

III.

Medicare Part D and MISCs

MISC drugs have three critical features: 1. Few of these products have any close
substitutes at least for a number of years after they come on the market. 17 2. Virtually all
their sales are heavily subsidized through insurance. 3. The combination of monopoly or
near monopoly power, combined with substantial insurance subsidy, enables MISC drugs
to charge very high prices to Medicare Part D.

As implied earlier, within Medicare Part D, spending on MISCs happens overwhelmingly
in the reinsurance range, as should be expected given their cost. For example, new drugs
that treat Hepatitis C, cancers, and inflammatory conditions account for high levels of
spending within the reinsurance benefit. Examples include Harvoni, Gleevec, Humira,
Embrel, and Revlimid. Medicare Part D, in many cases, is a large purchaser of such
unique products. For example in the Hepatitis C medicine category, Medicare Part D
accounted for 50% of all sales in 2015 (IMS, 2016), even though that disease does not

17 The competitive dynamics differ somewhat between small molecule and biological products. In the
case of small molecule drugs the Hatch-Waxman Act provides a well-developed pathway for generic
drug competition. The case for biologicals is quite different and it will be some time before we
understand how bio-similars will affect the contours of competition.

14

disproportionately strike the elderly. Similarly, Part D accounted for about 68% of
Revlimid (a drug that treats blood cancer) sales in 2015. 18

Given Medicare Part D’s role as a significant buyer, there is market power on both sides
of the market for a number of MISCs paid for under the reinsurance benefit. This
situation is thus a bilateral monopoly between the manufacturer and the government,
albeit a set of other key players affect the demand for the end product but are
substantially insulated from the price of the drugs. Those other players include doctors,
who pay nothing, patients, who pay 5%, and plans, which pay 15% in the reinsurance
range.

Despite its bilateral monopoly features, the MISC drug market does not behave like a
typical bilateral monopoly problem, for two reasons. First, and simplest, Medicare takes
no advantage of its market power, because it is prohibited from bargaining with
prescription drug manufacturers. Moreover, absent new legislation, it can’t duck out of
its 80% subsidy of drugs purchased in the reinsurance range. This subsidy bolsters the
returns to the drug manufacturers’ market power.

Second, the drug market under Medicare Part D differs from the typical bilateral
monopoly because the prescription drug plans stand in the middle. In a favorable world,
these plans would compete with each other to secure lower prices from

manufacturers – as Amazon competes with Walmart -- in order to offer lower prices
to health plans, health insurers or other payers.

Matters do not work out that way. The market for Part D prescription drug plans is

dominated by three large pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs). Given the quantities

that these PBMs buy, they have some potential to exert a countervailing force to the
pharmaceutical manufacturers, and could put downward pressure on drug prices if

they had a strong incentive to do so. Unfortunately, given the 80% subsidy that they
This may be an underestimate. We used payments for Revlimid in the reinsurance benefit of Part D
and divided them by the total sales reported by Celgene in 2015.
18

15

receive from Medicare in the reinsurance region, prescription drug plans have little
incentive to hold down drug prices. Indeed, including such drugs on their

formularies, even at very high prices, given that their cost is subsidized at a 95%
rate to consumers, enables the drug plans to raise their premiums.

Normally an insurance intermediary, such as a prescription drug plan (PDP), would
have a strong incentive to limit coverage of expensive products. However, MISCs

are overwhelmingly purchased in the reinsurance range of Medicare Part D. There,

the combination of heavily subsidized consumers and the 80% subsidy of purchases

from Medicare to a PDP changes, and perhaps reverses, the typical incentives. Given
that the insured and the insurer are only covering 20% of the cost between them,

this duo can, and in effect does, conspire against Medicare by providing coverage for

MISCs.

Posit the following, to simplify: 1) The probability that an insured will have the

condition for which the MISC offers treatment is pi. 2) Insureds are risk neutral. 3)

Insureds do not know their medical needs. Hence, their a priori demand curves deal
with expectations about use, and are identical. 4) MISCs are bought only in the
reinsurance range. 5) There are no administrative costs.

The figure below (Figure 3) shows the ex post aggregate demand curve for the MISC
as DD among those with the condition, assuming no subsidy. The price of the MISC

to the PDP is P. Given that Medicare subsidizes the PDP at 80%, P = 0.2P*, where P*
is the price paid to the drug company. An insured pays PI for the drug, where PI =
0.25P = 0.05P*. The amount Q will be demanded.

Among those with the condition, consumer surplus is the area below the demand

curve and above PI. It is shown as the region with slanted lines; that region’s area is

S. This quantity must be compared to the deadweight loss suffered by the duo

comprised of the plan and the insured. This duo’s deadweight loss arises because

insureds pay less for the drug than the cost to the PDP. This deadweight loss is the
16

dotted region, whose area is L. (Neither the PDP nor the insureds considers the cost
or the deadweight loss borne by Medicare.) The cost to the PDP from providing the
MISC is the shaded region, namely Q (P - PI), whose area is C.

In the figure, the area S (consumer surplus) well exceeds the area L (deadweight

loss to the duo). Thus, it will be attractive for these two players to have the MISC on
the formulary, and thereby exploit Medicare. The PDP can raise per capita

premiums by the expected consumer surplus, of piS. The per capita expected cost to
the PDP is piC. In the figure, piS >> piC; thus it will be worthwhile for the PDP to

offer the MISC. 19 It would secure more in increased premiums than it would have to

pay to provide the MISC.

It would be expected that demand for a MISC would be fairly inelastic. Holding the

horizontal intercept of DD fixed, the lower the demand curve’s elasticity, the greater
will be the consumer surplus, and the smaller will be the deadweight loss to the duo
of PDP and insureds. By contrast, the cost to Medicare – the amount demanded

times its price subsidy, or Q(P* - P) -- rises as elasticity declines, since Q rises as

elasticity declines.

The PBMs’ own high levels of market power, hence profitability; also reduce their
bargaining power against their suppliers. To see this, consider two extreme

situations. In situation A there are many PBMs, who compete actively against each
other. Their profit rate on sales is a modest few percent, to illustrate say 3%, just
enough to make it worthwhile to be in business. In situation B, a few PBMs
essentially control the industry. This concentration enables them to reap

substantial profits on sales, say 10% or 15% as an example. Given A, a 1% cost

reduction would increase profits dramatically, by 25%. In B, assuming no other
changes, it would increase profits by much less percentage wise; the reduction
might not be worth pursuing if reducing costs entailed incurring new costs.

If DD cut the vertical axis below or only slightly above P, implying that no or few insureds valued
the MISC above its cost to the PDP, then this inequality would be reversed.
19

17

Situation B is much closer to reality. Due to the lack of transparency in the

pharmaceutical market generally, and within the Part D market in particular, it is

not possible to know the profit rates of the PBMs, but what is known indicates that
they are doing quite well.

Two other features of the market further weaken potential price discipline within it.
First, a substantial number of Part D enrollees qualify for low-income subsidies that
insulate them from the cost sharing incentives that are part of the Part D benefit
design. Second, prescription drug manufacturers frequently provide consumers

with drug discount coupons that serve as a counter-weight to tiered cost sharing
incentives that PBMs employ to encourage the use of lower priced products.

A defining characteristic of the prescription drug market is that bringing new drugs to
market entails both high costs and high risks. 20 The implication is that the development
of new treatments for illnesses that threaten the health of the public represent a central
measure of success of the industry (Scott Morton and Kyle, 2012, Acemoglou and Linn,
2004). Innovations are hard to procure and almost always require healthy incentives to be
in place. Then why might MISCs be different?

MISCs possess three fundamental problems: 1) They may produce economic rents well in
excess of those that are necessary to generate innovation incentives. See Figure 1; 2) The
pricing strategy that produces these rents generates inefficiencies through the financing of
subsidies for Part D and; 3) The rents that are created are haphazard, and are often only
loosely connected to the benefits that the drugs provide. Thus, the provision of economic
rents for many MISCs is cost-ineffective. This last observation has motivated discussion
of value-based pricing, a subject that we take up below (Jayadev and Stiglitz, 2009;
Towse, Garrison and Puig-Peiro, 2012).

While there is fierce debate about exactly how high the costs of bring new drugs to market, there is
no evidence to suggest that on average the costs do not involve hundreds of millions of dollars.
20

18

If the drug market stayed static, that is if the drugs on the market did not change, each of
these inefficiencies would wither away. Patents would expire; generics would enter the
market place; and competition would move prices back towards marginal cost. But
merely waiting to have the problem wither away is not an option. Technological progress
in pharmaceuticals is an urgent priority to help conquer disease. And given rapid
advances in most areas of medical understanding, great leaps forward are likely to be
available. Finally, new scourges, such as the Zika virus, are appearing, and could be
devastating if there were no new drug and vaccine development.

Not surprisingly, given the pace of medical advances, recent years have seen an upsurge
in the launch of new effective drugs. Figure3 shows the upward trend and recent
acceleration in the number of new active substances introduced into the marketplace in
the years 2005-2015. (Interestingly, in the prior decade, the trend was flat and truly
innovative products were few.) Given today’s potential for important new drugs, any
prescription drug payment system must be sure to avoid stifling the incentives for
innovation. This is especially true for the types of new drugs that have recently produced
important health gains, and that are likely to sell for high prices.

Finally, problem 3 identifies the often weak connection between drug prices and “health
value”. Some high-priced drugs offer important clinical gains (e.g., Solvaldi, one central
component for the effective treatment of Hepatitis C), but many others yield only
marginal improvements, as is the case with some of the novel anti-coagulants (Eliquis).
The heavy subsidies to the consumer and the Part D plans over the reinsurance range,
feeds back to distort the incentives of drug companies. Those companies have almost as
great an incentive to develop a drug that only ameliorates a modest impairment but still
sells at an extreme price, as to develop one selling for the same price that significantly
improves a life-threatening condition. The person suffering from the modest impairment,
if operating in the reinsurance range, may be quite willing to pay 5% of the cost of a
high-priced drug. Indeed, with the prevalent use of drug discount coupons noted earlier,
consumers may even be insulated from those costs (Scott Morton, 2017). From the
standpoint of society, by contrast, it would make much better sense to grant much greater
19

profits to the drug reducing mortality as opposed to one reducing modest levels of
impairment and discomfort. If such arrangements were in place, drug companies would
focus on bringing drugs to market that offered great gains in quality-adjusted life years
(QALYs) and would steer away from those offering merely modest gains.

IV.

A Potential Prescription: Value–Based Pricing for MISCs

Many analysts have proposed that Congress should authorize Medicare to negotiate
prices for drugs. To date, the debate on price negotiations has focused on broad-based
arrangements that seemingly would cover all prescription drugs. A major objection to this
proposal is that a negotiation process might require a significant bureaucracy given the
number of drugs on the market. Moreover, our reading of the evidence indicates that
within Part D, in most cases, the market functions reasonably well. Sometimes,
straightforward competition among similar products works in its normally effective
fashion. Where MISCs are not important parts of drug sales, Part D plans can steer
beneficiaries among competing drugs that are close substitutes, and favorable pricing can
be realized through the negotiation of rebates or generic substitution (CBO, 2014).

MISCs present a different story. Where there are few if any substitutes and both the
consumer and the plan are heavily subsidized, market function breaks down.
The analysis above shows, however, that only a small (albeit growing) number of MISCs,
is largely responsible for the vast escalation of prices within Medicare Part D. Thus an
initiative to negotiate the price of MISCs should be manageable, and can’t be ruled out on
the grounds of the sheer number of drugs involved.

The remainder of this paper examines one possible design for a framework for
negotiating prices for MISCs. Of course, the goal of any drug is to promote health.
Hence, this framework considers health benefits as well, which it encapsulates within the
term value.

20

The framework focuses on MISCs, the major source of the excess-pricing problem, and
only MISCs. Despite the modest number of drugs that fall into the MISC category, they
account for a significant portion of spending for Part D, a higher proportion of the recent
increases in spending, and an overwhelming portion of spending in the reinsurance
region. Using CMS data for 2015 we identify a short list of drugs that are high cost (e.g.,
above $1,000 per month), incur high levels of Part D program spending (over $500
million), and have few close substitutes. Table 1 offers examples of such drugs. A policy
that merely reined in the prices of MISCs would produce significant savings, yet would
require limited administrative resources. Moreover, by restricting itself to high-priced
drugs, now the source of considerable political heat, the policy might enjoy broad
political support.

The fact that few drugs would be involved means that the bargaining process could be
pragmatically applied solely within the Part D program. America is not a land that
welcomes price controls, or even direct government negotiations over prices, particularly
given the current political climate. Thus, any effort to control a drug price would have to
work through a bargaining process between the pharmaceutical manufacturers and the
government, not just through a dictum on high. Moreover, the policy would and should
have to recognize the trade-off between static and dynamic efficiency goals.

Elements of the Framework: Ideally, the payment framework would respond to the
effectiveness of a drug, where drugs that produced more QALYs for patients would
receive higher prices. In a virtuous feedback process, this would signal and incentivize
drug manufacturers to strongly focus their efforts on drugs producing major health gains.
Under current payment arrangements, such signals and incentives are often very weak.
The result is that drug firms find it profitable to develop drugs that offer but modest
improvements over those currently on the market,

The mechanism considered incorporates principles from the literature on paying prizes
for innovation. In this case we seek to design a negotiated payment system that builds
economic profit into the price of any final product that substantially improves health
21

outcomes for its users. Thus, a drug that significantly reduces disability and/or mortality
would receive a much higher price than one contributing more modestly to health.

The negotiation system would offer a per-prescription payment, updated on an annual
basis. Often, information on benefits – both in terms of numbers served and average
benefits per user -- will be hazy when a MISC gets included on plan formularies. Thus,
data on health impacts would be collected and the payouts revisited periodically, perhaps
annually. Finally, the payment arrangement would be terminated when meaningful
competition came into being. This implies that a more inventive drug, one whose
properties were less easy to innovate around, would end up receiving money over a
longer period.

A second strand of the framework would reduce the extreme distortions due to the 80%
subsidy of the plan in the reinsurance benefit region of Part D. Following the analysis of
MedPac (2017) and others, that would require decreasing the risk borne by the
government and increasing the financial risk held by the prescription drug plans in the
reinsurance range. That would give PDPs a much stronger incentive to negotiate
advantageous prices.

Of course, a major justification for the heavy subsidy to plans in the reinsurance range
was to make premiums to the insured more affordable. Thus, if the subsidy in the
reinsurance range were slashed, if premium levels were to be maintained, there would
have to be increased subsidy elsewhere. Presumably, part of the original justification for
putting the entire subsidy in the reinsurance range was that was where plans were most at
risk.

This perception is somewhat misguided. This situation is quite unlike the usual
reinsurance arrangement from the government, as say with terrorism insurance, where
protection is against a single extremely costly event. The PBMs are insuring millions of
clients, and the large numbers significantly spread the risks of extreme expenses of

22

individuals in the reinsurance range. 21 22 If anything, if pharmacy plans are to be
reinsured, it should be on the basis of their total expenditures, and should not depend on
what individuals spend beyond some range.

To summarize, the key parameter in the payment system, and a point of negotiation, will
be an annual payout made for producing a product that advances the health of the public,
and that is sold to Medicare Part D plans at an agreed-upon price. This payment would
ideally be complemented by a revision in the subsidy system for plans, removing
subsidies of expenditures in the reinsurance range, and relocating those monies to
subsidies elsewhere in Part D, or to direct premium subsidies.

Drug products subject to the mandatory negotiated payment system would be identified
based on three criteria: A) They are unique products with few competitors. B) Most of
their costs will be paid for under the reinsurance benefit? And C) They are likely to
represent a significant claim on spending by the Part D program. Drugs that mostly meet
these criteria would be identified for incorporation into the negotiated payment system.
As such, they would be treated as if they were a special drug tier that was uniform across
all prescription drug plans. The prescription drug plan’s responsibility would be to pay
claims and produce data for on-going assessment of the products in this special tier.

The pricing scheme would have three basic goals: First, it would seek to severely trim the
distortions to budgets associated with drugs that tend to be priced well above even what
would be their uninsured monopoly price. Second, it would seek to provide incentives
for drug manufacturers to produce drugs that create significant value, as measured by

To be sure, the introduction of a new MISC drug, such as Solvaldi for hepatitis C, could represent an
extreme cost event. But the preferred solution from an incentives standpoint would involve raising
the per capita subsidy and employing risk adjustment to deal with differences in exposure across
prescription drug plans.
22 Rather than have 80% government subsidy in the reinsurance range and zero elsewhere, it would
be preferable to have a per capita subsidy, perhaps combined with a restructured risk-adjustment
mechanism and reinsurance provision. Plans would then be appropriately concerned about the
prices that they paid for drugs.
21

23

QALYs produced. Moreover, the better a drug performs in terms of sales and after-thefact measurements of QALY production the more highly it would be rewarded.

The scheme would be conducted with an attentive eye to the need for continuing
innovation in the pharmaceutical sphere. Thus, third, pharmaceutical manufacturers
would have to be adequately compensated to undertake the expensive and risky efforts
required to bring new drugs to market.

We first take up the pricing goal. We need assume no alchemy in transmuting
deadweight loss into Pareto superior outcomes for patients, the government and drug
companies. Such possibilities typically arise within a high fixed cost and low marginal
cost industry. In theory, the government could give the drug companies a lump sum
payment equal or somewhat greater than the profits they would otherwise earn in
exchange for a price equal to marginal cost. A full leap in that direction, even if
desirable, is beyond the scope of this essay. Moreover, as we noted above, sales or profits
of a drug newly introduced to the market can only be predicted with major error.
Nevertheless, the exchange of some equivalent of a lump sum payment for moderate
pricing is a key component of the proposal made below. However, it should be
understood, that the size of the lump sum payment would depend on the number of
prescriptions expected to be fulfilled. In practice, it would probably be paid on the actual
number or prescriptions filled. The price-per-prescription would come from a declining
schedule chosen at the outset through a screening process where the drug’s manufacturer
would have to choose among a menu of schedules on which schedule to operate. That
menu would be based on the principles of mechanism design, and to be described below.
The outcome is expected to give the pharmaceutical firm the equivalent of a lump sum
payment in exchange for marginal cost pricing.

This type of two-part pricing solution has often been proposed for situations where
patents create monopolies. Rarely are such solutions implemented, because governments
rarely want to pony up the lump sum payments required, despite the fact that social
welfare would be improved. (Governments do not appear to value consumer surplus
24

dollars nearly as highly as government expenditure dollars. That is, they do not
necessarily follow cost-benefit prescriptions.) This is especially the case when the
volume of treatments purchased is variable and outside the control of the purchaser.

However, Medicare Part D has good potential to elicit different government behavior,
since the government is already bearing a substantial direct cost due to high drug prices,
partly because of its subsidy of premiums and partly because it pays 80% of costs for
enrollees in the reinsurance range. Thus, if it could get prices down, it would benefit
directly. To implement such a two-part pricing scheme would be a major step. For now,
we just mention it as a possibility and note that Australia has long used such a scheme in
pricing pharmaceuticals covered by its government plan. 23 The pricing arrangement
outlined here would add an additional dimension. It would also focus on incorporating
QALYs into pricing. Future work will show how the two pricing features could be
effectively combined.

We turn first to the second goal, providing incentives to bring high-value drugs to market,
as indicated by the QALYs that they produce. The arrangement we analyze would give
greater payments for drugs that deliver higher value. Thus, company X and company Y
each introduce a drug that costs $1 billion to create, but company X’s drug provides far
more QALYs per unit consumed than does Y’s. Both companies would receive a perunit price, but that price for X would be greater than that for Y if it realized a superior
performance in practice. The objective in offering such higher payments to the more
beneficial drug is to feed back to drug companies’ decisions from the outset about which
drugs to develop. The high health impact drug would, other factors equal, yield greater
rewards to the drug company than would the drug producing lesser health gains.

The goal of this system is to determine how much to pay a drug company for producing a
drug of some fixed quality, q0, as a function of the quantity sold, n. The government will
pay the company an extra amount to achieve efficiency by having the drug sell at (or
relatively near to) marginal cost, as efficiency requires. We start by addressing this
23

See Johnston and Zeckhauser (2009).

25

question as if we had perfect information. A drug is like any other commodity, the more
that is sold the less is the value of the next unit. This is the benefit equivalent of a
downward sloping demand curve. The fully informed government could compute the
total surplus above marginal cost, the assumed selling price, for any quantity sold. Call
this value, V, where V = f(n), and f’ > 0 and f” < 0. We will leave aside discounting, the
time value of money, to simplify exposition.

One possible solution would have the government pay the drug company the amount f(n),
perhaps by paying the sum of the marginal value created in each period at the end of the
period. Thus, if nt was the total amount sold by the end of period t, the government
would pay ʃt-1 f(n) dn to the drug company at the end of each period. Such a payment
would get drug companies to produce drugs that were worth creating.

There are at least two problems with this solution. They cut in opposite directions. First,
many drugs that are developed using research expenditures are never brought to market.
Second, this formula would allocate the entire surplus created by the drug to the drug
company. It is clear that both problems apply. It is also clear that the second outweighs
the first. No drug company could ever do better than to reap the entire surplus its drug
creates.

Posit that we are going to give a drug company less than the total surplus its drug creates.
This automatically thrusts us into a second-best region. Some drugs that would be
worthwhile developing will not be developed. There is an inevitable tug-of-war between
excessive rewards to drug companies and insufficient incentives to get valuable drugs
produced. One logical cap on payments to a drug company, or at least one that would
have some political appeal, would be the monopoly profits it would reap if it just sold the
drug without government intervention. We will just posit that there is some cap, which
would be determined both through both the political process and negotiations between
government and pharmaceutical manufacturers. The cap level would trade off excessive
payments against the loss of valuable drugs. The goal then is to find a relatively efficient
way to reward the drug company subject to whatever cap is determined to be appropriate.
26

If the government had perfect information, it could just examine each drug as it arrives,
and make a lump sum payment in exchange for marginal cost pricing. Unfortunately, the
government will never have such information. It would have to rely on the drug
company, which has far superior information about the quantity of drug that it will sell.

Now we turn to the screening problem and mechanism design. We assume that the drug
company has an unbiased estimate of the quantity of the drug that it will sell. Thus, as
part of its participation in this arrangement, it would announce its expected sales amount,
call it ne. The government wants to create a menu of reward schedules that induces the
company to reveal that information through its choice of a schedule. Each available
schedule gives the per-unit payment for any level of sales.

The figure below (Figure 4) shows a menu presenting just two schedules. In practice
there would be a whole array. The solid line represents the schedule, S100*, that would be
chosen by a firm that expects to sell 100 units. That firm would do better than choose the
alternate schedule given by the dashed line. For a firm selling 100 units, the schedule
offering the greatest total profits is S100*. The dashed line shows the schedule chosen by
a firm that expects to sell 110 units as S110*. That schedule maximizes total profits for a
firm selling 110 units.

Given this screening approach it is possible to simultaneously achieve: 1) honest
reporting by the drug companies; and 2) the payment for some base level of output and
incremental payment changes as quantity is increased. Here the firm selling 100 is paid
$10 per unit, and is thus rewarded $1,000. The firm selling 110 is rewarded $9.70 per
unit, and is thus rewarded $1,067. If it was considered advantageous to have greater
output, the schedule for 110 could be shifted slightly upward to afford greater payment. 24
What is critical is that the firm selling 100 is better off on the S100* schedule and the firm

If there is uncertainty on sales, a firm might choose a schedule that does not maximize its profits
for its expected sales. See footnote 26.
24

27

selling 110 is better off on the S110* schedule. Thus, each firm will report honestly. As
drawn, the S110* schedule is simply the S110* schedule shifted lower and to the right.

One of the properties of this class of screening problem is that two schedules cross
precisely once, the situation shown in the diagram (Mashkin and Riley, 1984; Mussa and
Rosen, 1978). It is posited that the firm producing 110 units merits a $67 increment over
the firm producing 100. 25 (Adding more schedules would allow “well behaved”
increments for in between quantities, such as 105, to be easily achieved.)

Matters would be more complex if, as would seem likely, there is uncertainty about the
quantity demanded. Let the firm’s mean estimate be m. Posit an error term, e, so that the
firms actual sales are m+e. If the distribution of the error from m were known, call it
h(e), there would be no problem. 26 Schedules like those in Figure 4 could still be
employed.

The Determination of P0,n: This analysis was undertaken for a firm offering quality q0,
where q0 is assumed to be some minimum quality for drugs approved for compensation
under Medicare Part D. 27 We designate this base payment as P0,n., where the first
subscript indicates the quality level. This payment might be made predominantly up
front or simply each year as sales are made. However, if the firm declared an expected
output of n, the payment schedule should not exceed the payment on Sn* at any quantity,
unless the government was confident that it could claw back excess payments from the
dug company.

An appropriate benchmark for P0,n would take into account both the expected cost of
producing a new drug in its class, and the profits the drug would produce if it did not
participate in this arrangement. Any tally of expected cost must include the expected
costs of failed efforts to produce such a drug. That cost number might best be determined
25 This greater payment could be to compensate the bigger seller for more foregone profits, or to
provide an appropriate incentive to develop more widely used drugs.
26 This approach could also accommodate a situation where the error term was multiplicative, so that
sales were m(1+g(e)).
27 This standard could merely be the standard for FDA approval, or it could be set higher.

28

by relying exclusively on figures secured from competitor firms that had produced drugs
in roughly the same class. This would avoid the problem that drug companies would
simply find ways to inflate their own costs so as to increase their base payment. Given
such a system, a company would not inflate its own costs, since that would merely
increase the rewards to its competitors. To allow for base payments that differed by class
of drug, we would have to have a different P0,n for each drug class i, hence P0,n,i. In what
follows, we leave aside this complication.

Of course, as mentioned, the negotiated payment would also have to take account of the
profits a drug company producing a particular drug would reap. Drug companies are not
in business to merely cover their costs, and they could simply not to participate in any
negotiation arrangement. Any reward to profits could come from a second component of
payments due to the QALYs a drug produces. There are a couple of alternative
approaches that could be used to set P0,n. One approach would adopt an approach that is
commonly used in Europe. With that approach, new drugs prices are guided by
referencing prices in other countries or in similar drugs that have been launched either in
the home country or in similarly situated nations. This method has the advantage of
relying on relatively available information. However, this approach would also encounter
a number of difficulties. If the Medicare program in the context of the size of the U.S.
market adopted that type of approach it would distort incentives about launch locations
and timing. Moreover, if the U.S. were the original launch site then there would be little
guidance for the pricing of a MISC.

A second approach would rely on an ad hoc rate-setting process. Such a system would
largely follow processes such as those used by Medicare in setting most other health care
prices. That approach runs the risk of creating more uncertainty about prices and not
being guided by either bargaining considerations or the costs of developing different
kinds of drugs. Such uncertainty would attenuate innovation incentives to the benefit of
no party.

29

Payment for Quality Produced: The second component of payment would reward drugs
that produce quality above q0. The total increment in QALYs is the sum of QALYs over
all recipients that it offers over what is currently available. Information on QALYs
gained would be known only roughly at the outset. Hence, it might be tallied on an
annual basis. Let Qt be the total QALY gains the drug produces through its n sales in
period t. A bonus Bt = b(Qt) would be paid. It could be paid out as a lump sum at the end
of the period, or it could paid on a per-unit basis using last period’s experience to make
an estimate for the appropriate per-unit payment, βt for the current period, with a settling
up payment, Rt, added or subtracted from the end-of-period payment. The form or
precise timing of the payment is not what is critical. What is critical is to incorporate a
component of payment for QALYs gained in addition to the base payment P0,n.

The total revenues to the drug would sum across the drug, n, and over time. Therefore
total revenues for a MISC would be P0,n + Σt Bt(Qt) if the bonus scheme relies on annual
lump sum payments. The total would be P0,n + Σt nt*βt(Qt) + Rt if the bonus scheme pays
predominantly on a per-unit basis. To determine present values, the period payments
would be discounted.

Cost Savings Due to Discouraged Drug Development: The most direct effect of our
mechanism would be reaped in the cost of drugs that came on the market and proved
successful. However, there would be a second big source of savings if a plan with this
flavor were implemented. Many low-value drugs that currently come on the market, and
that are highly costly, would never be developed. The savings on drugs we never see
might be the predominant source of savings. And society would also save on some and at
times all of the R&D costs to develop some drugs. 28

The Bargaining Process Over the Bonus and an Example: Bargaining would be bounded
by a relatively low default price of P0,n and a requirement that ensures that innovation

For some drugs, it is impossible to determine if they will prove to be low value before some R&D is
undertaken.
28

30

incentives are in place. The per-unit price, combining P0,n with the bonus, would be
constrained to offer economic profits to firms introducing products that meet at least
some minimal level of desired performance. The bargaining would focus on the size and
criteria for obtaining bonus payments. The bonus schedule would be negotiated based on
evidence from clinical studies, experiences in other countries, and experience with related
products. The criteria for the schedule would be aligned with QALY measures, since
promoting QALYs is the base objective of health policy. Such alignment would also
facilitate cost-effectiveness comparisons between Medicare Part D and other healthpromoting interventions. The negotiated quality schedule q would be put into place and
the bonus payments would be made on a scheduled basis, perhaps yearly. This would
permit new information on drug performance into the bonus schedule.

The bargaining mechanics might be considered in the context of an example. Consider a
drug Z that addresses a particular type of cancer. To ease exposition, leave aside
discounting. The cost of developing the drug is $1.5 billion. Assume that 15,000 people
would be treated by the drug. The price per unit proposed by the manufacturer, outside of
this scheme, is $265. Each person is typically administered 310 doses per year for this
condition. Thus the person per year cost proposed would be $82,150. We expect that
after 5 years two therapeutic competitor drugs will enter the market, and the drug would
no longer be a MISC. Thus over the first five years on the market the present discounted
revenues implied by the proposed price would be nearly $4.3 billion. If the base or
default price were set at 75% of the cost of development, it would be $1.12 billion.
Assume further that over the first 5 years 23 million doses were projected to be sold, and
then 12 million in the next 5 years, and exclusivity would expire after 10 years. This
implies a default price of $32 per dose. The government and the manufacturer would then
negotiate over the outcome standard that would be the basis for bonus payments and the
level of those payments.

For simplicity assume there is an agreed upon threshold based on the percentage of
patients who have a defined level of positive responses to the therapy. Further assume
that the bargaining fell in between the smallest and largest rebates in Medicare—perhaps
31

27%--this would imply a bonus of about $161 per unit if the outcome target were met and
a transaction price of $193. The implied payout over five years would be $3.14 billion,
209% above the full cost of drug development. Thus, a significant economic profit would
still result (ignoring the second five years on patent with therapeutic competitors). This
represents a notable savings to Medicare in an arrangement where profitability is based
on therapeutic impact.

In practice, all costs and revenues would be computed in discounted terms. Moreover, the
research and development cost would take account of failure rates. Thus, it would be
doubled if half of such drugs were fully developed but never came to market.

Complementary Cost Control Mechanisms: There are numerous other potential
approaches that might be used as a means to keep a lid on prices in conjunction with our
proposed framework. For example, the copayment rate expected from the patient could
be set to increase with price, with firms having some or full freedom to set their prices.
Targeting copayments would penalize beneficiaries; given the relatively low incomes of
many Medicare beneficiaries, that would be undesirable (50% of Medicare beneficiaries
had incomes below $26,000 in 2016). However, if this targeting system led
manufacturers to charge lower prices, beneficiaries might ultimately face lower
copayments. It is better to pay 10% of $5,000 than 5% of $12,000. In a highly
sophisticated world, copayment amounts could be and would be scaled to income. The
role of copayments for MISC drugs, after all, is primarily to control consumption, not to
offload costs onto the insureds. Thus, moving a person with a $25,000 annual income
from a $10 to a $30 copayment for a drug might be as effective as moving a $75,000
income person from a $50 copayment to a $150 copayment. The subject of incomebased copayments, however, is beyond the scope of this essay.

In an extreme case a drug might be excluded from the formulary. But exclusion of a drug
would harm beneficiaries and would be politically fraught.

V.

Concluding Remarks
32

This paper examined the design of the reinsurance benefit in Part D of Medicare.

That design generates serious inefficiencies. The significant subsidies to plans in the
reinsurance region combined with the launch of unique high cost prescription drugs
could be expected to lead to and has led to substantial departures from cost-

effective outcomes in treatments delivered. Extremely high costs for an extremely

limited class of drugs, what we label MISCs, get woefully insufficient consideration.
This unfortunate situation feeds back to the innovation process. Drug companies

find it worthwhile to spend vast dollars to bring forth high-cost drugs that offer only
modest benefits above those of drugs already on the market. The result, being felt

increasingly more with the influx of new entities on the market, are budget-busting

overall expenditures on MISC drugs, some of which produce only marginal benefits.
Compounding this extreme-cost situation, the prices charged under these

arrangements are often multiples of what would be monopoly prices due to patents,

but absent insurance. However, significant potential savings are hiding amidst these
discomfiting observations. A quite different pricing scheme would likely produce
substantial gains in both efficiency and health outcomes. If so, substantial cost

savings would be realized, without curtailing the most important R&D efforts for
pharmaceuticals.

These findings point in two policy directions. The first follows on the MedPac

recommendation that the government reduce its share of risk bearing for the Part D
reinsurance benefit. This would make prescription drug plans bear much more of

the costs over that range. An increase on subsidies elsewhere, the least distortionary
being an increased straightforward premium subsidy, would be required to keep
premiums affordable.

The second focuses on eliminating price inefficiencies. It has two components:

eliminating monopolistic overpricing, and promoting the quality of drugs brought to
market. It led to a framework that could guide the structure of price negotiations for
33

the relatively limited number of MISC drugs. It is grounded in the economics of two

part tariffs, research on innovation prizes, performance-based contracts, and draws
on the mechanism design literature.

The framework calls for identifying high cost drugs with significant market power
that could be expected to be reimbursed under the reinsurance benefit of Part D.
These drugs would be accepted for coverage under Part D, but only if their

producers participated in mandatory negotiations. Those negotiations would focus
on two main elements of the two-part tariff pricing framework. Specifically the

criteria for obtaining different levels of bonus payments and the size of the bonus

payments would be negotiated. Failure to either successfully complete negotiations
or to reach acceptable levels of performance would result in a default price that
would yield no economic profit, indeed some loss. This default feature would

reward successful negotiation. The government would be constrained to offer a
potential price schedule that resulted in substantially greater profits if desired

health outcomes – as indicated by QALYs produced -- were achieved. Finally, the
negotiated price structure would be in force only until competitive conditions

emerged in a drug class. At that point, the market price would replace the negotiated
price.

MISCs represent a tiny fraction of the pharmaceuticals on the market, yet they have
an immense impact on spending under Medicare Part D. Indeed, due to severe

incentive distortions, the responses of drug companies’ to those incentives, and a
Medicare Part D structure that prohibits Medicare from negotiating prices and

discourages prescription drug plans from doing so, MISCs receive extreme prices

and are responsible for a major portion of policy concern about drug expenditures.

Those prices and expenditures merit even greater concern when those drugs yield
only moderate benefits. Market conditions and political forces appear ripe for

considering significant new approaches to pricing high cost drugs in Medicare Part
D.

34

References
Acemoglu D, J Linn (2004), Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from the
Pharmaceutical Industry, QJE 119(3):1049-90
Chambers JD, T Thorat, CL Wilkinson, P Neumann (2017), Drugs Cleared Through
FDAs Expedited Review Offer Greater Gains Than Drugs Approved By Conventional
Process; Health Affairs 36(8): 1408-1415.
Dranove D, C Garthwiate, M Hermosilla, Pharmaceutical Profits and the Social Value
of Innovation NBER Working Paper #20212; 2014
Dubois, Pierre, Olivier de Mouzon, Fiona Scott-Morton, and Paul Seabright (201.
“Market Size and Pharmaceutical Innovation,” Working Paper, March 2014.

IMSHealth (2016), Medicines Use and Spending: A Review of 2015 and Outlook to
2020; December
Jayadev A., and J. Stiglitz (2009), Two Ideas to Increase Innovation and Reduce
Pharmaceutical Costs and Prices, Health Affairs 28(1):165-168

Johnson M, R Zeckhauser (2009), "The Australian Pharmaceutical Subsidy Gambit:
Transmuting Deadweight Loss and Oligopoly Rents to Consumer Surplus," in
Prescribing Cultures and Pharmaceutical Policy in the Asia-Pacific, Karen Eggleston
(ed.), Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2009, 145-159
Mashkin E. J Riley (1984), Monopoly with Incomplete Information, Rand Journal of
Economics 15(2):171-196
MedPac (2017), Report to Congress March
Mussa M, S Rosen (1978), Monopoly and Product Quality, Journal of Economic Theory
18:301-317
Office of the Inspector General DHHS (2017) High Priced Drugs Are Increasing Federal
Payments for Medicare Part D Catastrophic Coverage, OEI-02-16-00270, January
Garber, Alan M. and Jones, Charles I. and Romer, Paul M. (2006), Insurance and
Incentives for Medical Innovation. NBER Working Paper No. #12080. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=888282
Scott Morton, F, Enabling Competition in Pharmaceutical Markets; Hutchins Center
Working Paper #30, Brookings Institution 2017
35

Scott Morton F and M Kyle (2012), Pharmaceutical Markets, Handbook of Health
Economics Amsterdam: North Holland

Scherer FM (2001), The Link Between Gross Profitability and Pharmaceutical R&D
Spending, Health Affairs 20(5): 216-220

Scherer FM (1996), Industry Structure, Strategy and Public Policy New York: HarperCollins
Towse A, L Garrison, and R Puig-Peiro, The Use of Pay for Performance for Drugs:
Can it Improve Incentives for Innovation?, Office of Health Economics, 2012

Yin W. 2008. “Market Incentives and Pharmaceutical Innovation,” Journal of Health
Economics, 27(4): 1060-77.

Table 1: High Cost Drugs and Reinsurance

Drug
2015 Spend (millions $)
PUPY Spend 2015
Atripla
$589
$20,959
Copaxone
$1,382
$50,048
Enbrel
$1,385
$27,116
Gleevec
$1,232
$81,151
HP Acthar
$504
$162,370
Harvoni
$7,030
$92,846
Humira
$1,662
$29,277
Imbruvica
$592
$57,653
Revlimid
$2,077
$68,217
Solvadi
$1,318
$89,217
Trifedera
$875
$46,578
Xtandi
$791
$46,751
Source: CMS Medicare Drug Spending Dash Board (2016)
36

Figure 1: Market Power and Insurance

37

38

Figure 2
Trend in FDA Drug Approvals

39

40

Figure 4: Price Schedule Mechanism

41

