                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DO CCTS IMPROVE EMPLOYMENT AND EARNINGS IN THE VERY LONG-TERM?
                       EVIDENCE FROM MEXICO

                                       Adriana D. Kugler
                                         Ingrid Rojas

                                      Working Paper 24248
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24248


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2018




We are grateful to Joe Altonji, Josh Angrist, S. Anukriti, Mariano Bosch, Kristin Butcher, Rachel
Heath, Melanie Khamis, Santiago Levy, Annemie Maertens, Laura Schechter, Erwin Tiongson,
Shin-Yi Wang for comments, and to seminar participants at the SFS Development Seminar Series
and at the Americas Initiative at Georgetown University. We are also grateful to Rogelio Grados
and Martha Cuevas from PROSPERA for access to the original and follow up data on
PROSPERA beneficiaries and for answering our questions on the data. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Adriana D. Kugler and Ingrid Rojas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do CCTs Improve Employment and Earnings in the Very Long-Term? Evidence from Mexico
Adriana D. Kugler and Ingrid Rojas
NBER Working Paper No. 24248
January 2018
JEL No. I38,J24,O38

                                        ABSTRACT

We assess long-term impacts of the Mexican conditional cash transfer (CCT) program on youth
employment and earnings. We rely on the original random assignment into early and late
treatment localities, which introduced CCTs in 1998 and 2000. We focus on children between 7
and 16 years of age in 1997, who we follow up to 17 years later. Using the household surveys
between 2003 and 2015, we find that those with greater time of exposure to CCTs had greater
increases in educational attainment. Moreover, we find significant and positive impacts of the
program on the likelihood and quality of employment.


Adriana D. Kugler
Georgetown University
McCourt School of Public Policy
37th and O Streets NW, Suite 311
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
ak659@georgetown.edu

Ingrid Rojas
NORC at the University of Chicago
ir118@georgetown.edu
1.       Introduction

         PROSPERA, formerly known as OPORTUNIDADES and PROGRESA, was the first

nationwide Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) program to be ever introduced in the world back in

1996.1 PROSPERA remains today one of the largest CCT programs around the world. The

program initially covered 300,000 households and, by 2016, PROSPERA provided CCTs to the

poorest 6.8 million households located in 116,601 localities from all 32 Mexican states (Secretaria

de Desarrollo Social, SEDESOL, 2016). The Brazilian CCT, Bolsa Familia, has grown from

400,000 households to 11 million and is the biggest in sheer size in the world. For many years the

Mexican and Brazilian CCTs were the only programs of this type around the world, but CCTs

spread all throughout Latin America in the 2000s and have now spread to two dozen countries in

all continents around the world.

         CCT’s provide monetary transfers to families below a certain income level, conditional on

the children in the household attending school and conditional on the children in the household

receiving immunizations and health check-ups. CCT programs were originally designed with the

goal of achieving two key objectives. The first objective of CCTs is to provide a safety net by

giving income support to poor families when they fall below poverty levels. The second key

objective of CCT programs is to increase human capital and to eventually permit those who

improve their educational and health status to achieve self-sufficiency. The Mexican CCT

program, PROSPERA, has typically put more emphasis on the second goal of increasing human

capital, while the Brazil’s Bolsa Familia has put more emphasis on the safety net role of CCT’s.

         This is the first assessment of the Mexican CCT program that considers information

gathered after 2007, and that follows beneficiaries for up to 17 years after they initially received


1
  The first CCT introduced at a local level was Bolsa Escola introduced in the Federal District of Brasilia in 1995 and
later expanded to the rest of the country as Bolsa Familia in 2003.


                                                          2
the CCTs. This evaluation of the Mexican CCT, thus, contributes to the still small but growing

literature on impact evaluations that examine the long-term effects of government programs in

developing countries. The ability to examine long-term effects is crucial because it allows

discerning if effects are long-lasting or dissipate and examining spillovers and impacts on

additional outcomes as a result of the primary impact of an intervention. For instance, in our

analysis we focus on the long-term impacts of CCTs on employment and earnings, instead of just

the immediate effects on education and health.

       In this analysis, we exploit exposure to treatment at the individual level to identify the

effects of CCT programs. Previous analysis of CCT’s have exploited only the initial random

assignment; comparisons between regions that adopt CCTs earlier or later; comparisons between

those below and above the threshold index at which households qualify for CCT’s, and matched

comparisons to individuals not qualifying for CCTs according to observable characteristics. Our

analysis, instead, focuses on those originally qualifying for PROSPERA according to their poverty

status and compares those with greater and lesser exposure due to being younger or older within a

given locality as well as between those, of a given age, with 2 more years of exposure due to being

in localities which were randomly selected to qualify for PROSPERA in 1998 rather than in 2000.

The exposure variable is, thus, the number of years that each individual was eligible to receive

PROSPERA scholarships, taking into account the age, the poverty status of the household and the

year when the locality started receiving the treatment. Our study focuses on children whose

mothers were eligible to receive PROSPERA scholarships starting in 1998 and for as long as they

fulfilled the established requirements. Thus, we focus on individuals between 7 and 16 years old

in 1997 whose income was below the poverty line. We use data from the Household Evaluation

Surveys (Encuestas de Evaluación de los Hogares, ENCEL) conducted in 2003 and 2007, which




                                                 3
follow children and households who were in the original 1997 baseline survey. In addition, we use

data from the Reevaluation, Recertification and Permanent Verification of Socioeconomic

Conditions (Verificación Permanente de Condiciones Socioeconómicas, VPCS) Surveys, which

collected information about these individuals from 2008 through 2015.

       We assess the impact of the Mexican CCT program on education as well as on employment

outcomes (including employment status, hours worked, type of contract, and receipt of non-wage

benefits) and earnings. Data about most outcomes of interest was collected in 2003, and between

2007 and 2015. We find positive impacts of the Mexican CCT program on education, as well as

on the likelihood and quality of employment. Specifically, we find positive effects of the exposure

to the Mexican CCT program on years of education, on the likelihood of completing high school

and on the likelihood of studying tertiary education. The average youth exposed to 7 years of the

CCT program has almost 3 additional years of education compared to someone who never received

CCTs. Similarly, the average person exposed to PROSPERA is almost 18 pp and 5 pp more likely

to complete high school and go on to tertiary education compared to someone never exposed to

the program. Thus, we find that the effects of PROSPERA are long-lasting.

       Most importantly, we find that the effects of PROSPERA on education allow individuals

to later gain access to more and better employment. We find a positive impact of length of exposure

to PROSPERA on the probability of being employed, on hours worked per week and on various

measures of the quality of employment (including having a contract, receiving non-wage benefits,

and wages). The average person exposed to PROSPERA is 36.6 pp more likely to be employed,

6.6 pp more likely to have a contract and 2.3 pp more likely to have non-wage benefits compared

to someone who never received CCTs. Moreover, the average person works 9 more hours a week




                                                4
and is paid 5 more pesos per hour compared to someone never exposed to the PROSPERA

program.

       In Section 2, we provide institutional background on the Mexican CCT program and also

provide a literature review. In Section 3, we describe the data sources and present descriptive

statistics. In Section 4, we present the identification strategy. In Section 5, we present the results

of the effects of CCTs on education and employment. We conclude in Section 6.



2.     Institutional Background and Literature Review

       In this section, we describe some key characteristics of the Mexican CCT program relevant

for this evaluation. Then, we provide an overview of the existing literature on the effects of CCT

programs on education and employment, focusing on studies that examine the impacts of CCTs at

least five years after their implementation.

2.1.   Institutional Background

       PROSPERA began its operation in 3,461 localities from nine Mexican states in 1996

(Skoufias et al., 1999). Since its establishment, the program has given subsidies for food, as well

as cash transfers conditional on the household’s members using health services and the children

attending to school (Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública, INSP, 2006).

       At the beginning, the program provided cash transfers for children between 8 and 17 years

old who were enrolled between the third year of primary education through the last year of high

school (Skoufias et al., 2000), conditional on their enrollment in school. In 2001, the program

expanded the beneficiary group to include those up to age 21 who were enrolled in high school

(INSP, 2005).




                                                  5
         In order to conduct a rigorous impact evaluation of the program, in 1997 505 rural

localities, where the program had not yet been implemented, were chosen to participate in an

experiment. These localities belonged to seven states: Guerrero, Hidalgo, Michoacán, Puebla,

Querétaro, San Luis Potosí and Veracruz (INSP and SEDESOL, 2006). Out of the 505 localities,

320 were randomly assigned to the treatment group, while the rest were randomly assigned to the

control group (Behrman and Todd, 1999). The program later expanded its geographic coverage,

so the remaining 185 localities that constituted the original control group started receiving the

treatment in 2000. In other words, the initial random assignment determined if each locality would

receive the treatment in 1998 (‘Treatment’ or ‘Early Treatment’ from now on) or 2000 (‘Control’

or ‘Late Treatment’ from now on).2

         In each locality, households were eligible for the conditional transfers according to their

poverty status (see Skoufias et al., 1999). The Socioeconomic Characteristics of Households

Survey (Encuesta de Características Socioeconómicas de los Hogares, ENCASEH) is the 1997

baseline study conducted for all households belonging to the 505 rural localities that were

originally assigned to the treatment or control groups. With the information gathered, PROSPERA

calculated per capita household incomes taking into account the total household income (without

the earnings of children aged 8-18). The total income of each household was then compared to the

poverty line, based on the Mexican Standard Food Basket, to classify households as poor or non-

poor. Finally, the last step in PROGRESA’s eligibility criteria consisted in performing

discriminant analysis to incorporate other multi-dimensional household characteristics into the

determination of the poverty status of households. For each region, the variables that best

differentiated poor from non-poor households were identified using the discriminant analysis.



2
    See INSP and SEDESOL, 2006.


                                                  6
These variables were then used to generate an index that classified households as poor or non-

poor.

2.2.    Previous Literature

        In this section, we focus on studies that assess the long-term effects of CCTs on young

adults who started receiving the treatment when they were school-aged children or teenagers.3

First, we review impact evaluations conducted in several Latin American countries. Then, we

present assessments of the Mexican CCT in greater detail. This allows us to compare our findings

and approach to previous evaluations of PROSPERA.

        Most studies have found positive long-term effects of CCTs on education in Latin America

(see Molina-Millan et al., 2016). Behrman et al. (2011) estimate a significant positive impact on

years of education between 15-21 year olds originally assigned to PROSPERA and those in the

control group in 2003. García et al. (2012) use quasi-experimental methods to evaluate Familias

en Acción, a Colombian CCT program. The authors use difference-in-differences with the original

sample and compare households in municipalities where Familias en Acción started operating in

2002 with households in municipalities that were originally not selected to participate in the

program, but that started receiving the CCTs five years later. Also, they use a regression

discontinuity design, employing the score produced by the Potential Beneficiaries of Social

Program Identification System (SISBEN) to compare households from the original sample and a

comparison group around the 1999 eligibility cutoff.4 They find positive 10-year effects on school

attainment and completion of upper secondary education, but a negative impact on enrolling in




3
  We focus on educational and employment outcomes and do not review the literature examining the impact of CCTs
on health outcomes. Moreover, we do not review studies that focus on impacts on the adult household members nor
papers that analyze children exposed to treatment in utero or in early childhood.
4
  The original sample consisted of SISBEN 1 households (the poorest in the country), while SISBEN 2 households
make up the new sample.


                                                      7
tertiary education for youth aged 18 to 26 in 2011. Barrera-Osorio et al. (2017) examine the

medium and long-term effects of a randomized CCT program introduced only in the capital of

Colombia. They find that the CCT program increased enrollment in tertiary education 8 to 12 years

after random assignment into three transfer programs.5

         Moreover, Barham et al. (2013) use the experimental design of Red de Protección Social,

a Nicaraguan CCT program, and find positive 10-year effects on years of schooling and learning

for young men. They compare early- and late-treatment boys aged 9-12 at the start of the program

– each of the groups being exposed to the treatment for around three years. Further, Araujo et al.

(2016) estimate a positive 10-year effect of Bono de Desarrollo Humano, an Ecuadorian CCT

program, on secondary school completion but only for men. Using a regression discontinuity

design based on the poverty index that determined eligibility to the program, they also find no

significant effects of the CCT program on employment for young adults aged between 9 and 15 at

baseline.

         In contrast, there is mixed evidence about the impacts of the Mexican CCT program on

youth employment. Behrman et al. (2011) estimate negative and significant effects on the

likelihood of employment for men, but insignificant effects for women. Similarly, Rodríguez-

Oreggia and Freije (2012) do not find significant effects on the likelihood of employment for their

full sample. Moreover, Gutiérrez (2008) does not find significant effects of the length of exposure

to the program on the likelihood of being employed for either men or women.




5
 Barrera-Osorio et al. (2017) estimate the impact of three different CCT programs: (i) a traditional CCT for secondary
school, (ii) a traditional CCT for secondary school plus requirement to save, and (iii) a traditional CCT for both
secondary and tertiary education. They find increases in tertiary education from the second and third treatments and
no differential effect of directly providing a CCT for tertiary education vs. forcing households to save for tertiary
education.


                                                          8
         In addition, Rodríguez-Oreggia and Freije (2012) only find significant and positive impacts

on wages for men living in localities where the program operated for at least six years, and on the

likelihood of moving to higher ranked occupation6 for women in localities exposed to the program

for up to three years. Similarly, Rodríguez-Oreggia (2010) finds a positive effect of the program

only on women’s intergenerational occupational mobility (see Campos, 2000). However, Yaschine

(2014) did not find significant impacts on youth’s inter-generational occupational mobility.7

         These evaluations of the Mexican CCT use only data from the 2003 and 2007 follow-up

surveys to estimate the impacts of the program on young beneficiaries up to between 5 and 9 years

after they start receiving CCTs. Behrman et al. (2011) study impacts up to 5 years after

implementation of PROSPERA, while others examine impacts up to 9 years after implementation.

The exception is the study by Yaschine (2014), which uses both the ENCEL 2007 and the

ENCELMIG 2008 to study impacts up to 10 years after the Mexican CCT is introduced. This

contrasts with our study, which examines effects up to 17 years after PROSPERA was first

introduced.

         Our study also differs from these studies in the terms of its identification strategy. Behrman

et al. (2011) relies on Differences-in-Differences to compare early and late treatment individuals,

based on when their localities started receiving the treatment. Rodríguez-Oreggia (2010), instead,

uses a regression discontinuity design based on the score that determines household’s eligibility

into the program as well as households’ year of incorporation into the program. Yaschine (2014)

used the program’s records to calculate how long the household had received CCTs up until 2007.




6
 This study uses an occupational ranking based on a pyramidal scheme with eight levels, with agricultural activities
at the bottom and professional activities at the top, rather than using standard occupation status measures.
7
 Measuring intergenerational mobility by comparing the income of children while young to the income of adults as
Rodríguez-Oreggia and Freije (2012) Rodríguez-Oreggia (2010) is problematic because one is comparing parents and
children at different points in their life-cycle, when children would not have lived up to their full earnings potential.


                                                           9
She, then, compared the group with nine or ten years of exposure with the group with less than six

years of exposure, using propensity scores. Our study not only exploits differences between

early/late treatment localities, but also additional differences in exposure to treatment as a result

of individuals’ ages at the time of implementation of the program. The fact that age is given means

that the exposure variable is exogenous and cannot be manipulated. This is, thus, preferable to the

strategies used by Rodríguez-Oreggia (2010) and Yaschine (2014). Rodríguez-Oreggia (2010)

compares individuals who are poor or non-poor and are different in other ways, but also uses

eligibility thresholds that vary over time and the index to determine eligibility could be

endogenous. Yaschine (2014) instead uses actual take up, which is subject to selection biases.

        Aside from the much longer follow-up and the different identification strategy followed in

this paper, we also examine the impacts of the Mexican CCT program on important additional

outcomes. In particular, we examine the impacts of PROSPERA not only on education and the

external margin of employment, but also on changes in employment at the internal margin (i.e.,

hours worked per week) and on employment quality (i.e., the likelihood of having a contract, the

likelihood of having non-wage benefits, and hourly wages). Examining the impact on CCTs on

employment quality and not only employment levels is important, since a final goal of these

programs is to help individuals and households improve their standards of living in the longer-

term.

        This paper contributes to the few evaluations that have examined long-term impacts of

randomized trials in developing countries. Aside from the handful of evaluations that examine

medium and longer term impacts of CCTs, only a handful of RCTs in developing countries have

been evaluated in the very long-term. Maluccio et al. (2009) examines the impact of a randomly

assigned early childhood nutrition program introduced in Guatemala on educational attainment 25




                                                 10
years later. They find that exposure to healthier food up until 36 months increased the years of

education, speed of progression in school, and the likelihood of finishing primary school and

attending secondary school. Baird et al. (2016) evaluates the impact of a de-worming experiment

in Kenya 10 years after random assignment. They find that de-worming has positive impacts on

the labor market outcomes 10 years after, increasing hours worked and increasing the likelihood

of non-agricultural employment and of having manufacturing jobs. Kugler et al. (2015) examine

the impact of vocational training program in Colombia on formal education 3 to 8 years after

random assignment. They find that students exposed to vocational training were also more likely

to complete high school and attend university. Angrist et al. (2006) examine the impact of

educational vouchers 7 years after random assignment in Colombia, and find that the vouchers

increased high school completion, in addition to the short-term impact of lowering grade repetition,

increasing test scores and lowering the likelihood of children working (Angrist et al., 2002).

Muralidharan (2012) examines the 5-year impact of an experiment in Andhra Pradesh, which

provided individual and group performance pay incentives for teachers. Like our study, he uses

exposure to treatment and he finds that students exposed to teachers who received performance

pay incentives increases their test scores in math and English, but also in natural and social sciences

for which the teachers did not receive performance pay. Thus, most middle- to long-term

evaluations have examined impacts from 5 to 10 years after random assignment. Only the study

for Guatemala by Maluccio et al. (2009) looks at impacts in the longer term.8

         Unlike previous studies, this evaluation includes information collected from 2008 to 2015,

or up to 17 years after the implementation of the program. An additional novelty is that we exploit


8
 There are also a handful of follow ups of randomized evaluations of programs in the very long-term in high-income
countries. For example, Chetty et al. (2016) and Chetty et al. (2011) find that exposure to better neighborhoods through
vouchers from the Moving to Opportunity project and exposure to better classrooms through the STAR project in
childhood lead to higher likelihood of attending college and higher earnings.


                                                          11
the length of exposure to CCTs at the individual level to estimate the impact of the program.

Finally, in contrast to the existing literature, we focus not only on the likelihood of employment

but also on the quality of employment.



3.         Data description

           In this section, we describe the data used in the evaluation. First, we describe the sources

of information and the baseline characteristics for the early treatment and late treatment groups.

Then, we explain how we solve the problem of attrition observed in the data. Later on, we present

the outcome variables of interest. Finally, we describe how we calculate the length of exposure

variable.

3.1.       Sources of Information

           This study uses three primary sources of information. The first source is the baseline

survey, ENCASEH, which collected information in 1997. We also use the ENCEL, collected in

2003 and 2007. Finally, we use data from 2008 through 2015 from the Reevaluation, the

Recertification and the VPCS Surveys.

           The 1997 ENCASEH collected information on 23,213 children from poor households

between 7 and 16 years old in 1997. Table 1 includes baseline characteristics at the locality level

in Columns (1) through (4) and at the individual level in Columns (5) through (8). Columns (1)-

(4) report averages of the households living in each locality in our sample. Columns (1) through

(3) of Table 1 show the means of all characteristics at the locality level for the total sample, and

the early and late treatment samples, respectively. Column (4) shows the differences in locality

level average characteristics in treatment and control localities.9 Most of these differences are



9
    The locality level means only include the information of the individuals of interest.


                                                             12
insignificant, except for the higher proportion of women and higher log of household income in

the late treatment (significant at the 5% and 1% level). By contrast, Columns (5)-(8) show the

average for all individuals in the sample, the average for all the individuals in the early adoption

localities, and the average of all individuals in the late adoption localities. Column (8) shows that

comparing early and late localities overall for all individuals not only shows differences in the

share of women, but also in the father’s education and age, in households building materials and

connectivity to electricity and in the level of income. To take account of this, we use the inverse

probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) as described in Section 4.1.

       We also use the ENCEL surveys for 2003 and 2007, which allows us to quantify the

medium- and long-term impacts of the Mexican CCT program. These databases provide

information for most of the relevant outcome variables. This evaluation only focuses on the

households that were assigned to the original treatment and control groups – who participated in

the baseline study – although information of households that were not surveyed in the ENCASEH

1997 is included in the two ENCEL datasets.

       We also use information from the Reevaluation, Recertification or VPCS Surveys. The

Reevaluation and VPCS Surveys provide information from 2008 to 2015, while the Recertification

Survey only has information for the period from 2008 to 2012. These surveys include only

households that continued as beneficiaries of the program at the time of the survey.

3.2.   Dealing with Attrition

       Not all of the children surveyed in 1997 are present in the databases in 2003, and later

between 2007 and 2015. Table 2 shows that attrition rates are higher for the most recent periods,

indicating that it is easier to re-interview a person when the survey is conducted closer to the

baseline year. While the attrition rate was 12 percent in 2003 for the children aged 7-16 in 1997,




                                                 13
it doubled to 24 percent in 2007. Then, the attrition rate significantly increased to over 70 percent

in each of the following years. Column (2) of Table 2 reports attrition rates are calculated as the

share of individuals, from the 1997 database, who cannot be matched using unique identifiers with

individuals from the more recent databases. In Column (4) of Table 2 we also use age as an

additional criteria to determine if the right person was matched. As expected, the attrition rates

increased when considering individuals’ ages. The observations of individuals who did not attrite

and included in Column (3) of Table 2 make up the samples under study in each period.

       Attrition is more problematic if it is related to early vs. late treatment. Thus, in Table 3 we

report results of a probit regression where the dependent variable is equal to 1 if the individual

attrited and the explanatory variables include the observable characteristics in 1997 presented in

Table 1, as well as an indicator of whether the person lives in a treatment or control locality. The

results show that being from an early/later treatment locality is not related to attrition in 2003 and

2015. However, attrition is higher for early treatment localities in 2008 and between 2011 and

2014. By contrast, attrition is lower in early treatment localities in 2007, 2009 and 2010.

       In order to balance the data to deal with differential attrition, we use the methodology

developed by Fitzgerald et al. (1999). This methodology consists in deriving the population density

using the inverse probabilities of non-attrition as weights. The inverse probability weights (IPW)

reduce bias by giving higher weights for those remaining units with very low probability of

remaining in the sample (see Wooldridge, 2002).

3.3.   Outcome Variables

       Given attrition, we combine the information and keep the most recent value for each

outcome of interest for each individual. Therefore, the number of attrited individuals observed in

the pooled samples is less than in any of the separate samples: 16 percent for the variables whose




                                                 14
data is available in the years 2003 and 2007, and 14 percent in the case of variables coming from

the 2003-2015 period.

       We show the number of observations that each year provides in the case of each outcome

variable in Table 4. Around 45 percent of the available pooled data for education variables comes

from data after 2003 and half of the information of employment and non-wage benefits come from

data after 2003. The whether the person has a contract comes only from the 2007 ENCEL, and the

hourly wage and hours worked per week variables comes from the 2003-2007 pooled database.

       Table 5 shows the descriptive statistics of the outcome variables, incorporating the inverse

probabilities of non-attrition as weights for all non-baseline values. In addition to presenting the

outcome variables for the periods 1997, 2003, 2007 and 2015, this table includes the mean values

of the pooled samples. Column (1) shows the descriptive statistics for the full sample, while

Columns (2) and (3) show the descriptive statistics for the samples of those living in early and late

treatment localities. Column (4) shows differences between those in early and late treatment

localities. There are no significant differences in years of education and likelihood of high school

completion for the pooled sample, but those in late treatment localities are more likely to do more

than high school. By contrast, employment, hours worked, the likelihood of receiving non-wage

benefits and wages are all higher for those in the early treatment compared to the late treatment

localities when using the pooled sample. This is as expected since those in the early treatment

localities would had been exposed to two more years of CCTs. However, these are simple

comparisons of means that do not control for other differences between individuals in those

localities, including age, which also determines the years of exposure to CCTs.




                                                 15
3.4.     Length of Exposure to the Program

         We calculate the length of exposure to the program as the number of years that each

individual was eligible to receive PROSPERA’s scholarships. Table 6 shows the average number

of years that individuals in the treatment and control localities were exposed to the program for

each year of available information.

         We use three exogenous variables to construct the length of exposure: each individual’s

age, the poverty status of her household in 1997 and the year when her locality started receiving

the treatment.10 Taking into consideration these variables, we estimate how long each person could

have been exposed to the program. Since only those aged 8-17 for scholarships between 1998 and

2000 and only those age 8-21 were eligible since 2001, we only consider those aged 7 to 17 in

1997. Also, we only consider children from a households classified as poor in 1997, to avoid using

children from households who may had a manipulated their status to qualify for scholarships.

Finally, we take into account that individuals living in early treatment localities could receive the

scholarships since 1998, and those living in late treatment localities could get PROSPERA’s

scholarships starting in 2000.

         In order to know how long each person qualifies for the scholarships, we jointly consider

age, poverty status and locality. For example, a person from a poor household who was 10 years

old in 1997 and lived in a late treatment locality was eligible to receive the scholarship from 2000

(when she was 13) until 2008 (when she turned 21). That is, this person was exposed to the program

for a period of nine years.

         For each person, we use the most updated information that is available for each outcome

variable and its respective length of exposure to the program. Therefore, the same person could


10
   The calculations of length of exposure do not incorporate if the children were regularly going to school, as school
attendance is a direct outcome of the program.


                                                         16
have different lengths of exposure for each outcome variable, conditional on the availability of

information for various outcomes. Table 7 shows the mean, minimum and maximum number of

years of exposure to the program by outcome variable. The average length of exposure is between

five and eight years, depending on the variable.



4.     Empirical Strategy

       This section presents our empirical strategy. We, first, describe the early and late treatment

groups, and explain why we need to rely on a quasi-experimental strategy using sample weights.

Then, we present the specification we estimate and the identifying assumptions behind these

estimations.

4.1.   Propensity Scores

       The original sample consists of those in the 505 rural localities that were originally

assigned to the treatment or control groups. The program started operating in the first group of

localities in 1998, while it started providing CCTs in the localities of the control group around 18

months later (INSP, 2005). Therefore the 320 localities assigned to the original treatment group

constitute the early treatment group, while the remaining 185 localities represent the late treatment

group that started receiving the program’s benefits in 2000.

       While the weighted means of the treatment and control localities do not differ from each

other, there are differences in baseline characteristics for individuals living in the treatment and

control localities (see Columns (5)-(8) in Table 1).

       The randomized controlled trial of the original evaluation design was conducted at the

locality level. However, due to systematic differences observed between the treatment and control

individuals before the intervention took place, we require quasi-experimental methods to minimize




                                                   17
the lack of comparability of the groups at the individual level (see Gertler et al., 2016; Khandker

et al., 2010). Since the treatment and control groups are comparable when analyzed at the locality

level, but not at the household or individual level (INSP and SEDESOL, 2006), we use propensity

score methods to balance individuals in the two groups (Becker and Ichino, 2002).

       In order to improve the comparability of the treatment and control groups at the individual

level, we estimate each person’s likelihood of belonging to the treatment group, based on pre-

treatment characteristics, i.e., the propensity score. Only two outcomes are possible – a person

being assigned to the treatment or the control group – so we use the following probit model:

                          𝑃𝑖 (𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 = 1 | 𝑋) = Φ (𝛼0 + 𝛼𝑖 × X𝑖 ),

where P denotes the probability of success, that is, an individual being assigned to the treatment

group. Φ represents the cumulative normal distribution function of the standard normal distribution

and 𝛼𝑖 are the parameters estimated using a probit model. X symbolizes all the baseline individual

and household characteristics included in Table 1, which we use as covariates in this model. Our

propensity score model uses sampling weights, the IPWs that account for the existing attrition in

the data, as suggested by Ridgeway et al. (2015) for any kind of survey weight that make the

sample of respondents representative of the original baseline sample. Figure 1 shows that the

distribution of the propensity scores of the individuals assigned to treatment and control for the

2003-2015 pooled sample are on top of one another, indicating that there is a common support.

       Since the distribution of baseline covariates is similar between treated and untreated

subjects conditional on the propensity score, we can obtain unbiased average treatment effects can

be calculated by using the inverse of the probability of receiving the treatment as weights to create

an artificial population in which the covariates are not associated with the treatment (Joffe et al.,

2004). Additionally, there are gains in efficiency when using estimated propensity scores.




                                                 18
Therefore, it is possible to use the inverse of the predicted values of the propensity scores to obtain

unbiased and efficient estimates of the average treatment effect (Hirano et al., 2003).

       We calculate the inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) for each individual,

according to the following formula (Emsley et al., 2008):

                                                  𝐴     1−𝐴
                                      𝐼𝑃𝑇𝑊 =          +
                                                 p̂ 𝑋   1 − p̂ 𝑋

where A is equal to 1 if the individual was assigned to the treatment group, and takes the value of

zero if she lived in a locality originally assigned to the control group. Furthermore, p̂x is the

estimated propensity score, conditional on the defined set of baseline covariates.

4.2.   Sample Weights

       In Section 3.3., we presented the magnitude of the attrited sample and how we fix the

problem it raises by using an inverse probability weight. In addition, the previous section also

showed that differences in pre-treatment characteristics of individuals from the treatment and

control groups make it necessary to balance the sample by using propensity scores. Consequently,

we need two different sample weights – both IPW and IPTW – to obtain unbiased treatment

estimates.

       It is necessary to combine the IPW and IPTW in order to have a single weight that we can

use to generate estimates that are representative of the original survey target population (Bryson

et al., 2002). Therefore, we calculate a new hybrid weight by multiplying the propensity score

weight and the survey weight for each observation (DuGoff et al., 2014). In other words, our final

sample weight is the product of the IPW and the IPTW.




                                                  19
4.3.     Identification Strategy

         We estimate the impact of the length of exposure on education and employment outcomes

by estimating the following regression:11

          𝑌𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑇𝑖 + 𝛽2 × 𝐸𝑖 + 𝛽3 × 𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑖 + 𝛽4 × 𝐶𝑖 + 𝛽5 × U𝑖 + 𝛽6 × Z𝑖 + e

where Y is the outcome variable; T is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the locality of residence

in 1997 was assigned to the early treatment group; E is the continuous variable that represents the

length of exposure; Year represents indicator variables that are equal to 1 for the year of most

recent information available (base=2003); C is an indicator variable equal to 1 when the year of

most recent information is 2008 or 2009 – the years of the economic crisis; U represents the level

of unemployment of the state where the individual lives;12 and Z is a set of baseline variables,

including age and other individual characteristics as well as household characteristics in 1997.

         For education, employment, and receipt of non-wage benefits, we have information for the

entire period from 2003 to 2015, so we are able to include all the controls in the regression above.

However, the data for hours worked per week and hourly wages are only in the 2003 and 2007

survey, so we exclude the economic crisis variable in these regressions. Finally, since the contract

variable is only asked in the 2007 survey, we do not control for the indicator for the year in which

the most recent information is available nor the economic crisis variable of economic crisis in this

regression.

         The regression includes an early treatment indicator as well as controls for age. Thus, the

estimation strategy exploits differences in exposure to treatment for younger relative to older




11
   The quadratic form of the mean centered length of exposure was added in the models, but only the linear form of
the mean centered length of exposure was significant for all outcomes. In addition, the length of exposure was included
in the models as a categorical variable, obtaining similar results to the regressions with the variable included in its
linear form.
12
   We include unemployment rates from 2015 since information from 1997 is not available.


                                                          20
individuals within a locality and it also exploits differences in exposure to treatment between early

and late treatment localities for those within the same group. Since both age and assignment to

treatment are given to the individual, there is no room to self-select into length of exposure to

treatment. The first identifying assumptions is that that younger and older individuals would have

had similar education and employment if living in the same locality absent CCTs. The second

identifying assumption is that those in early treatment and late treatment localities would have had

the same education and employment absent the treatment for those at a given age.

4.4.     Controlling for False Discoveries with Multiple Hypothesis Testing

         When one is conducting multiple hypotheses testing, it is possible to make discoveries

(rejection of null hypothesis) that are false, by chance. Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) defined

the false discovery rate (FDR) as the proportion of the rejected null hypotheses, which are

erroneously rejected.

         Since we are testing for multiple hypotheses by examining the impacts of CCTs on a

number of outcomes for various sub-groups, we adjust the p-values to avoid false discoveries.

FDR adjusted q-values are equal to the smallest level at which each hypothesis would be rejected

(see Anderson, 2008). Since q-values account for false discoveries, they are higher than the

traditional p-values.

         We use the Stata code developed by Anderson (2008) to calculate FDR adjusted q-values

for our nine families13 of tests. Our 9 families include the full sample, and one for each subsample

(younger population, older population, females, males, children of illiterate women at baseline,

children of literate women at baseline, children of unemployed fathers at baseline, and children of



13
  One for the full sample, and one for each subsample (younger population, older population, females, males, children
of illiterate women at baseline, children of literate women at baseline, children of unemployed fathers at baseline, and
children of employed fathers at baseline).


                                                          21
employed fathers at baseline). Tables 8 to 13 present the effects of exposure on education and

employment and include FDR adjusted q-values.



5.     Long-term Impacts of CCTs on Education and Employment

       In this section, we present the evaluation’s results for the full sample, and sub-samples that

control for the individuals’ age and sex, as well as her mother’s education and her father’s

employment status at baseline. These results show positive impacts of the Mexican CCT program

on education, similarly to previous studies, as well as new results on the likelihood and quality of

employment.

5.1.   Education

       We find that greater exposure to the Mexican CCT program increases educational

attainment, high school completion and studying at least one year of tertiary education. However,

the impacts are weaker for the older group of youth, and for the children of illiterate women at

baseline.

       Column (1) of Table 8 shows the estimates for all children aged 7-16 in 1997. The length

of exposure has positive and significant impacts on years of education, the likelihood of high

school completion and the likelihood of attending at least one year of tertiary education. However,

the estimated coefficient for the variable that indicates if a person was assigned to the original

treatment or control groups is negative for all the variables studied. This means that the CCT

program might not have a positive or significant effect, given a short period of exposure. By

contrast, we observe positive impacts on years of education, the likelihood of high school

completion and the likelihood of studying tertiary education starting at the second or third year of

exposure.




                                                22
       The program increases the years of education by 0.8 years for the youth receiving the

scholarships for three years, compared to those without access to the CCTs. Then, each additional

year of exposure to the program is associated with 0.5 additional years of education. The average

individual, someone exposed seven years to the CCT program, would achieve 2.9 additional years

of education, in comparison to a person never exposed to the program. Given that the average

individual between 25 and 34 years old in 1997 had 4.6 years of education at baseline, the program

increases the years of education of its average beneficiary by 63 percent.

       In addition, the program increases the likelihood of finishing high school and the likelihood

of studying tertiary education by 3.3 and 0.2 percentage points, respectively, for the those receiving

the scholarships for three years, compared to those without access to the CCTs. After that, each

additional year of exposure to the program increases the probability of completing high school and

going to tertiary education by 2.9 and 0.9 percentage points, respectively. Thus, a person exposed

eight years to PROSPERA, is 17.9 and 4.9 percentage points more likely to finish high school and

study tertiary education, respectively, in comparison to a person never exposed to the program.

Since the high school completion rate of individuals between 25 and 34 was 0.7 percent at baseline,

the program increases 24.6 times the likelihood of finishing high school. Also, given that the

proportion of individuals aged 25-34 with at least one year of tertiary education at baseline was

0.4 percent, so the program increases 11.3 times the likelihood of studying tertiary education.

       We estimate differential impacts of exposure for Younger and Older individuals based on

their age at baseline. Columns (2) and (3) of Table 8 present results of the ‘Younger’ sample or

children between 7 and 11 years old at baseline, and for the ‘Older’ sample or those between 12

and 16 years old at baseline. The estimated impacts of the younger population are similar to those

of the full sample, but we do not find significant impacts of the Mexican CCT on the educational




                                                 23
outcomes of the older group. In the case of the younger group, we estimate that someone exposed

seven years to the CCT has 3.1 more years of education than a person of the same age group with

no access to the program. We also find that someone aged 7-11 at baseline and exposed eight years

to PROSPERA is 5 percentage points more likely to study tertiary education than a person who is

the same age but has not been exposed to the CCTs.

       Column (4) and (5) of Table 8 show results for women and men. The results show bigger

effects of exposure to CCTs for men than for women. For instance, after seven years of exposure

to the program, the expected increase in years of education is higher for men – 3.1 years – than for

women – 2.5 years, compared to men and women without access to the CCTs. In addition, after

eight years of exposure to the program, the expected increase in the likelihood of finishing high

school is higher for men – 17.2 percentage points – than for women – 15.0 percentage points,

compared to those never exposed to the program. Nevertheless, after eight years of exposure to the

program, the likelihood of studying tertiary education increases around four percentage points for

both men and women, compared to those not exposed to the program.

       Columns (1) and (2) of Table 9 report heterogeneous treatment effects depending on the

mother’s education. Interestingly, we mostly find positive impacts of the program when the mother

was literate at baseline (Column (1)), but not when the mother was illiterate (Column (1)). Children

of literate women at baseline who are exposed to the program for seven years have 3.6 more years

of education than children of literate women without access to the CCTs. Similarly, children of

literate women who are exposed to the program for eight years are 28.5 and 8.0 percentage points

more likely to finish high school and study tertiary education, respectively, in comparison to the

children of literate women with no exposure to the CCT. However, we find positive impacts of the

length of exposure to the program on the likelihood of studying tertiary education for children




                                                24
illiterate mothers at baseline, though the effect is small in magnitude. Each additional year exposed

to the program increases the likelihood of studying tertiary education by 0.2 percentage points,

compared to children of illiterate women never exposed to the program.

       Finally, we estimate differential effects for those with a father who is employed or

unemployed at baseline. Column (4) of Table 9 show that the impacts for those with fathers who

are employed are positive and significant and similar to those in the full sample. By contrast,

Column (3) of Table 9 shows that for those whose father was unemployed at baseline we only find

a positive effect on high school completion. In this case, each additional year of exposure to the

program increases the likelihood of finishing high school by 3.5 percentage points, compared to

children never exposed to the CCT and whose fathers were unemployed at baseline. However, it

is worth noting that the effect for those with unemployed fathers at baseline are imprecise due to

the small sample size for this group.

5.2.   Employment and Earnings

       Given the positive impacts of CCTs on educational attainment, one would expect

individuals exposed to the program to have better labor market opportunities not only in terms of

getting jobs but also in term so getting higher quality jobs. We find positive effects of the length

of exposure on the probability of being employed and the number of hours worked per week. An

increase in the length of exposure to the CCT program is also associated with an improvement in

employment quality, especially hourly wages. These impacts are stronger for the younger

population of the sample and for males.

       Column (1) in Tables 10 and 11 include the estimates for all children aged 7-16 in 1997.

We observe that the estimated coefficients of the length of treatment is significant and positive for

all the outcomes studied. In the case of the variable that denotes if an individual lives in a locality




                                                  25
assigned to the early treatment group, it is only significant – and negative – for the number of hours

worked per week, the likelihood of having non-wage benefits, and the hourly wage.

       A person exposed to the program for three years is 13.7 percentage points more likely to

be employed, works 2.9 more hours per week, and earns 1.4 more pesos per hour than someone

never exposed to CCTs. Moreover, these outcomes increase 4.6 percentage points, 3.1 hours per

week and 1.2 pesos per hour, respectively, with each additional year exposed to the program.

Similarly, a person exposed four years to the CCT is 0.3 percentage points more likely to have

non-wage benefits than someone never exposed to the program, and this effect increases 0.5

percentage points for each additional year of exposure. Furthermore, someone exposed five years

to PROSPERA is 4.2 percentage points more likely to have an employment contract than a person

without access to the program, and this impact increases 0.8 percentage points with each additional

year exposed to the CCTs.

       The average individual was exposed to the program eight years in the case of variables

collected until 2015, and between five and six years in the case of the variables whose information

was collected only until 2007. Thus, the average person aged 6-17 in 1997 is 36.6 percentage

points more likely to be employed, works 9 more hours per week, is 6.6 percentage points more

likely to have an employment contract, is 2.3 percentage points more likely to have non-wage

benefits, and earns 5.0 more pesos per hour than an individual never exposed to the CCTs. The

average impact represents a 40 percent increase on the likelihood of being employed, considering

that 91 percent of the heads of households were employed in 1997. Similarly, we observe a 25

percent increase in the number of hours worked per week, a 69 percent increase in the likelihood

of having non-wage benefits, and a 38 percent increase in the hourly wages for the average

individual, when comparing them to their heads of households at baseline.




                                                 26
       Column (2) of Tables 10 and 11, shows the results for the younger population of the sample.

The impacts are significant in the case the number of hours worked per week, non-wage benefits

and hourly wages. Thus, someone aged 7-11 at baseline and exposed five years to PROSPERA

works 23.2 more hours per week than people of similar age with no exposure to the program. Also,

a person in this same age group that has been exposed to the CCTs for eight years is 5.6 percentage

points more likely to have non-wage benefits than someone without access to PROSPERA. In

addition, someone between 7 and 11 years old at baseline with six years of exposure to the program

earns 3.4 more pesos per hour than another person of similar age that has not been exposed to the

CCTs. Nevertheless, we do not find a statistically significant effect of the program on the

likelihood of working or having an employment contract in the case of the younger group of

individuals. Similarly, Column (3) of Tables 10 and 11 show no significant impacts in the case of

any of the outcomes when we examine the older group of individuals.

       When we split the sample by gender in Columns (4) and (5) of Tables 10 and 11, we find

no statistically significant effects on the likelihood of working and on the likelihood of having an

employment contract for either men or women. However, we do find that the average man exposed

to the program for eight years earns 8.0 more pesos per hour than a man with zero years of

exposure, while there are not significant effects on women’s hourly wages. We also find a

substantial difference in the impacts on weekly working hours. A man with five years of exposure

to the program works 14.1 more hours per week than a man that has not been exposed to the CCTs,

but this difference decreases to 3.5 hours in the case of women.

       Like for educational attainment, Columns (1) and (2) of Tables 12 and 13 show stronger

effects for the children of literate women at baseline than for the children of illiterate women in

1997. We find impacts that are very similar to the full sample for the children of literate women in




                                                27
the case of likelihood of being employed, weekly working hours, likelihood of having non-wage

benefits, and hourly wages. However, we only find significant impacts on the children on illiterate

women in the case of weekly working hours – and this effect is not as strong as in the case of the

children of literate women. Thus, we find that a person exposed five years to the program works

7.2 and 10.5 more hours per week in the case of children of illiterate and literate women,

respectively, compared to someone without access to the CCTs.

     Lastly, we report differential effects on employment outcomes for children of unemployed and

employed fathers at baseline in Columns (3) and (4) of Tables 12 and 13. We find positive and

significant impacts of the exposure to the program in the case of those individuals whose father

reported to have a job at baseline. These effects are similar to those of the full sample, as the fathers

of 91 percent of the youth were employed at baseline. Accordingly, we find that a child whose

father had a job in 1997 and has been exposed to the program for eight years is 38.2 percentage

points more likely to work, 6.3 percentage points more likely to have an employment contract and

1.8 percentage points more likely to have non-wage benefits than a child never exposed to the

CCTs and whose father reported to be unemployed at baseline. In a similar way, we find that the

children of unemployed fathers at baseline work 9.7 more hours per week and earn 5 more pesos

per week after five and six years of exposure to the program, respectively, compared to the children

of unemployed fathers in 1997 without access to the program. On the other hand, all other effects

for the children of fathers unemployed in 1997 are not statistically significant.



6.      Conclusions

        This is the first evaluation that follows up beneficiaries of the Mexican CCT program for

up to 17 years. We study the children aged 7-16 in 1997 that live in the localities who were either




                                                   28
randomly assigned to the early treatment and started receiving CCTs in 1998, or to the late

treatment groups where the program was implemented in 2000. Unlike previous analysis of the

Mexican CCT, we construct a variable that quantifies the time that each person was exposed to the

program, using three exogenous variables: each individual’s age, the poverty status of her

household, and the year when her locality started receiving the treatment.

       We examine three education variables and five employment variables, and we find

significant and positive impacts of the CCT program in all cases after controlling for multiple

hypotheses testing. We find positive effects of the exposure to the Mexican CCT program on

educational attainment, high school completion and studying at least one year of tertiary education.

However, the impacts are weaker for women and for the children of illiterate women at baseline,

implying that educational policies should focus on these vulnerable groups.

       In contrast to previous studies, we also find positive impacts of the program on the

likelihood and quality of employment. We find positive effects of the length of exposure on the

probability of being employed and on the number of hours worked per week. Moreover, an

increase in the length of exposure to the CCT program is also associated with an improvement in

employment quality, including the likelihood of having an employment contract, the likelihood of

having non-wage benefits, and hourly wages.

       Once again, the impacts on employment and quality of employment are stronger for men

and for the children of literate women, showing that it is more difficult to women and for children

of illiterate women to continue studying after high school and/or to transition to the labor market.

       These results show that the effects of CCTs are long-lasting and go well-beyond the initial

impact on education that have been so well documented. Our study shows that the human capital

investments induced by CCTs allow individuals to improve their standards of living by gaining




                                                29
access to better quality employment and higher paying jobs. Thus, the initial intent of CCTs of

helping individuals in poor rural communities to become self-sufficient appears to have been

achieved.




                                              30
References

Anderson, M. 2008. “Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early intervention:
   A reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training projects,” Journal of
   the American Statistical Association, 103(484): 1481-1495.
Angrist, J., and J. Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricists Companion.
   Princeton University Press.
Angrist, J., E. Bettinger, and M. Kremer. 2006. “Long-Term Educational Consequences of
   Secondary School Vouchers: Evidence from Administrative Records in Colombia,” The
   American Economic Review, 96(3): 847-862.
Angrist, J., E. Bettinger, E. Bloom, E. King, and M. Kremer. 2002. “Vouchers for Private
   Schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment,” The American
   Economic Review, 92(5): 1535-1558.
Araujo, C., M. Bosch, and N. Schady. 2016. “Can cash transfers help households escape an inter-
   generational     poverty     trap?”     NBER        Working       Paper     No.     22670.
   http://www.nber.org/chapters/c13838.pdf.
Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer and Edward Miguel. 2016. “Worms at Work:
   Long-term Impacts of a Child Health Investment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4):
   1637-1680.
Barham, T., K. Macours, and J. Maluccio. 2013. “More schooling and more learning? Effects of a
   three-year conditional cash transfer program in Nicaragua after 10 years,” IADB Working
   Paper                                      Series                                     432.
   https://www.povertyactionlab.org/sites/default/files/publications/578%2010%20year%20foll
   ow%20up%20July2013.pdf
Barrera-Osorio, F., L. Linden, and J. Saavedra. 2017. “Medium- and Long-Term Educational
   Consequences of Alternative Conditional Cash Transfer Designs: Experimental Evidence from
   Colombia,” NBER Working Paper No. 23275.
Becker, S., and A. Ichino. 2002. “Estimation of average treatment effects based on propensity
   scores,” Stata Journal, 2(4): 358-377.
Behrman, J., and P. Todd. 1999. “Randomness in the Experimental Samples of PROGRESA
   (Education,    Health,    and     Nutrition  Program),”    Washington,     DC:     IFPRI.
   http://www.ifpri.org/publication/randomness-experimental-samples-progresa-education-
   health-and-nutrition-program.
Behrman, J., S. Parker and P. Todd. 2011. “Do Conditional Cash Transfers for Schooling Generate
   Lasting Benefits? A Five-Year Follow-up of PROGRESA/Oportunidades,” Journal of Human
   Resources, 46(1): 203-236.
Benjamini, Y., and Y. Hochberg. 1995. “Controlling the False Discovery Rate,” Journal of the
   Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Methodological), 57(1): 289–300.
Bryson, A., R. Dorsett, and S. Purdon. 2002. “The Use of Propensity Score Matching in the
   Evaluation of Active Labour Market Policies,” Department for Work and Pensions Working
   Paper                                        No.                                    4.


                                                31
   http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/4993/1/The_use_of_propensity_score_matching_in_the_evaluation_of
   _active_labour_market_policies.pdf.
Campos, P. 2000. Documento Compilatorio de la Evaluación Externa 2007-2008 del Programa
   Oportunidades.               Mexico,                  DF:                 SEDESOL.
   https://prospera.gob.mx/EVALUACION/es/wersd53465sdg1/docs/2010/2010_doc_compilat
   orio2008.pdf.
DuGoff, E., M. Schuler, and E. Stuart. 2014. “Generalizing Observational Study Results: Applying
  Propensity Score Methods to Complex Surveys,” Health Services Research, 49(1): 284–303.
Emsley, R., M. Lunt, A. Pickles, and G. Dunn. 2008. “Implementing Double-Robust Estimators
  of Causal Effects,” Stata Journal, 8(3): 334-353.
Fitzgerald, J., P. Gottschalk, and R. Moffitt. 1999. “An Analysis of Sample Attrition in Panel Data:
    the Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics,” The Journal of Human Resources, 33(2):
    251-299.
García, A., O. Romero, O. Attanasio, and L. Pellerano. 2012. “Impactos de Largo Plazo del
   Programa Familias en Acción en Municipios de Menos de 100 Mil Habitantes en los Aspectos
   Claves        del     Desarrollo      del     Capital    Humano,”      Final     Report.
   https://sinergiacp.dnp.gov.co/Sinergia/Archivos/92646308-df90-4107-a074-
   8bf62ea9e862/Eval_Familias%20Acci%C3%B3n%20Largo%20plazo.pdf
Gertler, P., S. Martinez, P. Premand, L. Rawlings, and C. Vermeersch. 2016. Impact evaluation in
   practice.           Washington,          D.C.:          World          Bank           Group.
   http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/698441474029568469/Impact-evaluation-in-
   practice
Gutiérrez, J. 2008. “Comportamientos de Riesgo y sus Consecuencias para la Salud, Bienestar y
   Probabilidad de Participación Laboral,” in, ed., SEDESOL, Evaluación externa del Programa
   Oportunidades – Tomo I: Efectos en zonas rurales a diez años de intervención (1997-2007),
   pp.               239-279.               Mexico,             DF:               SEDESOL.
   https://prospera.gob.mx/EVALUACION/es/wersd53465sdg1/docs/2008/2008_tomo_i_efecto
   s_oportunidades.pdf.
Hirano, K., G. Imbens, and G. Ridder. 2003. “Efficient Estimation of Average Treatment Effects
   Using the Estimated Propensity Score,” Econometrica, 71(4): 1161-1189.
INSP. 2005. Tomo I de la evaluación externa de impacto del Programa Oportunidades 2004.
   https://prospera.gob.mx/EVALUACION/es/wersd53465sdg1/docs/2004/insp_ciesas_2004_to
   mo_i.pdf.
INSP. 2006. Informe compilatorio de la evaluación externa de impacto del Programa
   Oportunidades                                                          2001-2006.
   https://prospera.gob.mx/EVALUACION/es/wersd53465sdg1/docs/2006/insp_2001_2006_co
   mpilatorio.pdf.
INSP       and      SEDESOL.      2006.  Nota     Metodologica      General    Rural.
   https://prospera.gob.mx/EVALUACION/es/wersd53465sdg1/eval_cuant/nota_metodologica
   _general_rural_2006_02_03.pdf.




                                                32
Joffe, M., T. Ten Have, H. Feldman, and S. Kimmel. 2004. “Model Selection, Confounder Control,
    and Marginal Structural Models: Review and New Applications,” The American Statistician,
    58(4): 272–279.
Khandker, S., G. Koolwal, and H. Samad. 2010. Handbook on Impact Evaluation: Quantitative
   Methods               and               Practices.            World            Bank.
   https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/2693/520990PUB0EPI1101Of
   ficial0Use0Only1.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
Kugler, A., M. Kugler, J. Saavedra, and L. Herrera Prada. 2015. “Long-term Direct and Spillover
   Effects of Job Training: Experimental Evidence from Colombia,” NBER Working Paper No.
   21607.
Maluccio, J., J. Hoddinott, J. Behrman, R. Martorell, A. Quisumbing, A. Stein. 2009. "The Impact
   of Improving Nutrition During Early Childhood on Education among Guatemalan Adults,"
   The Economic Journal, 119(537): 734-763.
Molina-Millan, T., T. Barham, K. Macours, J. Maluccio, and M. Stampini. 2016. “Long-term
  impacts of conditional cash transfers in Latin America: Review of the evidence,” IADB
  Working Paper Series 732). https://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/7891/Long-
  term-Impacts-of-Conditional-Cash-Transfers-in-Latin-America-Review-of-the-
  Evidence.pdf?sequence=1.
Muralidharan, K. 2012. "Long-Term Effects of Teacher Performance Pay: Experimental Evidence
  from India," UC San Diego Working Paper.
Ridgeway, G., S. Kovalchik, B. Griffin, and M. Kabeto. 2015. “Propensity Score Analysis with
   Survey Weighted Data,” Journal of Causal Inference, 3(2): 237–249.
Rodríguez-Oreggia, E. 2010. “Evaluación de movilidad social intergeneracional de los jóvenes
   beneficiarios de Oportunidades provenientes de hogares en zonas rurales,” in, ed., J. Soto,
   Informe final de la meta evaluación 2007-2012 del Programa de Desarrollo Humano
   Oportunidades (pp. 53-56). Tuxtla Gutiérrez, Chiapas: SEDESOL and Universidad Autónoma
   de                                                                                Chiapas.
   https://prospera.gob.mx/EVALUACION/es/wersd53465sdg1/docs/2012/informe_final_oport
   .pdf.
Rodríguez-Oreggia, E., and S. Freije. 2012. “Long term impact of a cash‐transfers program on
   labor outcomes of the rural youth in Mexico,” CID Working Paper No. 230.
   https://www.hks.harvard.edu/content/download/69387/1250358/version/1/file/230.pdf.
SEDESOL.      2016.     Cuarto      Informe      de    Labores      2015    –     2016.
  https://www.gob.mx/cms/uploads/attachment/file/136723/Cuarto_Informe_de_Labores_de_l
  a_Secretar_a_de_Desarrollo_Social_web_2015_-_2016.pdf.
Skoufias, E., B. Davis, and J. Behrman. 1999. “An Evaluation of the Selection of Beneficiary
   Households in the Education, Health, and Nutrition Program (PROGRESA) of Mexico,”
   Washington, DC: IFPRI. http://ebrary.ifpri.org/cdm/ref/collection/p15738coll2/id/125727.
Skoufias, E., J. Behrman, J., P. Gertler, and P. Schultz. 2000. “¿Está dando buenos resultados
   Progresa? Informe de los resultados obtenidos de una evaluación realizada por el IFPRI -
   Síntesis de la evaluación de impacto,” IFPRI. http://www.ifpri.org/node/1359.



                                              33
Wooldridge, J. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge, MA:
  MIT Press.
Yaschine, I. 2014. “Impacto del Programa Oportunidades en el logro ocupacional de jóvenes de
   origen rural en México,” in, eds. M. Mora and O. de Oliveira, Desafíos y Paradojas – Los
   Jóvenes frente a la Desigualdades Sociales, pp. 191-244. Mexico, DF: Centro de Estudios
   Sociológicos del Colegio de México.




                                            34
                                        Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Baseline Characteristics in 1997

                                                              Locality                                                 Individual
                                                      Early      Late          Early treatment                  Early       Late     Early treatment
                                          Total                                                    Total
               Variable                             treatment treatment        – Late treatment               treatment treatment    – Late treatment
                                           (1)          (2)       (3)                 (4)            (5)          (6)        (7)            (8)
                                         11.0941    11.1201     11.049             0.0711         11.1071     11.1049    11.1105         -0.0056
Age in 1997
                                         (0.5962)   (0.6033)   (0.5825)            (0.0551)       (2.7885)    (2.7905)   (2.7854)        (0.0377)
HH classified as poor (2003              0.9968      0.9971     0.9962              0.001          0.9973      0.9976     0.9968         0.0008
methodology)                             (0.0194)    (0.02)    (0.0185)            (0.0018)        (0.052)    (0.0492)   (0.0564)        (0.0007)
                                         0.4806      0.473      0.4938            -0.0208**        0.4852      0.4802     0.4934         -0.0132*
Female
                                         (0.1103)   (0.1147)    (0.101)            (0.0102)       (0.4998)    (0.4996)     (0.5)         (0.0068)
                                         0.2464      0.2362     0.2642              -0.028         0.3502      0.3394     0.368        -0.0286***
Indigenous language
                                         (0.3981)   (0.3935)   (0.4063)            (0.0368)       (0.4771)    (0.4735)   (0.4823)        (0.0065)
                                         0.9063      0.9106     0.8988             0.0118          0.9152      0.9231     0.9021        0.0210***
Working father (1997)
                                         (0.1227)   (0.1302)   (0.1084)            (0.0113)       (0.2786)    (0.2664)   (0.2972)        (0.0038)
                                         0.0973      0.1058     0.0825             0.0233          0.0994      0.1121     0.0786        0.0334***
Working mother (1997)
                                         (0.1633)   (0.1702)   (0.1499)            (0.0151)       (0.2992)    (0.3155)   (0.2692)        (0.004)
                                         43.5298    43.4417     43.6831             -0.241        43.2505     43.0053    43.6534        -0.648***
Father's age (1997)
                                         (4.3552)   (4.3572)   (4.3594)            (0.403)        (10.9914)   (10.712)   (11.4248)       (0.149)
                                         38.1819     38.284     38.0044              0.28         38.0387     37.9983    38.1056          -0.107
Mother's age (1997)
                                         (3.6134)   (3.6031)   (3.6342)            (0.334)        (9.0884)    (9.0207)   (9.1996)        (0.129)
                                         2.5472      2.5674     2.5119             0.0555          2.5533      2.5869     2.4979        0.0889***
Father's years of education (1997)
                                         (1.1792)   (1.2059)   (1.1335)            (0.109)        (2.4621)    (2.4882)   (2.4178)        (0.0333)
                                         2.2366      2.2293     2.2493             -0.0199         2.1078      2.1314     2.0691         0.0623*
Mother's years of education (1997)
                                         (1.1443)   (1.1307)   (1.1706)            (0.106)        (2.3768)    (2.3569)   (2.4089)        (0.0322)
Home with concrete, adobe, partition,    0.5332      0.5421     0.5178             0.0243          0.5165      0.5402     0.4781        0.0621***
brick, stone or cement walls (1997)      (0.3808)    (0.376)   (0.3894)            (0.0353)       (0.4997)    (0.4984)   (0.4996)        (0.0069)
Number of rooms in dwelling w/o          1.7317      1.7386     1.7196              0.019          1.7022      1.7074     1.6935         0.0139
bathroom and kitchen (1997)              (0.4298)   (0.4237)    (0.441)            (0.0398)       (0.9794)    (0.9553)   (1.0177)        (0.0133)
HH with electrical connection (1997)     0.6658      0.652      0.6896             -0.0376         0.6639      0.6527     0.6824       -0.0296***



                                                                          35
                                                                           Locality                                                           Individual
                                                               Early           Late          Early treatment                        Early          Late         Early treatment
                                                  Total                                                               Total
                 Variable                                    treatment      treatment        – Late treatment                     treatment     treatment       – Late treatment
                                                   (1)           (2)            (3)                 (4)                (5)            (6)           (7)                (8)
                                                (0.3844)      (0.3964)       (0.3624)            (0.0356)           (0.4724)       (0.4761)       (0.4656)           (0.0064)
Head of household's number of male               2.4758        2.4979         2.4372              0.0607             2.5166         2.5469         2.4668           0.0800***
children (1997)                                 (0.6187)      (0.6307)        (0.597)            (0.0572)            (1.583)       (1.589)        (1.5718)           (0.0214)
Head of household's number of female             2.3221        2.3272         2.3131              0.0141             2.3108         2.315          2.3039             0.0111
children (1997)                                 (0.7078)      (0.7226)       (0.6832)            (0.0655)           (1.5546)       (1.5567)       (1.5513)            (0.021)
                                                 9.5376        9.4783         9.6408             -0.163*             9.5112         9.4334         9.6392           -0.206***
Natural log of household income (1997)
                                                (1.0615)      (1.1656)       (0.8438)             (0.098)           (1.8959)       (2.031)         (1.642)           (0.0256)
Maximum Number of Observations                     504           320            184                 504              23,213         14,437         8,776              23,213

Notes: The sample consists of individuals from households classified as poor and aged 7-16 in 1997. Columns (1)-(4) include simple averages of individuals at each locality.
Columns (5)-(8) include averages of all individuals in the early localities and of all the individuals in the late localities. Total, Early treatment and Late treatment: Mean, and
standard deviation in parentheses. Columns (4) and (8) include Early treatment - Late treatment difference and standard errors in parentheses. Significance of difference between
groups: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                        36
Table 2: Attrition of Original Sample of Individuals Aged 7-16 in 1997 over 2003-2015

                                       Not considering age                 Considering age
    Database         Status         Frequency     Percentage          Frequency     Percentage
                                        (1)            (2)                (3)            (4)
                 Non-attrited         20,413         87.94              19,319         83.22
    2003
                    Attrited           2,800         12.06               3,894         16.78
                 Non-attrited         17,503         75.40              16,631         71.65
    2007
                    Attrited           5,710         24.60               6,582         28.35
                 Non-attrited          4,281         18.44               2,393         10.31
    2008
                    Attrited          18,932         81.56              20,820         89.69
                 Non-attrited          6,918         29.80               4,109         17.70
    2009
                    Attrited          16,295         70.20              19,104         82.30
                 Non-attrited            48           0.21                14            0.06
    2010
                    Attrited          23,165         99.79              23,199         99.94
                 Non-attrited           245           1.06                34            0.15
    2011
                    Attrited          22,968         98.94              23,179         99.85
                 Non-attrited          1,072          4.62                104           0.45
    2012
                    Attrited          22,141         95.38              23,109         99.55
                 Non-attrited           159           0.68                25            0.11
    2013
                    Attrited          23,054         99.32              23,188         99.89
                 Non-attrited           123           0.53                13            0.06
    2014
                    Attrited          23,090         99.47              23,200         99.94
                 Non-attrited           142           0.61                13            0.06
    2015
                    Attrited          23,071         99.39              23,200         99.94
               Total                  23,213          100               23,213          100

    Notes: The sample consists of individuals from households classified as poor and aged 7-16 in
    1997. In Columns (3) and (4), we drop out of the sample any individual with more than two years
    of difference between the age reported in each survey and the age calculated using data from the
    baseline study.




                                                   37
                                                            Table 3: Attrition by Year

    Year:                    2003                      2007                        2008                         2009                         2010
                      (1)            (2)        (3)            (4)          (5)             (6)         (7)              (8)         (9)            (10)
Early
                   0.0331        0.0151       0.0956       -0.197*      2.273***      4.712***      -1.752***      -1.965***       -0.361     -6.294***
Treatment
                  (0.0551)       (0.128)     (0.0636)      (0.119)       (0.136)       (0.277)       (0.0939)        (0.136)      (0.231)       (1.161)
Group
Controls              No             Yes        No             Yes          No             Yes          No              Yes          No             Yes
Number of
                   23,213        18,232       23,213       18,270        23,213            6,155      23,213           10,689      23,213           410
Observations

    Year:                     2011                      2012                        2013                        2014                         2015
                      (11)           (12)       (13)           (14)         (15)            (16)        (17)             (18)        (19)           (20)
Early
                     0.153      3.744***      -0.0913      4.173***        0.173       4.901***        -0.198          5.534***    0.0977        0.129
Treatment
                    (0.149)      (0.423)      (0.138)       (0.274)       (0.179)       (0.676)       (0.238)           (1.347)    (0.171)      (1.148)
Group
Controls              No             Yes         No            Yes          No              Yes          No              Yes         No             Yes
Number of
                    23,213           1,428     23,213          2,167      23,213            851        23,213            427       23,213           650
Observations

Notes: The sample consists of individuals from households classified as poor and aged 7-16 in 1997. Early treatment group refers to localities that started
receiving the treatment in 1998, as opposed to 2000. Additional independent variables include: (1997 values): age; whether household is classified as
poor according to 2003 methodology; female indicator; indigenous language indicator; working father indicator; working mother indicator, father's age;
mother's age; father's years of education; mother's years of education; indicators of whether home is made out of concrete, adobe, partition, brick, stone
or cement walls; number of rooms in dwelling w/o bathroom and kitchen; whether household has an electrical connection; number of male children;
number of female children; the natural log of household income. Robust standard errors clustered at the locality level in parentheses. Significance levels:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                           38
                                   Table 4: Available Data of Outcome Variables by Survey Year

                                                Number of                                    Year of information (%)
           Outcome variables                   observations      2003    2007   2008         2009 2010 2011 2012                2013    2014     2015
                                                    (1)           (2)     (3)    (4)          (5)     (6)   (7)    (8)           (9)    (10)     (11)
                                                                   A. Education
Years of schooling                                 14,437        62.22 19.30    6.48         10.79    0.08     0.18     0.62    0.16     0.08    0.08
Likelihood of finishing high school                14,491        54.89 17.20    9.76         16.93    0.08     0.19     0.62    0.16     0.08    0.08
Likelihood of studying tertiary education          14,495        54.27 16.90 10.00           17.61    0.08     0.19     0.62    0.16     0.08    0.08
                                                                  B. Employment
Likelihood of being employed                       11,830        44.52 29.39    9.26         15.33    0.11     0.23     0.76    0.19     0.10    0.10
Hours worked per week                              14,431        79.72 20.28
Likelihood of having a contract                    4,398                100.00
Likelihood of having non-wage benefits             11,586        49.27 26.72 11.46           11.66    0.12     0.10     0.40    0.13     0.07    0.06
Hourly wage                                        11,362        56.58 43.42

Notes: Data refer to most updated available value between 2003 and 2015. Sample: individuals from households classified as poor and aged 7-16 in 1997.




                                                                         39
                    Table 5: Descriptive Statistics of Outcome Variables

                                                                                  Early
                                                      Early          Late     treatment -
                                        Total
              Variable                              treatment     treatment        Late
                                                                               treatment
                                          (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)
                                        3.8786        3.8942       3.8527         0.0415
Years of education in 1997
                                       (2.2617)      (2.2607)     (2.2633)      (0.0314)
                                        7.0513        7.1267       6.9311       0.196***
Years of education in 2003
                                       (2.4415)      (2.4232)     (2.4658)      (0.0414)
                                        8.3447        8.4189       8.2313        0.188**
Years of education in 2007
                                       (2.6632)      (2.6351)     (2.7025)      (0.0858)
                                        6.0719        5.0351       9.0728         -4.038
Years of education in 2015
                                       (4.0256)      (4.1137)     (2.2332)       (2.376)
                                        7.8998        7.8808       7.9265        -0.0456
Years of education (2003-2015)
                                       (2.8694)      (2.7522)     (3.0262)      (0.0471)
                                        0.0002        0.0003       0.0000         0.0003
Completed high school in 1997
                                       (0.0131)      (0.0166)     (0.0000)      (0.0002)
                                        0.0370        0.0369       0.0371        -0.0003
Completed high school in 2003
                                       (0.1887)      (0.1884)     (0.1891)      (0.0032)
                                        0.1373        0.1416       0.1308         0.0108
Completed high school in 2007
                                       (0.3442)      (0.3487)     (0.3373)      (0.0111)
                                        0.0971        0.0342       0.2791         -0.245
Completed high school in 2015
                                       (0.3081)      (0.1962)     (0.4914)       (0.191)
                                        0.0881        0.0898       0.0859         0.0040
Completed high school (2003-2015)
                                       (0.2834)      (0.2860)     (0.2802)      (0.0046)
                                        0.0001        0.0001       0.0000         0.0001
More than high school in 1997
                                       (0.0093)      (0.0118)     (0.0000)      (0.0001)
                                        0.0096        0.0110       0.0075       0.0035**
More than high school in 2003
                                       (0.0977)      (0.1043)     (0.0862)      (0.0017)
                                        0.0273        0.0250       0.0309        -0.0060
More than high school in 2007
                                       (0.1630)      (0.1560)     (0.1731)      (0.0053)
                                        0.0000        0.0000       0.0000            0
More than high school in 2015
                                       (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)          (0)
More than high school (2003-2015)       0.0230        0.0204       0.0263      -0.0059**



                                            40
                                                                            Early
                                                  Early        Late     treatment -
                                     Total
              Variable                          treatment   treatment        Late
                                                                         treatment
                                        (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)
                                     (0.1498)    (0.1413)    (0.1601)     (0.0024)
                                      0.1196      0.1270      0.1076     0.0194***
Employment in 1997
                                     (0.3245)    (0.3329)    (0.3098)     (0.0044)
                                      0.4132      0.4157      0.4090        0.0067
Employment in 2003
                                     (0.4924)    (0.4929)    (0.4917)     (0.0095)
                                      0.5402      0.5648      0.5016     0.0633***
Employment in 2007
                                     (0.4984)    (0.4959)    (0.5001)     (0.0141)
                                      0.4529      0.3662      0.7040        -0.338
Employment in 2015
                                     (0.5181)    (0.5204)    (0.5000)      (0.328)
                                      0.4162      0.4760      0.3448      0.131***
Employment (2003-2015)
                                     (0.4929)    (0.4995)    (0.4754)     (0.0088)
                                      4.1788      4.3562      3.8874      0.469***
Hours worked per week in 1997
                                    (13.0945)   (13.2541)   (12.8233)      (0.178)
                                     12.1681     12.4658     11.6926       0.773**
Hours worked per week in 2003
                                    (23.2506)   (23.6648)   (22.5670)      (0.388)
                                     43.0183     42.8612     43.2849        -0.424
Hours worked per week in 2007
                                    (21.6623)   (21.8548)   (21.3387)      (0.817)
                                     17.7830     18.2059     17.1012       1.105**
Hours worked per week (2003-2007)
                                    (25.8372)   (26.2020)   (25.2251)      (0.429)
                                      0.0224      0.0230      0.0215        0.0014
Contract in 2007
                                     (0.1480)    (0.1498)    (0.1452)     (0.0045)
                                      0.0013      0.0012      0.0014       -0.0001
Non-wage benefits in 1997
                                     (0.0359)    (0.0353)    (0.0370)     (0.0005)
                                      0.0046      0.0052      0.0035        0.0017
Non-wage benefits in 2003
                                     (0.0673)    (0.0719)    (0.0592)     (0.0013)
                                      0.0342      0.0340      0.0344       -0.0004
Non-wage benefits in 2007
                                     (0.1817)    (0.1813)    (0.1824)     (0.0056)
                                      0.0000      0.0000      0.0000           0
Non-wage benefits in 2015
                                     (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)         (0)
                                      0.0179      0.0212      0.0140     0.0072***
Non-wage benefits (2003-2015)
                                     (0.1325)    (0.1442)    (0.1177)     (0.0024)
Hourly wage in 1997                   0.6801      0.5103      0.9534        -0.443



                                          41
                                                                                                        Early
                                                                   Early              Late          treatment -
                                                  Total
                 Variable                                        treatment         treatment            Late
                                                                                                     treatment
                                                    (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)
                                                (27.5994)         (2.7792)         (44.4429)           (0.383)
                                                  2.6741           2.6930            2.6436            0.0494
Hourly wage in 2003
                                                 (6.2247)         (6.2147)          (6.2415)           (0.121)
Hourly wage in 2007                               4.8891           5.1380            4.5005           0.638**
                                                 (8.6822)         (8.8224)          (8.4462)           (0.249)
                                                  3.9570           4.0883            3.7441           0.344**
Hourly wage (2003-2007)
                                                 (7.7443)         (7.8496)          (7.5664)           (0.147)
Maximum Number of Observations                    23,213           14,437             8,776            23,213

Notes: Pool data refer to most updated available value between 2003 and 2007, or between 2003 and 2015. The sample
consists of individuals from households classified as poor and aged 7-16 in 1997. Total, Early treatment and Late
treatment: Mean, and standard deviation in parentheses. Early treatment – Late treatment: Standard errors in
parentheses. Significance of difference between groups: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Inverse probability of non-
attrition in 2003, 2007, 2015 and pool data used as individual weights.




                                                       42
         Table 6: Length of Exposure to the CCT Program by Year

                                             Early             Late        Early treatment
                             Total
        Year                               treatment        treatment      – Late treatment
                               (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)
                            4.2193           4.8684           3.0000            1.868***
2003
                           (0.9757)         (0.4959)         (0.0000)            (0.0070)
                            7.9165           8.5983           6.6696            1.929***
2007
                           (1.1661)         (0.7405)         (0.6624)            (0.0131)
                            7.3073           8.6155           7.2159            1.400***
2008
                           (0.9752)         (1.3723)         (0.8737)            (0.0867)
                            9.3903           9.5536           8.3409            1.213***
2009
                           (1.5499)         (1.5410)         (1.1506)            (0.0730)
                            10.5726          10.8309         10.0000              0.831
2010
                           (1.6089)         (1.8897)         (0.0000)            (0.937)
                            9.6060           9.4193           9.7722              -0.353
2011
                           (1.7634)         (1.9443)         (1.6377)            (0.690)
                            9.8865           10.7133          8.4517            2.262***
2012
                           (2.6254)         (2.2924)         (2.5831)            (0.514)
                            8.1923           10.4802          7.7571             2.723**
2013
                           (2.0206)         (2.3909)         (1.6430)            (1.016)
                            9.8499           9.8302          11.0061              -1.176
2014
                           (1.9893)         (2.0177)         (1.4142)            (4.913)
                            10.3286          10.9994          8.2611              2.738
2015
                           (2.7148)         (2.2354)         (3.3009)            (1.704)
Maximum Number
                            14,282            9,227           5,055               14,282
of Observations

Notes: The length of exposure variable is calculated based on when the locality started receiving
the treatment and the age of the individuals. The sample consists of individuals from households
classified as poor and aged 7-16 in 1997. Total, Early treatment and Late treatment: Mean, and
standard deviation in parentheses. Early treatment – Late treatment: Standard errors in
parentheses. Significance of difference between groups: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Yearly
inverse probabilities of non-attrition used as individual weights.




                                              43
Table 7: Length of Exposure to the CCT Program by Outcome Variable

                                              Mean         Minimum        Maximum
              Outcome variables
                                                (1)           (2)           (3)
                                   A. Education
  Years of schooling                           6.88             3             14
  Likelihood of finishing high school          7.51             3             14
  Likelihood of studying tertiary education    7.53             3             14
                                 B. Employment
  Likelihood of being employed                 7.77             3             14
  Hours worked per week                        4.85             3              9
  Likelihood of having a contract              7.84             5              9
  Likelihood of having non-wage benefits       7.58             3             14
  Hourly wage                                  5.77             3              9

 Notes: Data refer to most updated available value between 2003 and 2015. The
 sample consists of individuals from households classified as poor and aged 7-16 in
 1997.




                                          44
               Table 8: Long-term Impacts of Mexican CCT on Education

                                                       Age                               Sex
                              All
                                            Younger           Older          Women               Men
                              (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)                (5)
                                          A. Years of education
 Years of                 0.531***          0.445**        -0.121            0.364***           0.587***
 Exposure to                (0.104)          (0.216)      (0.162)            (0.0933)            (0.111)
 Treatment                  [0.001]          [0.072]      [0.811]             [0.001]            [0.001]
                          -0.832***         -0.790*       0.872**              -0.456          -1.018***
 Early Treatment
                            (0.284)          (0.426)      (0.412)             (0.330)            (0.320)
 Group
                            [0.008]          [0.104]       [0.32]             [0.268]            [0.004]
 Number of
                            14,437            9,395           5,042            6,975             7,462
 Observations
                                       B. High school completion
 Years of                 0.0292***          0.0141       -0.0147           0.0188***           0.0319***
 Exposure to               (0.0059)        (0.0117)      (0.0112)            (0.0069)            (0.0075)
 Treatment                  [0.001]         [0.291]       [0.685]             [0.036]             [0.001]
                         -0.0542***         -0.0307     0.0577**              -0.0253          -0.0833***
 Early Treatment
                           (0.0204)        (0.0271)      (0.0284)            (0.0235)            (0.0273)
 Group
                             [0.01]         [0.302]        [0.32]             [0.346]             [0.002]
 Number of
                            14,491            9,417           5,059            6,993             7,491
 Observations
                                          C. Tertiary education
 Years of                 0.0093***        0.0101***       0.0026            0.008***          0.0077***
 Exposure to               (0.0015)         (0.0031)      (0.0029)            (0.0017)          (0.0020)
 Treatment                  [0.001]          [0.001]       [0.803]             [0.001]           [0.001]
                         -0.0257***       -0.0309***       0.0026           -0.0275***         -0.0193**
 Early Treatment
                           (0.0084)         (0.0142)      (0.0066)            (0.0108)          (0.0111)
 Group
                            [0.001]          [0.007]       [0.868]             [0.006]           [0.045]
 Number of
                            14,483            9,414           5,050            6,958             7,487
 Observations

Notes: Data refer to most updated available value between 2003 and 2015. The sample consists of
individuals from households classified as poor and aged 7-16 in 1997. The length of exposure variable is
calculated based on when the locality started receiving the treatment and the age of the individuals. Early
treatment group refers to localities that started receiving the treatment in 1998, as opposed to 2000.
Additional independent variables include: (1997 values): age; whether household is classified as poor
according to 2003 methodology; female indicator; indigenous language indicator; working father indicator;
working mother indicator, father's age; mother's age; father's years of education; mother's years of
education; indicators of whether home is made out of concrete, adobe, partition, brick, stone or cement
walls; number of rooms in dwelling w/o bathroom and kitchen; whether household has an electrical
connection; number of male children; number of female children; the natural log of household income.
Other independent variables include: indicator variables for most recent year of available information of
outcome under evaluation (base=2003), and indicator variable for economic crisis (equal to one when year
of information is 2008 or 2009). Estimation method: OLS for years of education, and Dprobit for all other
dependent variables. Individual weights: Inverse probability of non-attrition times inverse probability of
belonging to early treatment or late treatment group. Robust standard errors clustered at the locality level
in parentheses, and false discovery rate adjusted q-values in brackets. ***P-value<0.01, **P-value<0.05,
*P-value<0.1. Older defined as those between 12 and 16 in 1997, whereas those between 7 and 11 in 1997
are considered Younger.




                                                      45
Table 9: Long-term Impacts of Mexican CCT on Education by Parents’ Characteristics

                                      Mother’s literacy             Father's employment status
                                  Illiterate      Literate          Unemployed     Employed
                                      (1)            (2)                (3)           (4)
                                         A. Years of education
        Years of                    0.180        0.723***               0.268             0.547***
        Exposure to                (0.129)        (0.137)              (0.185)             (0.107)
        Treatment                  [0.292]        [0.001]               [0.32]             [0.001]
                                    0.330       -1.415***               -0.174           -0.850***
        Early Treatment
                                   (0.302)        (0.327)              (0.482)             (0.288)
        Group
                                   [0.368]        [0.001]              [0.839]             [0.006]
        Number of
                                    5,644             8,793              693               13,744
        Observations
                                       B. Completed high school
        Years of                   0.0051      0.0488***      0.0347***                  0.0297***
        Exposure to               (0.0077)      (0.0077)        (0.0112)                  (0.0061)
        Treatment                  [0.554]       [0.001]         [0.014]                   [0.001]
                                   0.0094      -0.105***         -0.0484                -0.0550***
        Early Treatment
                                  (0.0229)      (0.0250)        (0.0378)                  (0.0209)
        Group
                                   [0.682]       [0.001]          [0.32]                   [0.012]
        Number of
                                    5,657             8,831              691               13,798
        Observations
                                        C. More than high school
        Years of                 0.0018***       0.0147***       7.61e-05                0.0096***
        Exposure to               (0.0006)        (0.0028)       (0.0003)                 (0.0016)
        Treatment                  [0.001]         [0.001]        [0.664]                  [0.001]
                                   -0.0009      -0.0381***        0.0002                -0.0271***
        Early Treatment
                                  (0.0015)        (0.0117)       (0.0005)                 (0.0087)
        Group
                                   [0.554]         [0.001]        [0.664]                  [0.001]
        Number of
                                    5,646             8,825              530               13,790
        Observations

       Notes: Data refer to most updated available value between 2003 and 2015. The sample
       consists of individuals from households classified as poor and aged 7-16 in 1997. The length
       of exposure variable is calculated based on when the locality started receiving the treatment
       and the age of the individuals. Early treatment group refers to localities that started receiving
       the treatment in 1998, as opposed to 2000. Additional independent variables include (1997
       values): age; whether household is classified as poor according to 2003 methodology; female
       indicator; indigenous language indicator; working father indicator; working mother indicator,
       father's age; mother's age; father's years of education; mother's years of education; indicators
       of whether home is made out of concrete, adobe, partition, brick, stone or cement walls;
       number of rooms in dwelling w/o bathroom and kitchen; whether household has an electrical
       connection; number of male children; number of female children; Natural log of household
       income. Other independent variables include: indicator variables for most recent year of
       available information of outcome under evaluation (base=2003), and indicator variable for
       economic crisis (equal to one when year of information is 2008 or 2009). Estimation method:
       OLS for years of education, and Dprobit for all other dependent variables. Individual weights:
       Inverse probability of non-attrition times inverse probability of belonging to early treatment
       or late treatment group. Robust standard errors clustered at the locality level in parentheses,
       and false discovery rate adjusted q-values in brackets. ***P-value<0.01, **P-value<0.05, *P-
       value<0.1. Mother's education and father's employment status, according to baseline (1997
       data).




                                                     46
       Table 10: Long-term Impacts of Mexican CCT on Employment

                                                     Age                            Sex
                              All
                                         Younger           Older         Women             Men
                              (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)
                                        A. Employment
                          0.0458**       0.0948*    0.0122               0.0370*            0.0306
Years of Exposure
                          (0.0187)       (0.0552)  (0.0398)              (0.0206)         (0.0208)
to Treatment
                            [0.02]        [0.133]   [0.868]               [0.144]          [0.163]
                           -0.0376         -0.127   0.0032                0.0109           -0.0732
Early Treatment
                          (0.0478)        (0.102)  (0.0974)              (0.0536)         (0.0540)
Group
                           [0.431]        [0.291]   [0.974]               [0.894]           [0.19]
Number of
                           11,830          8,533           3,293          5,506            6,317
Observations
                                  B. Hours worked per week
                          3.048***     7.916***       -0.222             1.257**       4.721***
Years of Exposure
                            (0.457)     (0.192)       (0.57)             (0.559)         (0.675)
to Treatment
                            [0.001]     [0.001]      [0.868]             [0.058]         [0.001]
                          -6.290*** -16.34***        2.624*             -2.778**       -9.530***
Early Treatment
                            (1.110)     (0.837)      (1.455)             (1.209)         (1.612)
Group
                            [0.001]     [0.001]      [0.384]             [0.058]         [0.001]
Number of
                           14,431          8,739           5,692          6,953            7,478
Observations

Notes: Data refer to most updated available value between 2003 and 2015 for employment, and
between 2003 and 2007 for hours worked per week. The sample consists of individuals from
households classified as poor and aged 7-16 in 1997. The length of exposure variable is calculated
based on when the locality started receiving the treatment and the age of the individuals. Early
treatment group refers to localities that started receiving the treatment in 1998, as opposed to
2000. Additional independent variables include: (1997 values): age; whether household is
classified as poor according to 2003 methodology; female indicator; indigenous language
indicator; working father indicator; working mother indicator, father's age; mother's age; father's
years of education; mother's years of education; indicators of whether home is made out of
concrete, adobe, partition, brick, stone or cement walls; number of rooms in dwelling w/o
bathroom and kitchen; whether household has an electrical connection; number of male children;
number of female children; the natural log of household income. Other independent variables
include: indicator variables for most recent year of available information of outcome under
evaluation (base=2003), and indicator variable for economic crisis (equal to one when year of
information is 2008 or 2009). Estimation method: Dprobit for employment, and OLS for hours
worked per week. Individual weights: Inverse probability of non-attrition times inverse
probability of belonging to early treatment or late treatment group. Robust standard errors
clustered at the locality level in parentheses, and false discovery rate adjusted q-values in
brackets. ***P-value<0.01, **P-value<0.05, *P-value<0.1. Older defined as those between 12
and 16 in 1997, whereas those between 7 and 11 in 1997 are considered Younger.




                                                47
   Table 11: Long-term Impacts of Mexican CCT on Quality of Employment

                                                           Age                           Sex
                                All
                                            Younger              Older        Women              Men
                                (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)              (5)
                                               A. Contract
                            0.0083*           0.0014        -0.0079             0.0064           0.0090
Years of Exposure
                            (0.0046)         (0.0031)      (0.0076)           (0.0061)         (0.0060)
to Treatment
                              [0.07]          [0.691]       [0.774]            [0.346]          [0.138]
                             -0.0175                         0.0098            -0.0179          -0.0156
Early Treatment
                            (0.0126)                       (0.0179)           (0.0167)         (0.0161)
Group
                             [0.147]                        [0.868]            [0.346]          [0.295]
Number of
                             4,379            3,483               857          2,087             2,217
Observations
                                         B. Non-wage benefits
                            0.005**         0.0110**     -0.0036              0.0041*          0.0074**
Years of Exposure
                            (0.0022)         (0.0047)   (0.0031)              (0.0023)         (0.0037)
to Treatment
                              [0.02]          [0.044]    [0.685]               [0.144]          [0.056]
                           -0.0174**       -0.0322***    -0.0009             -0.0173**         -0.0202*
Early Treatment
                            (0.0095)         (0.0145)   (0.0099)              (0.0095)         (0.0125)
Group
                             [0.031]          [0.006]    [0.974]               [0.058]          [0.079]
Number of
                             11,483           8,374              3,104         5,375             6,098
Observations
                                            C. Hourly wage
                           1.181***          0.756***      0.227               0.164            1.988***
Years of Exposure
                             (0.243)         (0.0507)    (0.304)              (0.326)            (0.328)
to Treatment
                             [0.001]          [0.001]    [0.811]              [0.702]            [0.001]
                           -2.131***        -1.185***     -0.243              0.0841           -3.927***
Early Treatment
                             (0.533)          (0.235)    (0.728)              (0.679)            (0.739)
Group
                             [0.001]          [0.001]    [0.868]              [0.901]            [0.001]
Number of
                             11,362           7,958              3,404         5,297             6,065
Observations

Notes: Information comes from 2007 for employment contract; and data refer to most updated available
value between 2003 and 2015 for non-wage benefits, and between 2003 and 2007 for hourly wage. The
sample consists of individuals from households classified as poor and aged 7-16 in 1997. The length of
exposure variable is calculated based on when the locality started receiving the treatment and the age
of the individuals. Early treatment group refers to localities that started receiving the treatment in 1998,
as opposed to 2000. Additional independent variables include: (1997 values): age; whether household
is classified as poor according to 2003 methodology; female indicator; indigenous language indicator;
working father indicator; working mother indicator, father's age; mother's age; father's years of
education; mother's years of education; indicators of whether home is made out of concrete, adobe,
partition, brick, stone or cement walls; number of rooms in dwelling w/o bathroom and kitchen; whether
household has an electrical connection; number of male children; number of female children; the natural
log of household income. Other independent variables include: indicator variables for most recent year
of available information of outcome under evaluation (base=2003), and indicator variable for economic
crisis (equal to one when year of information is 2008 or 2009). Estimation method: OLS for hourly
wage, and Dprobit for all other dependent variables. Individual weights: Inverse probability of non-
attrition times inverse probability of belonging to early treatment or late treatment group. Robust
standard errors clustered at the locality level in parentheses, and false discovery rate adjusted q-values
in brackets. ***P-value<0.01, **P-value<0.05, *P-value<0.1. Older defined as those between 12 and
16 in 1997, whereas those between 7 and 11 in 1997 are considered Younger.




                                                      48
Table 12: Long-term Impacts of Mexican CCT on Employment by Parents’ Characteristics

                                        Mother’s literacy           Father's employment status
                                     Illiterate    Literate         Unemployed     Employed
                                         (1)          (2)               (3)           (4)
                                                A. Employment
                                       0.0413       0.0501***            0.0465           0.0478**
          Years of Exposure
                                     (0.0342)        (0.0172)          (0.0565)           (0.0193)
          to Treatment
                                      [0.331]         [0.006]           [0.654]            [0.021]
                                      -0.0928         -0.0548           -0.0939            -0.0413
          Early Treatment
                                     (0.0901)        (0.0510)           (0.116)           (0.0496)
          Group
                                      [0.376]          [0.29]           [0.654]            [0.405]
          Number of
                                       4,542           7,286              542              11,282
          Observations
                                         B. Hours worked per week
                                    2.796***       3.295***       -0.388                 3.260***
          Years of Exposure
                                      (0.700)       (0.572)      (2.016)                   (0.464)
          to Treatment
                                      [0.001]       [0.001]      [0.869]                   [0.001]
                                    -6.829***     -6.011***       -0.771                 -6.575***
          Early Treatment
                                      (1.679)       (1.343)      (4.684)                   (1.125)
          Group
                                      [0.001]       [0.001]      [0.869]                   [0.001]
          Number of
                                       5,784           8,647              692              13,739
          Observations

          Notes: Data refer to most updated available value between 2003 and 2015 for employment,
          and between 2003 and 2007 for hours worked per week. The sample consists of individuals
          from households classified as poor and aged 7-16 in 1997. The length of exposure variable
          is calculated based on when the locality started receiving the treatment and the age of the
          individuals. Early treatment group refers to localities that started receiving the treatment in
          1998, as opposed to 2000. Additional independent variables include: (1997 values): age;
          whether household is classified as poor according to 2003 methodology; female indicator;
          indigenous language indicator; working father indicator; working mother indicator, father's
          age; mother's age; father's years of education; mother's years of education; indicators of
          whether home is made out of concrete, adobe, partition, brick, stone or cement walls;
          number of rooms in dwelling w/o bathroom and kitchen; whether household has an
          electrical connection; number of male children; number of female children; the natural log
          of household income. Other independent variables include: indicator variables for most
          recent year of available information of outcome under evaluation (base=2003), and
          indicator variable for economic crisis (equal to one when year of information is 2008 or
          2009). Estimation method: Dprobit for employment, and OLS for hours worked per week.
          Individual weights: Inverse probability of non-attrition times inverse probability of
          belonging to early treatment or late treatment group. Robust standard errors clustered at
          the locality level in parentheses, and false discovery rate adjusted q-values in brackets.
          ***P-value<0.01, **P-value<0.05, *P-value<0.1. Mother's education and father's
          employment status, according to baseline (1997 data).




                                                       49
Table 13: Long-term Impacts of Mexican CCT on Quality of Employment by Parents’
                                 Characteristics

                                       Mother’s literacy                Father's employment status
                                    Illiterate    Literate              Unemployed     Employed
                                        (1)          (2)                    (3)           (4)
                                                   A. Contract
                                      0.0046*           0.0091                  0                0.0079*
       Years of Exposure
                                     (0.0031)         (0.0067)                 (0)               (0.0046)
       to Treatment
                                      [0.166]          [0.197]                                    [0.093]
                                     -0.0141*          -0.0180                  0                 -0.0170
       Early Treatment
                                     (0.0113)         (0.0178)                 (0)               (0.0128)
       Group
                                      [0.166]           [0.29]                                     [0.17]
       Number of
                                       1,508              2,785                 43                 4,188
       Observations
                                           B. Non-wage benefits
                                     0.0033*      0.0061**      0.0197**                        0.0044**
       Years of Exposure
                                     (0.0014)     (0.0026)      (0.0109)                         (0.0021)
       to Treatment
                                      [0.166]      [0.014]       [0.175]                          [0.032]
                                      -0.0054    -0.0248**      -0.0953*                        -0.0175**
       Early Treatment
                                     (0.0042)     (0.0142)       (0.100)                         (0.0095)
       Group
                                      [0.303]      [0.032]        [0.29]                           [0.03]
       Number of
                                       4,420              7,061                477                10,953
       Observations
                                                 C. Hourly wage
                                      0.711*          1.475***               1.240              1.174***
       Years of Exposure
                                     (0.374)           (0.290)              (0.871)               (0.245)
       to Treatment
                                     [0.166]           [0.001]               [0.32]               [0.001]
                                     -1.344*         -2.634***               -2.833             -2.088***
       Early Treatment
                                     (0.762)           (0.652)              (1.881)               (0.533)
       Group
                                     [0.166]           [0.001]               [0.32]               [0.001]
       Number of
                                       4,357              7,005                523                10,839
       Observations

       Notes: Information comes from 2007 for employment contract; and data refer to most updated
       available value between 2003 and 2015 for non-wage benefits, and between 2003 and 2007 for hourly
       wage. The sample consists of individuals from households classified as poor and aged 7-16 in 1997.
       The length of exposure variable is calculated based on when the locality started receiving the treatment
       and the age of the individuals. Early treatment group refers to localities that started receiving the
       treatment in 1998, as opposed to 2000. Additional independent variables include: (1997 values): age;
       whether household is classified as poor according to 2003 methodology; female indicator; indigenous
       language indicator; working father indicator; working mother indicator, father's age; mother's age;
       father's years of education; mother's years of education; indicators of whether home is made out of
       concrete, adobe, partition, brick, stone or cement walls; number of rooms in dwelling w/o bathroom
       and kitchen; whether household has an electrical connection; number of male children; number of
       female children; the natural log of household income. Other independent variables include: indicator
       variables for most recent year of available information of outcome under evaluation (base=2003), and
       indicator variable for economic crisis (equal to one when year of information is 2008 or 2009).
       Estimation method: OLS for hourly wage, and Dprobit for all other dependent variables. Individual
       weights: Inverse probability of non-attrition times inverse probability of belonging to early treatment
       or late treatment group. Robust standard errors clustered at the locality level in parentheses, and false
       discovery rate adjusted q-values in brackets. ***P-value<0.01, **P-value<0.05, *P-value<0.1.
       Mother's education and father's employment status, according to baseline (1997 data).




                                                         50
Figure 1: Kernel Density of Propensity Scores by Treatment Status




                         Pr(Treatment=1)




                               51
Appendix Figures: Long-term Impacts of Mexican CCT by Length of Exposure (Minimum, Mean
         and Maximum Years Exposed to the Program for Each Dependent Variable)




                                          52
53
54
