NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNCONVENTIONAL FISCAL POLICY
Francesco D’Acunto
Daniel Hoang
Michael Weber
Working Paper 24244
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24244

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018

The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of GfK
or the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank the project coordinator at
GfK, Rolf Buerkl, for help with the data and insightful comments. We also thank Rudi
Bachmann, Oli Coibion (discussant), Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Valerie Ramey, Harald Uhlig, and
conference participants at the 2018 AEA session on Conventional and Unconventional Fiscal
Multipliers. Weber thanks the Cohen Keenoy Faculty Research Fund at the University of Chicago
Booth School of Business.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Francesco D’Acunto, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Unconventional Fiscal Policy
Francesco D’Acunto, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 24244
January 2018
JEL No. D12,D84,D91,E21,E31,E32,E52,E62
ABSTRACT
Unconventional fiscal policy uses announcements of future increases in consumption taxes to
generate inflation expectations and accelerate consumption expenditure. It is budget neutral and
time consistent. We provide preliminary evidence for the effectiveness of such policies using
changes in value-added tax (VAT) and household survey data for Poland. We find households
increased their inflation expectations and willingness to purchase durables before the increase in
VAT. Future research has to ensure income, wealth effects, or intratemporal substitution channels
cannot explain these results and ideally exploit exogenous variation in VAT in a fixed nominal
interest rate environment.
Francesco D’Acunto
University of Maryland
R.H.Smith School of Business
fdacunto@rhsmith.umd.edu
Daniel Hoang
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Kaiserstr. 12
76128 Karlsruhe
Germany
daniel.hoang@kit.edu

Michael Weber
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu

Unconventional Fiscal Policy
By Francesco D’Acunto, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber∗

crease aggregate demand and hence promote growth.
This issue is especially relevant for several major developed economies that, years
after the end of the Great Recession in the
United States, are still experiencing sluggish growth. In particular, southern European countries are still facing the contractionary effects of the austerity measures
they implemented to abate their debt-toGDP ratios during the Euro sovereign-debt
crisis. Many economists argue structural
reforms are necessary to improve the competitiveness of these countries in the long
run, but promoting a short-run increase in
aggregate demand to jump start the economy is also a compelling objective for policy
makers.
The conundrum the Euro area has faced
since the start of the Great Recession is to
generate inflation and ultimately stimulate
consumption and economic growth in a setting in which traditional monetary policy
measures were not viable and governments
could not generate growth with fiscal stimulus because of their large debt-to-GDP
ratios. This challenge was so compelling
that in his Marjolin lecture on February
4, 2016, the president of the European
Central Bank, Mario Draghi, asserted that
“there are forces in the global economy
that are conspiring to hold inflation down.”
(Draghi, 2016).

Macroeconomists often prefer monetary
policy to fiscal policy as a tool to stabilize
business cycles. Fiscal policy is typically
only effective with a lag, and results in permanent deficits with higher nominal interest rates and distortionary taxes. In addition, a high marginal propensity to save
out of temporary tax cuts might result in
low fiscal multipliers with empirical estimates often below 1 (see Ramey (2011b)
and Barro and Redlick (2011)).1
The zero lower bound on nominal interest
rates, however, constrains the effectiveness
of monetary policy during liquidity traps.
Large stocks of sovereign debt limit the
scope of fiscal stimulus, and inflated central bank balance sheets constrain assetpurchase programs as forms of unconventional monetary policy.2 The unclear effectiveness of several measures of monetary
policy – both conventional and unconventional – after the 2008-2009 Financial Crisis calls for alternative mechanisms to in∗ D’Acunto: R.H.Smith School of Business, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. eMail: fdacunto@rhsmith.umd.edu. Hoang: Department for Finance and Banking, Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology, Karlsruhe, B-W, Germany. e-Mail:
daniel.hoang@kit.edu. Weber: Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA and
NBER. This research was conducted with restricted access to Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung (GfK) data.
The views expressed here are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of GfK. We thank
the project coordinator at GfK, Rolf Buerkl, for help
with the data and insightful comments. We also thank
Rudi Bachmann, Oli Coibion (discussant), Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Valerie Ramey, Harald Uhlig, and conference
participants at the 2018 AEA session on Conventional
and Unconventional Fiscal Multipliers. Weber thanks
the Cohen Keenoy Foundation for financial support.
1 Researchers debate the size and state dependence
of fiscal multipliers (see Auerbach and Gorodnichenko
(2012) and Owyang, Ramey and Zubairy (2013)).
Ramey (2011a) and Ramey (2015) review this literature.
2 Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2015) develop a
model in which liquidity traps spread around the world,
and secular stagnation can be the new norm for global
macroeconomic conditions.

I.

What Is Unconventional Fiscal
Policy?

In this article, we define and propose preliminary empirical evidence for an alternative type of policy measure, which we call
unconventional fiscal policy. We define unconventional fiscal policies as those policies
that generate an increasing path of consumption taxes that result in households’
higher inflation expectations and negative
real interest rates. Negative real interest
1

2

rates can stimulate household consumption,
and result in increased spending, and ultimately higher growth. Thus, the main objective of unconventional fiscal policies is to
increase households’ inflation expectations
even when conventional monetary policy is
constrained.
Unconventional fiscal policy satisfies the
following criteria:
1. It is time consistent, because it replicates the first-best allocation in a setting in
which lump-sum taxes are available.
2. It does not rely on inefficient policies
such as commitments to keep future interest
rates low or wasteful government spending.
3. It does not rely on income effects,
which might be small.
4. It can be implemented in a budgetneutral fashion, which is especially relevant
for countries plagued by large debt-to-GDP
ratios.
5. It is a policy measure that is salient
and easy to understand by households.
Theoretical underpinnings for unconventional fiscal policy are in Correia et al.
(2013), who show the use of consumption
taxes can replicate negative real interest
rates and completely offset the zero-lowerbound constraint on nominal interest rates
in a time-consistent manner. The intuition
for the result is simple. Suppose real interest rates should be negative. Nominal interest rates typically cannot be negative due to
the arbitrage relationship between money
and bonds, and hence the only way to generate negative real interest rates is higher
inflation. Consumer prices determine the
households’ intertemporal decisions. Implementing an increasing path of future consumption taxes generates consumer price
inflation and negative real interest rates,
which stimulate demand.
If firms set prices in a staggered fashion, additional taxes might be necessary to
achieve a first-best allocation. We might
have to lower labor income taxes to ensure consumption taxes do not affect the
intratemporal margin between leisure and
consumption, and hence the real wage. The
constant real wage and the fact that firms’
pricing decisions are independent of the
change in consumption taxes ensures firms

have no incentive to change prices, which
avoids costly price dispersion. Therefore,
the production allocation across firms is efficient and the government can use taxes
to offset the possible distortions due to
monopoly rents. Under certain conditions,
these policies can replicate the first-best allocation and are hence time consistent.
Based on the criteria listed above, unconventional fiscal policy differs markedly from
traditional forms of fiscal policy, such as fiscal stimulus and tax rebates. For instance,
traditional measures of fiscal policy are not
budget neutral, but produce higher budget
deficits. Moreover, traditional forms of fiscal policy rely heavily on income effects,
which might be small and stimulate only
temporary demand, as the example of the
cash for clunkers program in the United
States demonstrates (see, e.g., Mian and
Sufi (2012)).
Unconventional fiscal policy also differs
markedly from unconventional monetary
policy measures, such as forward guidance,
which also operate through inflation expectations but might be difficult to understand
and actually increase savings because they
might increase uncertainty and induce precautionary savings.
II.

Unconventional Fiscal Policy:
A Case Study

A concrete example of a measure of unconventional fiscal policy is the announcement of future value-added tax (VAT) increases. Among the criteria this policy tool
fulfills, the salience of this type of policy
measure to generate inflation expectations
among non-experts, such as households, is
a crucial advantage of unconventional fiscal
policy over unconventional monetary policy.3
Shapiro (1991), Feldstein (2002), and
Hall (2011) propose pre-announced increases in VAT to generate consumer price
inflation and stimulate spending via intertemporal substitution without increas3 See D’Acunto et al. (2017) for a discussion of the
relationship between the salience of consumer prices and
inflation expectations.

3

ing the federal budget deficit.4
Testing for the effect of unconventional
fiscal policy on households’ consumption
expenditure empirically poses two main
challenges. First, the econometrician needs
to observe households’ consumption plans
in conjunction with a large set of expectations regarding future personal and
macroeconomic conditions, including inflation expectations. This setup is crucial because unconventional fiscal policy operates
through households’ inflation expectations
as opposed to channels such as income or
wealth effects.
Second, a generic change in consumption
taxes does not necessarily represent a measure of unconventional fiscal policy. Viable measures require an exogenous preannouncement of higher future consumption
taxes. The announcement should happen
when nominal interest rates are fixed, so
that higher inflation expectations result in
lower real interest rates, and hence households’ lower willingness to save. Fixed nominal interest rates can arise if the zero lower
bound binds, or if the central bank does
not necessarily respond to unilateral governmental policies, such as in a currency
union.
In this article, we propose Poland as a
case study. We use confidential micro data
from the market research firm GfK. GfK
surveys a representative set of 1,000 Polish households on a monthly basis to measure expectations about business-cycle conditions on behalf of the European Commission. The Polish administration announced
in July 2010 that it would increase the general VAT from 22% to 23% and the reduced
rate to 8%. We use the answers to the
questions regarding how consumer prices
will evolve in the next 12 months relative
to the previous 12 months and whether
households think it’s a good time to buy
larger items, such as furniture and electronic items, given the current economic
conditions, to test for the effect of uncon4 Feldstein (2002):
“This [VAT] tax-induced inflation would give households an incentive to spend
sooner rather than waiting until prices are substantially
higher.”

ventional fiscal policy on consumption expenditure.5
Based on a sample from January 2009
through December 2012, Figure 1 documents a positive time-series correlation between Polish households’ average inflation
expectations and their willingness to purchase durable goods. The positive correlation is statistically different from zero
throughout the sample period. Its size is
larger after the announcement (July 2010)
and before the actual VAT increase (January 2011).
Figure 1 is consistent with the consumption Euler equation as well as with the potential effectiveness of unconventional fiscal
policy. At the same time, though, this baseline association is also consistent with alternative explanations and channels.6
The ideal experiment would consist of
an exogenous increase in future consumption taxes with no other contemporaneous shock. The Polish experiment is thus
far from perfect: (i) the tax change was
not exogenous based on the taxonomy of
Romer and Romer (2010); (ii) the period
of the change coincided with the European
sovereign debt crisis; (iii) the Polish government implemented several contemporaneous policy changes; (iv) Poland had monetary sovereignty to change nominal interest rates over the period of interest; and (v)
channels other than inflation expectations
might explain our findings, such as income
or wealth effects, redistribution, consumer
uncertainty, or housing-wealth effects.
In addition, all Polish households were
exposed to the same shock. For identification, we miss a counterfactual, that is,
a group of households not affected by the
shock but similar to Polish households before the shock.
In D’Acunto, Hoang and Weber (2018),
we address all these challenges and exploit a unique natural experiment in Ger5 See D’Acunto, Hoang and Weber (2018) for the exact wording and variable construction.
6 The size and sign of the association between inflation expectations and consumption propensities is still
debated. See, e.g., Bachmann, Berg and Sims (2015),
Burke and Ozdagli (2014), Crump et al. (2015), and
D’Acunto, Hoang and Weber (2018).

2009m1

1.8

.05

1.85
1.9
1.95
2
Good Time to Buy Durables

Fraction Inflation Increases
.1
.15
.2
.25

2.05

.3

4

2010m1

2011m1

Inflation Expectations

2012m1

2013m1

Durable Purchases

Figure 1. Expected Increase in Inflation and Average Readiness to Spend on Durables
Note: This figure plots average monthly inflation expectations (black solid line, left y-axis) and the average monthly
readiness to purchase durables (red dashed line, right y-axis) over time. We use the confidential micro data underlying
the GfK Consumer Climate survey to construct these variables. GfK asks a representative sample of 1,000 households
how consumer prices will evolve in the next 12 months compared to the previous 12 months and whether it is a good
time to purchase durables given the current economic conditions. We create a dummy variable that equals 1 when a
household expects inflation to increase. Higher values correspond to better times to purchase durables. The sample
period is January 2009 to December 2012 for a total of four years.

many that fulfills our definition of unconventional fiscal policy. In November 2005,
the newly formed German government unexpectedly announced a three-percentagepoint increase in VAT, effective in January
2007.
Two features make this announcement
uniquely suited to test for the effect of
unconventional fiscal policy, compared to
other changes in VAT. First, the European Union (EU) imposed this measure on
the German administration to avoid an infringement procedure for the breach of the
Maastricht Treaty. The VAT increase announcement was therefore unexpected and
unrelated to expected future economic conditions, which qualifies as an exogenous tax
change due to inherited fiscal deficits in
Romer and Romer (2010). Second, Germany had no monetary sovereignty in 2010.
The European Central Bank excluded explicitly any increases in nominal interest
rates to counteract the price pressure from
a higher VAT in Germany.
To create a counterfactual, D’Acunto,
Hoang and Weber (2018) proposes a strategy in the spirit of Poterba (1996) and
Besley and Rosen (1999). The empirical design uses matched households in EU countries not exposed to the VAT shock as a
counterfactual for German households, in a

difference-in-differences identification strategy.
III.

Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we provide preliminary empirical evidence of the effectiveness for a
novel form of stimulus – unconventional fiscal policy – that we argue has many desirable properties compared to conventional
fiscal policy or unconventional monetary
policy. Pre-announced VAT increases combined with lower income taxes-including
tax credits-would result in a predictable
increase in inflation without inducing uncertainty. They would increase consumer
spending and hence growth, but would not
lead to higher budget deficits, without affecting the total tax burden of households.
These implications are especially relevant
at times of low inflation and low growth,
paired with the non-viability of conventional measures of monetary and fiscal policy. Governments could reverse the tax
changes during normal economic times to
keep the gunpowder dry for potential subsequent economic slumps.
REFERENCES

Auerbach, Alan J, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. “Measuring the out-

5

put responses to fiscal policy.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(2): 1–27.
Bachmann, Ruediger, Tim O. Berg,
and Eric Sims. 2015. “Inflation Expectations and Readiness to Spend:
Cross-Sectional Evidence.” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
7(1): 1–35.
Barro, Robert J., and Charles J.
Redlick. 2011. “Macroeconomic Effects
From Government Purchases and Taxes.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
126(1): 51–102.
Besley, Timothy J, and Harvey S
Rosen. 1999. “Sales taxes and prices: an
empirical analysis.” National Tax Journal, 52(2): 157–178.
Burke, Mary A, and Ali Ozdagli.
2014. “Household Inflation Expectations and Consumer Spending: evidence from Panel Data.” Unpublished
Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, 13(25): 1–43.
Caballero, Ricardo J, Emmanuel
Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2015. “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi,
Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro
Teles. 2013. “Unconventional Fiscal Policy at the Zero Bound.” American Economic Review, 103(4): 1172–1211.

Price Changes, Ination Expectations,
and Household Behavior.” Unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago Booth
School of Business.
Feldstein, Martin. 2002. “The role for
discretionary fiscal policy in a low interest rate environment.” National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Hall, Robert E. 2011. “The Long
Slump.” American Economic Review,
101(2): 431–469.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2012. “The
Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from
the 2009 Cash for Clunkers Program.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
127(3): 1107–1142.
Owyang, Michael T, Valerie A
Ramey, and Sarah Zubairy. 2013.
“Are government spending multipliers
greater during periods of slack? Evidence from twentieth-century historical
data.” The American Economic Review,
103(3): 129–134.
Poterba, James M. 1996. “Retail price
reactions to changes in state and local sales taxes.” National Tax Journal,
49(2): 165–176.
Ramey, Valerie A. 2011a. “Can government purchases stimulate the economy?” Journal of Economic Literature,
49(3): 673–685.
Ramey, Valerie A. 2011b. “Identifying
Government Spending Shocks: It’s all in
the Timing.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 126(1): 1–50.

Crump, Richard K, Stefano Eusepi,
Andrea Tambalotti, and Giorgio
Topa. 2015. “Subjective intertemporal
substitution.” FRB of New York Staff
Report, , (734).

Ramey, Valerie A. 2015. “Macroeconomic shocks and their propagation.”
Handbook of Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

D’Acunto, F., D. Hoang, and M. Weber. 2018. “The Effect of Unconventional
Fiscal Policy on Consumption Expenditure.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago Booth School of Business.

Romer, Christina D, and David H
Romer. 2010. “The Macroeconomic
Effects of Tax Changes:
Estimates
Based on a New Measure of Fiscal
Shocks.” The American Economic Review, 100(3): 763–801.

D’Acunto, F., U. Malmendier, J. Ospina, and M. Weber. 2017. “Salient

Shapiro, Matthew D. 1991. “Economic
Stimulant.” New York Times.

