NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVENTORIES AND THE
PROPAGATION OF SECTORAL SHOCKS

Russell Cooper
John Haltiwanger

Working Paper No. 2425

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1987

Helpful suggestions and comments from participants at the 1987 NBER Summer
Institute Meetings are greatly appreciated. Financial support from the Lynde
and Harry Bradley Foundation, from the National Science Foundation for Cooper,
through SES 8605302 and a grant to the Hoover Institution's National Fellows
Program, and for Haltiwanger, through SES 8520697, is gratefully acknowledged.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2425
November 1987

Inventories and the Propagation of Sectoral Shocks

ABSTRACT

This paper studies the dynamic properties of an imperfectly competitive
economy with inventory holdings.

In particular, we focus on the serial

correlation in aggregate output and employment produced by the holding of
inventories in one sector of the economy and the co-movement between sectors

of an economy over the cycle resulting from demand linkages. This model is

then contrasted with a simple, competitive real business cycle model with
inventories. We find that the predictions of these models with regards to the

co-movement of employment may differ.

Based on this, we present empirical

evidence on the co-movement of employment over the business cycle which is
consistent with the predictions of the model of imperfect competition with
inventory holdings and demand linkages.

Russell Cooper
Hoover Institution, HHNB
Stanford University
Stanford, California
94305-2323

John Haltiwanger
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, Maryland
20742

1

Inventories and the Propagation of Sectoral Shocks

I.

Introduction

-

Nacroeconomists are generally concerned with characterizing the positive
and normative aspects of business cycles.

Two important features of cycles

are: (i) correlated movements in aggregate output over time and (ii) the
positive co-movement in output and employment between sectors over the cycle.
Discussions of these observations appear, for example, in Lucas [1977J

,

Long-

Plosser [1983], Zarnowitz [1985].' For the purpose of building models of the

cycle, the task is to determine the features of preferences, endowments,
technology and information, along with the institutional structure in which
agents interact, that reproduce these two key observations.

Macroeconomic theorists (see, for example, Kydland-Prescott [1982J) have

focused on correlated movements in output over time by studying the wide

variety of intertemporal linkages (capital, non-separable preferences,
stochastic structure) present in the economy.

This emphasis on persistence

reflects both the extensive use of the representative agent paradigm and the

fundamental concern of macroeconomists over aggregate quantities.

This

literature highlights both possible sources of aggregate fluctuations
(monetary shocks, real shocks, etc.) as well as the mechanisms which propagate
these disturbances throughout the economic system.

Formulating models to understand the co-movement in employment and output

across sectors is a bit more difficult.

To see why, consider an extreme

economy in which workers suffer no disutility from work so that equilibrium is

always at full employment.

Then, variations in output and employment in one

sector, say due to sector specific technology shocks, will cause opposite
movements in other sectors.

That is, sectoral shocks may produce the

2

substitution of resources from one sector to another rather than the positive
co-movement observed in practice.

While these substitution effects dominate

in this extreme case, they are certainly present in other, less-extreme,
settings as well.2

One means of producing positive co-movement in employment and output is

through economy-wide rather than sectoral shocks.

Lucas [1972,1975]

accomplishes this in an economy subject to aggregate monetary disturbances

which individual agents confuse with real shocks.

As an alternative to

monetary disturbances, aggregate real disturbances could be the source of
aggregate fluctuations in employment and output. An increase in economy-wide

productivity would generally increase output in all sectors of the economy.

However, the effect on employment may be ambiguous due to offsetting income
and substitution effects.

Long-Plosser [1983] present a model in which aggregate fluctuations in
output arise from sector specific rather than aggregate technology shocks.

This emphasis on sectoral shocks is perhaps more convincing since it is
difficult to identify aggregate supply disturbances associated with each turn
of the business cycle.

In the Long-Plosser model economy, a technology shock

in one sector leads to a contemporaneous expansion in that sector's output.
This additional output is partly consumed and partly used as an input in the
production of other commodities for next period. The resulting output of the

other commodities is then partly consumed and partly used as additional
inputs, etc.

In this manner shocks to the production function in a single

sector are spread over time and to other sectors creating persistent aggregate
fluctuations.

In the extensive example of Long-Plosser, equilibrium

employment is constant as income and substitution effects are offsetting.

Thus as stated, their example fails to match the observed co-movement in

3

sectoral employment levels over the cycle. We return to this point later.

This paper provides an alternative framework for understanding the comovement in output

employment in a multi-sector setting. In contrast to

Long-Plosser's emphasis on technological linkages and factor demand flows, our

approach highlights demands for final consumption goods as the important
linkage between sectors and excludes production of commodities by commodities.

Instead, the intertemporal linkage in the model is the holding of inventories

by the firm in one sector and the linkage across sectors is through demands

for final goods only.

Further, we are interested in generating empirical

implications for the co-movement in employment levels across sectors over the
cycle.

The normality of demands for consumption goods is the basis for the
propagation of shocks from one sector to another.

These demand linkages

create output and employment movements rather than price changes when the
economy is in an underemployment equilibrium in which all available resources

are not fully utilized.
competition.

The source of the underemployment is imperfect

Hart [1982], Weitzman [1985], Cooper [1986] and Hall [l987a]

also emphasize the importance of imperfect competition in generating large
quantity fluctuations relative to perfect competition because the economy is

more likely to be in an underemployment region when sellers of goods and/or
labor have market power.3

One important feature of our paradigm is that only

sector can hold

inventories. This reflects the fact that many sectors of the economy produce

goods and services which cannot be held in inventory.

However, as a

consequence of the demand linkages across sectors, the holdings of inventories

in a subset of the sectors is sufficient to produce persistence in the output
of all sectors. A buildup of inventories in one sector will reduce production

4

in that sector which then leads to a reduction in demand for the product of
other sectors.

In the underemployment equilibrium this decrease in demand is

met by reductions in output and employment. Section II presents a version of
this model in which imperfect competition is a key feature of the environment
and validates these claims about persistence and co-movement.

To further facilitate a comparison of approaches, Section III presents a
simple, competitive real business cycle model with inventory holdings in one

sector. Absent mobility costs, shocks to this system will produce negatively
correlated movements in output and employment as workers shift from one sector

to another. As one sector expands, the other tends to contract.

Section IV reconciles these results with the model of imperfect
competition.

The point of this discussion is to identify the key assumptions

which determine whether employment movements are positively or negatively
correlated across sectors. The main conclusion of the analysis then is that

perfectly competitive economies tend to produce more substitution between
activities than imperfectly competitive economies.

Drawing on this implication, Section V of the paper looks at the evidence
on employment fluctuations over time and across sectors. Our main finding is

that employment fluctuations are generally positively correlated across
sectors at the frequency of monthly data. We argue that this provides support

for the underemployment equilibrium model relative to a real business cycle
model in which shocks induce the reallocation of workers across sectors.

II. Imperfect Competition, Propagation.and Inventories

To study these issues, consider a two period imperfectly competitive
economy.

There are two goods produced by monopolists and a third, non-

produced good, endowed to a group of agents termed outsiders.

There are also

5

2N workers present each period who sell their labor services to firms.

The monopolist in each of the two sectors produces a unit of output from
each unit of labor.

In making production decisions, firms recognize their

market power as sellers. These agents consume the non-produced good in each
period and, as buyers, act as price takers. Their preferences (formally those

of their shareholders) are given by V(m) in each period where V() is
increasing and concave and m is their consumption of the nonproduced good in

period t.

To produce, these firms hire workers in a competitive labor

market. '

The sectors differ in two important respects.

First, in period 1 the

monopolist in sector 1 receives an endowment of that good, e1.

Second, this

agent can hold goods over time as inventories. The sector 2 monopolist has a
zero endowment and is unable to hold inventories. This specification permits

us to analyze the interaction between sectors holding inventories (such as
manufacturing) and those for which inventory holding is impossible (services).

There are two types of outsiders.

Type i outsiders have an aggregate

endowment of W units of the non-produced good in each of the two periods.
They demand both the non-produced good and the good produced in sector i and
have homothetic preferences.

Their demands for sector i output and the non-

produced good are given by

q. =

(1)

h(p.)

and

m =

(l

-

p.h(p.)).

With homothetic preferences, demands are proportional to income so that
variations in M' induce proportional variations in the demand for the produced
good.

The function ho

is

decreasing and, since demands are positive, 1 >

ph(p) for p>O.5

There are 2N workers born each period who are endowed with a unit of

6

leisure. Workers are of two possible types depending on the location of their
employment.

Those employed in sector i consume the nonproduced good and the

good produced in the other sector (denoted hereafter by -i). This is a common
preference structure for these models (see, for example, Cooper-John [1987] or

Heller [1986]) as it highlights the fact that agents generally consume goods
other than those which they produce.

For simplicity, workers in sector i, who consume good -i, have the same
preferences as type -i outsiders.

Workers employed in sector -i receive a

wage of w and demand h(p1)w units of good i. Their indirect utility function

is given by Z(w,p1) U(h(p1)w,(l-h(p)p1)w) - k where k>O is the disutility
of working and U() is increasing, concave and homothetic.

ZO is necessary

for worker participation in the market.

Before proceeding it may be fruitful to evaluate the assumptions made thus

far. We have restricted attention to two periods and two sectors for ease of
presentation.

Extensions to more time periods and sectors would not

dramatically affect our results.

One important assumption is that there are monopolists in the two sectors.
If these markets were oligopolistic, the analysis would be much more difficult
as it would require the characterization of a dynamic Cournot-Nash equilibrium

with inventories.

In this setting, inventories would play an important

strategic role as discussed by Aryan [1985] and Rotemberg- Saloner [1987].
While this is an interesting possibility, it did not seem crucial to our line
of inquiry and is avoided by the monopolistic setting.

Finally, the structure of demands here is quite important. The monopolists

are assumed to consume only the non-produced good while the workers consume
the produced goods. This implies that the current spending of workers is the

key linkage across the sectors of the economy and firms' profits represent a

7

leakage from the expenditure stream. This is similar to the structure imposed

by Hart [1982] in his discussion of the importance of income distribution in
models of imperfect competition.

One way to think about this is to view consumption of the non-produced

good, in part, as a proxy for future consumption in an infinite horizon
setting.

In that environment, our (implicit) assumption is that firms (i.e.

their owners) have a higher marginal propensity to save than workers. This
could be explicitly modeled by assuming that workers live many periods but
face credit constraints that limit their participation in capital markets thus

increasing their marginal propensity to consume.

have the ability to borrow and lend.

Firms, on the other hand,

With this approach, workers would be

viewed as "Keynesian consumers" while firms are "life cycle consumers". 6
Instead of formally analyzing these capital market imperfections and working
with the infinite horizon model, we simply assume that workers have a shorter

time horizon than firms and that only workers engage in consumption of the
produced good each period.

To characterize the equilibrium for this two period model, we first
consider the equilibrium in period 2 taking as given the inventory holdings of

the sector 1 monopolist. We then consider the first period choice problems
and the overall equilibrium.

Period 2 analysis for given Inventories

In period 2, the sector 1 firm has inventories from the previous period
which we denote by IO This monopolist is interested in maximizing income,
in terms of its consumption good (the non-produced good), and solves

1

1

1

(2) maximize p(q2± 11)(q2-4- Il) - w2q2.
1

8

Throughout this presentation, superscripts index the sector and subscripts

index the time period.

The demand for sector 1 output comes from the

outsiders and sector 2 workers and is

(3)

q + I h(p)(M1 + qw2 ).

The inverse demand curve in (2), comes directly from (3).

Using (3), the

solution to the monopolist's problem is

lF

1

1

(4) P2[l- + P2) ] = W2.
where ()

h(p)

< 0 is the inverse of the price elasticity of demand.

ph' ()

Because of the homothetic preferences and constant marginal costs, the
mark-up of prices over marginal cost (the wage rate) is independent of the
level of output.

Thus variations in output and/or inventory holdings will

only influence prices when wages are sensitive to employment levels.

The maximization problem of the monopolist in sector 2 is identical to that

of the sector 1 monopolist with the restriction that I=O since there are no
inventories in sector 2.

The demand for sector 2 output is given by (3) with

the appropriate changes in the income level of the consunters of good 2. The
solution to the monopolist's optimization problem is therefore

1

(5)
[

+ (p) ]

W2.

Equations (4) and (5) link the prices in the two sectors to the wage rate in
period 2 through ().

Since both firms hire workers at the same wage and face

9

demand curves with the same elasticities, the prices in the two sectors will
be equal.7 Denote by p2 this common price for period 2.

Inserting (w2,p2) into the sector demand curves yields- two equations
describing the of output for each of the two sectors at these prices. These
are given by

(6) q = h(p2)(& + w2q)
2

-2

1

(7) q2 = h(p2) (M +w2q2 )

-

'1

for

for sector 1 and

sector 2.

For convenience of exposition, (6) is a restatement of (3).

demand for sector 2 output depends on the level of output
1.

Note that the
sales in sector

This is because the linkage between sectors is through the demands of

workers not firms. Hence, a decrease in sector 1 production, perhaps due to
an increase in the inventories held by sector 1 firms, will reduce the demand
for sector 2 output.

Figure 1 provides a graphical representation of these two curves.

Their

intersection determines the levels of output for the two sectors for given
(w2,p2). For I small, both curves have a positive intercept term and slopes
less than one, since p2>w2 from (5) and ph(p)<l. As the inventory holdings of

sector 1 firms increase, the level of production in that sector will fall at

each level of sector 2 output given (w2,p2).

Since we will ultimately

characterize an equilibrium in which wages and prices will not vary with

these comparative statics will be important in understanding the linkage
between period 1 inventory holdings and the period 2 equilibrium levels of
output and employment.
Period 1 Choice Problems and Eciuilibrium

I

(7'

(6)

h(p2)N' —

I
q

h(p2)M2

FIGURE 1

10

The period 1 choice problem of the monopolist in sector 2, the workers and

the outsiders are exactly the same as their period 2 choice problems since
none of these agents solve intertemporal problems. In particular, the sector
2 monopolist's first order condition is given by

(9)

2 1

2[

p1j 1 +

(p1)

j

= w.

This is identical to (5) except for the change in the decision period.
The sector 1 monopolist selects an output level and inventory holdings to

(10) max V(4) + V(24)
where

=
1

(q
1

=

(q2

+
+

e1

I1)p()

-

1

I1)p2()

-

-

w1q

and

1

w2q2.

Here w2 is the period 2 equilibrium wage anticipated by this firm. The period

2 price function, p() is the inverse demand function that the firm
conjectures for the next period.
correct.

In equilibrium, these conjectures will be

In the expression for period 1 profits, e1 is the monopolist's

endowment in the first period.

The first order conditions for this problem

are

(11)

(12)

In

V'(i4)MR

11
p1 L

1

+

= V'(ir)M14 and

11

e(p1)

j

= Wi.

(11), MR refers to the marginal revenue of selling an extra unit of sector

1 output in period t=l,2.

Expression (12) is analogous to (4) and implies

that within period 1 marginal revenue will equal marginal cost. Using (12)

11

and (4), (11) can be rewritten as

(13) V' (4)w1= V? ()w2
Expression (13) characterizes the intertemporal decision of the monopolist.
The gain to holding more inventories from period 1 to 2 is given by the right
side of (13).

The monopolist saves the labor cost associated with producing

an extra unit times the marginal utility of period 2 income. The cost of
holding inventories is the wage for hiring the extra worker times the marginal

utility of period 1 income. In this economy, as in the Blinder-Fischer [1981]
yeoman farmer model, inventories are used to smooth consumption.

At these wages and prices, the quantities produced in the two sectors are
given by expressions analogous to (6) and (7). These are

(14) q = h(p1)

2

(M1 +

-2

w1q)

+

I

-

e1

and

1

(15) q1 = h(p1)(M + w1q1).
Figure 2 provides a graphical representation of these two equations for a
given value of (11-e1).

Equilibrium

Our interest is in the behavior of the economy in a stationary
underemployment equilibrium where total employment and output is the same each
period and is strictly less than 2N.

To do so, assume that e1=O and that M'=M

in each period so that preferences, endowments and technology are all
stationary and the sectors are symmetric.

Given the symmetry between the

sectors of the economy, the equilibrium wages are independent of time and the

equilibrium prices are independent of time and sector. We denote these by
(w*,p*).

1

q1

(15)

(14

h(p1)M1 +
(11_e1)

2

h(p1)M2

FIGURE 2

12

In an underemployment equilibrium, workers will be indifferent between
working and not. Hence the participation constraint
(16)

Z(w*,p*)=O

will be binding.

To characterize an underemployment equilibrium, solve for the (w*,p*) that

simultaneously solves (16) and one of the identical mark-up equations, say
(4).

This is an equilibrium if the outputs demanded at these prices are

producible given the technology and number of workers in the economy; i.e.
labor markets clear when (16) holds.

Given the stationarity and symmetry,

this condition must hold in both sectors and time periods and is:

(17) q* h(p*)[M + w*q*] < N

Proposition 1: If H is not too large relative to N, e1=O and M'M for i=l,2,
then there will exist a symmetric, stationary underemployment equilibrium for

this economy with prices and wages determined by (4) and (16) and quantities
determined by demand at these prices.

Proof: See Appendix.

Figure 3 depicts an equilibrium (w,p) from the crossing of a worker's
indifference curve (16) with one of the mark-up equations, (4).

Note that

multiple equilibria are possible if (p) varies enough to create multiple
crossings of these curves.

This possibility is discussed in Heller [1986].

Uniqueness of equilibrium is guaranteed by assuming a constant elasticity
specification.

If the conditions for Proposition 1 do not hold, then the economy could be

in a full employment equilibrium.

In that case, the behavior of the economy

in response to shocks is radically different than in the underemployment

w
(4)

p

FIGURE 3

13

regime.

We emphasize the latter case in the analysis to follow and then

return to a discussion of the full employment economy in Section IV of the
paper.

Effects of changes in period 1 endowment

Consider the effect on the economy of an increase in the endowment of the
monopolist in period 1 at a stationary, underemployment equilibrium.8

This

exercise of varying an endowment is similar to that outlined by BlinderFischer [1981] as a vehicle for understanding the propagation effects of
holding inventories.

There are a number of alternative shocks that could be

considered in this framework such as fluctuations in marginal products and/or

variations in the endowment levels of the outsiders. While this might be of
independent interest, for the purpose of focusing on the propagation effects
of inventories on future production, consumption and employment, the analysis

under either of these two alternatives would be the same as that conducted
here.

An increase in e1 has two important effects. From (14), the output of the
sector 1 monopolist would fall for given inventory holdings. So, in Figure 2,
this causes a shift down in the line expressing sector 1 output as a function

of sector 2 output in period l. As seen from this figure, this causes a
reduction in sector 2 output as well.

However, from (13), part of this

increase in endowment would be held as inventories by the monopolist.

From

(6), this increased level of inventories will then reduce the sector 1
monopolist's output in period 2. This reduction in sector 1 output in the two
periods spills over to sector 2 because sector 1 employment falls. A decrease

in sector 1 employment reduces demand for sector 2 output since the linkage

across the sectors is based on the demands of the workers. This is seen in
Figure 1 as a shift down

in

the line expressing sector 1 output as a function

14

of sector 2 output in period 2. These effects are summarized by

Proposition 2: An increase in e1 will increase

and reduce q for i=l,2 and

t=l,2.

Proof: From (11), if an increase in e1 increases ir, then I must increase so

that this condition is met. However, the increase in I will not exceed the
increase in e1.

Holding inventories constant and using (12), an increase in

e1 increases ir by MR.

So, in order for (11) to hold, I must increase with

e1 but by less than e1.

From (14), this implies that period 1 output for sector 1 will fall and
from (6) period 2 output will fall as well.

Since sector 2 output is an

increasing function of sector 1 output (not sales) in both periods, sector 2
output will fall as well.

QED.

The key to this result is the positive interaction across sectors in the
economy. Reduction in sector 1 output in each of the periods is a consequence
of a positive endowment shock and the smoothing behavior of inventory holdings

as the monopolist seeks to spread the endowment increase over time.

The

resulting reduction in sector 1 output spreads to sector 2 through the reduced

demands of the unemployment workers.

Thus these demand spillover effects,

coupled with the persistence created by the holding of inventories, generates
correlated movements in output and employment across sectors and over time.

In the following section, this result is contrasted with that of a simple
real business cycle model.

It is also useful to contrast Proposition 2 with

an alternative model of coordination failures stemming from the search
behavior of consumers/producers. One such model is that of Diamond [1982] in

which agents decide whether or not to accept production opportunities given
that they must meet a trading partner in order to consume. In this setting,

15

increased inventory holdings by other agents may create incentives for

prospective partners to accept more production opportunities since the
likelihood of meeting a trading partner increases when inventory holdings are
higher.

Thus instead of reducing production in other sectors, higher

inventories actually encourage production.

III. A Real Business Cycle Model with Sectoral Reallocation
The objective of this section is to construct a real business cycle model
with inventory holdings and to contrast its implications with the results from
Section II.

The model differs from that in Section II both in terms of the

market structure and in the specification of agents' preferences.

In

particular, we follow the real business cycle literature by assuming that the
market allocation corresponds to the solution of a planner's problem and that

there is a single agent in the economy.

The analysis in this section

highlights the role of sector specific shocks in inducing the sectoral
reallocation of workers.

These differences in assumptions and results are

discussed in some detail in Section IV of the paper.

This section forms a

useful bridge between the economy described in Section II and the Long-Plosser
model.

Consider a Robinson Crusoe economy in which the single agent has
preferences described by:

(18) flt(Ul(cl) +

where U1 ()

is

U2(c) + U3(m)

concave, go

-

g(nfl

n= n +

n.

is convex and both are twice continuously

differentiable. As in the Section II model, there are two produced goods
(c,c) and one non-produced good (mn) in each period.

Robinson Crusoe is

16

endowed with 2N units of leisure and M units of the non-produced good in each
period. The production technology is given by:

i

(19) q f1(n),

where f'> 0 and f't <

0.

1,2

Good 1 is storable while good 2 is not.

beginning of period 1, Robinson Crusoe receives an endowment of good 1,

At the

e.

Robinson Crusoe maximizes utility given by (18) subject to the technology
given by (19) and the following feasibility constraints:

1

1

(20)

c +

(21)

c =

(22)

rn =

q

+

for

t=1,2,

and

where IO is end-of-period inventories and 10=e1.

As there is no incentive

to hold inventories at the end of period 2, 12 = 0.
optimality conditions (for an interior solution to

(23) U1'(c)f1'(n) g'(n);

1,2; t

i

Given this, the

and I) reduce to:

1,2

(24) U(c) =
Expression (23) implies simply that Robinson Crusoe makes his within period
consumption and production decisions so that the marginal utility from the
output produced by one additional unit of labor equals the marginal disutility

of an additional unit of labor.

Expression (24) indicates that inventories

are used to smooth the marginal utility of consumption over time.

Now consider the same

conceptual

experiment conducted in Section II.

In

particular, consider the effect on the economy of an increase in the endowment

17

of good 1 in period 1. As the following proposition demonstrates, in response

to an increase in e1, Robinson Crusoe will reduce his production in sector 1
and shift resources towards the production in sector 2 in both periods.

Proposition 3: An increase in e1 will increase I, decrease q, and increase

q for t = 1,2.
Proof: As long as e1 + q increases in response to the increase in e1, then
both cI and I. I must increase in order to satisfy (24). Further. e.1 + q'
not
1

increasing would violate (23).

Observe from (23) that the increased

consumption of good 1 in period 1 will induce a reduction in the production of

good 1, which in turn by reducing the marginal disutility of labor induces an

increase in the production and hence consumption of good 2. Further, since I
increases as well this will induce an increase in the consumption of good 1 in

period 2. This, in turn, will induce a similar reduction in the production of
good 1 in period 2 but an increase in the production of good 2 in period 2.
QED.

Overall, we observe that in this setting the co-movements in inventories,

output and employment are very different than those found in the model of
Section II.

In this environment with complete mobility across sectors and

resources necessarily being allocated to their highest value use, inventory
movements in one sector induce substitution of resources away from that sector

to the other sectors of the economy. Thus neither output nor employment vary
together in response to endowment shocks. This contrasts with the co-movement

in output and employment present in the specification of Section II.

In the

subsequent section we discuss what factors underlie the dramatic differences
in the predicted behavior of inventories, output and employment across the two
alternative specifications.

18

Before proceeding, it is useful to bridge the conceptual gap between

Propositions 2 and 3 and the results that emerge from the Long-Plosser
analysis. Their model differs from ours in two important ways.

First, the

shock in their model is sector specific productivity disturbance which occurs

after the determination of factor inputs.

That is, their model contains a

stochastic technology with a production lag while we focus on an endowment
shock.

Second, the use of commodities as inputs in the production of other

commodities provides a mechanism for generating positive co-movements in
production across sectors and time. In the Long-Plosser model, these linkages

are characterized by an input-output matrix with non-zero off-diagonal
elements. Our model has a matrix in which the only linkage across commodities
and time is the holding of sector 1 inventories.

In contrast to Proposition 3, Long-Plosser demonstrate that their model can
produce correlated movements in output across sectors which reflect the input-

output matrix. As noted earlier, their explicit example yields an allocation
in which employment levels in each sector were constant because of the CobbDouglas preferences.

To understand the differences between these models, consider a transitory

productivity shock in sector 1 in our model instead of an endowment shock

while retaining the assumption of no production lags.

The optimality

conditions for the planner's problem will equate the marginal disutility of
work with the product of the marginal productivity of labor in a given sector

and the marginal utility of consuming that sector's output (as in (23)).
Suppose that there is a positive productivity shock in sector 1. If U(c) is
not too concave, then employment and output in sector 1 will increase while
sector 2 output and employment will decline.10

Through inventory holdings,

the effects of the productivity shock will be propagated over time. Thus the

19

response to a shock to the sector 1 production function would be the
substitution of employment across the sectors just as in Proposition 3 so that

negative correlations in output and employment across sectors would again be
predicted.

To move a step closer to the Long-Plosser specification, suppose that
sector 1 output is produced with a lag so that period t output in sector 1 is

a function of labor input in period t-l and a shock in period t.

Further,

assume that sector 2 does not have a production lag (i.e. continue to think of

that as a service sector). Then, in an infinite horizon version of the model

(which is needed to avoid the inconsistency of having a final period in a
model with a production lag), a shock to the sector 1 production function in
period t will reduce employment in that sector and cause the substitution of
labor into sector 2.

Output will be higher in both sectors in the period of

the shock though sector 1 output will, on average be lower in the next period

(assuming i.i.d. shocks) due to the reduction of sector 1 labor input. Note

that once again, employment is negatively correlated across sectors as the
productivity shock creates substitution effects.

As a final step, suppose that we allow the production of commodities by
commodities and assume that labor and other inputs are complements in the
production function, as in the Long-Plosser model. A shock to the sector 1

production function will then cause a decline in the marginal utility of
consuming sector 1 output.

Since some of this additional output is used in

the production of sector 1 goods next period, this increases the marginal
productivity of labor.

Thus, as discussed by Long-Plosser, there is an

ambiguity regarding the response of employment to productivity shocks in the
Long-Plosser setting.

A sufficiently large technological complementarity

between inputs and labor in all sectors relative to the curvature of the

20

utility function is required to generate positively correlated movements in
employment.

In a sense, the effect of the technological linkages between

sectors in the Long-Plosser model can be similar to an economy-wide technology

shock inducing both income and substitution effects and hence an ambiguous
effect on employment in each sector.

If, however, there are sectors in the

economy for which the marginal product of labor is xi an increasing function
of the level of intermediate inputs, then employment in these sectors will be
negatively correlated with employment in sectors exhibiting the technological
complementarities.

The point of this analysis is to demonstrate the importance of the
reallocation of labor in the presence of sector specific technology shocks.

This effect will generally produce negative correlations in sectoral
employment levels.

While a modified version of the Long-Plosser model might

overcome these tendencies, it is not clear whether the specification of
preferences and technology (in particular the required complementarities
between labor and other inputs) is at all reasonable.

IV. Reconciliation
There are several factors that contribute to the differences in predicted

behavior across the specifications presented in Sections II and III.

One

important element is the imperfect competition of the Section II model. To
see this, consider the equilibrium allocation from a competitive version of
that model. An underemployment equilibrium may arise and is characterized by

simultaneously solving the participation equation (16) and the zero profit

condition of w=p for all t and i.

These two curves are shown in Figure 4

which is a variation on the figure used to characterize the underemployment

equilibrium in the model with imperfect competition.

The competitive

stationary, underemployment solution is given by the (w,p) solving these two

21

equations j the resulting quantities demanded are less than N in each sector.
If they are not, then a full employment equilibrium results.

Since (p)<O, the wage and price levels are higher for the imperfectly
competitive economy than under perfect competition in an underemployment
equilibrium. This is indicated in Figure 3 by the fact that the curve for the

mark-up equation in the imperfectly competitive economy, lies below the 45
degree line.

As a consequence, the set of parameter values for which an

underemployment equilibrium can occur (demand at (w*,p*) less than N) with
perfect competition is a subset of that for imperfect competition.

Given that underemployment can occur with perfect competition, what is the

contribution of imperfect competition to the analysis?

Because prices and

wages are higher due to imperfect competition, the likelihood that the economy

will be in an underemployment equilibrium is higher.1'

That is, if the

parameters describing the economy were chosen randomly at the start of the
model, than the consequence of the imperfect competition is to increase the

probability that the stationary equilibrium will be in the underemployment
region.

As a consequence, the propagation effects of inventories on output

and employment discussed above are more likely to occur.

This argument is further strengthened by noting that there are environments
in which an underemployment equilibrium occurs only if some agents have market
power.

Hart [1982] provides such an example in which the market power of

workers in the labor market supports an underemployment equilibrium in an
economy for which all perfectly competitive equilibria are full employment
solutions. Heller [1987] describes an economy in which workers have a zero

value for leisure so that all competitive equilibria are full employment
allocations.

In that setting, Heller describes the possibility of an

underemployment solution.

In our model, setting k=O would sever the linkage

22

between sectors since wages would be driven to zero and workers would have no

income to spend on the other sector. This problem can be circumvented either

by allowing firms to spend some of their income in the other sector or by
considering a contracting solution in the labor markets in which workers have
some bargaining power.12

The point of the emphasis on underemployment equilibria is that the results

reported in Proposition 2 only hold in the underemployment region.

In the

event that the economy is at a full employment solution, we obtain results
very similar to the real business cycle model of Section III.

That is, an

increase in initial inventories in a particular sector induces a reduction in

the production in that sector and a shift of resources towards the other
sector.

Thus the empirical observation that employment is positively

correlated across sectors over the cycle (see the discussion in the next
section) is produced by an economy operating in the underemployment region.

Another important part of the Section II model is the extreme nature of the

disutility of work and the restriction to {O,l) employment. This approach is
used to create employment variations rather than hours.

The fact that k is

common to all workers creates an inverted L-shaped labor supply curve and
hence the two regimes noted above.13 As a consequence, the behavior of the
economy across the two regimes is vastly different. If the disutility of work
was continuously increasing and convex as in the Section III model, then wages

and prices would vary with output and employment and this would reduce the
impact on production and employment of the demand linkages across the sectors.

In fact, it is the convexity of the function characterizing the disutility

of work in the Section III model that creates the negative correlations in

employment since setting g(n)=kn would sever the connection between the
sectors.

As a consequence, shocks to one sector would have no effect on

23

output and employment in the other sector.

Finally, the model explored in Section III contains strong assumptions
about the preferences of workers and firms. As discussed earlier, workers are
"Keynesian consumers" in that their consumption of produced goods is sensitive

to their income while firms only consume the non-produced good (a proxy for
future consumption). This structure creates a linkage between the production

in one sector and the output level of the other sector which is absent from
the real business cycle model of Section III. In the latter model, consumers

are effectively aggregated and their preferences over produced goods are
represented by the functions U(c) for i=l,2 and t=l,2.

To see the importance of the differences in tastes, suppose that in the

Section II model, workers and firms had identical homothetic preferences.
Then, total demand for each good would simply depend on aggregate income as if

there was only a single consumer. Spending on each sector would then depend
only on the revenues generated by production in the other sector and not the
decomposition of these revenues into profits and wages. As a consequence, the

optimal sales of the sector firm would be independent of the endowment and
inventory holding of that firm and the level activity in sector 2 would be

independent of these variables as well.

Thus, fluctuations in sector 1

inventories caused by variations in e1, would p spillover to activities in
sector 2.

Overall, the models in Sections II and III capture some important forces in

the effects of sectoral shocks on employment at the disaggregated level. The
specification of preferences coupled with the operation of the economy in an
underemployment region produces positive co-movements in the model of Section
II. Sector specific shocks however may cause the substitution of workers from
one sector to another as captured by the simple real business cycle of Section

24
III.

While these sectoral reallocation effects may be reduced by mobility

costs, as in Rogerson [1987], they tend to produce negatively correlated
employment fluctuations.

V. Empirical Implications

The models explored in Sections II and III have interesting empirical
implications regarding fluctuations in output, employment and inventories both

over the cycle and across sectors. In particular, the analysis suggests that

models with imperfect competition may generate time series with different
properties than perfectly competitive economies.

To emphasize an important

message, imperfectly competitive economies are, on average, predicted to
exhibit less substitution across activities than their perfectly competitive
counterparts.

One difficulty with confronting these models with data concerns the source

of fluctuations in the economy.

In most of our formal models we rely on

endowment shocks to the inventoriable good as the initial source of
fluctuations.

Broadly speaking, these disturbances can be interpreted as

resulting from sector specific shocks to tastes or technology. However, we

have not formally examined whether the models of perfect and imperfect
competition respond differently to aggregate demand and technology shocks.'4

We conjecture though, that once inventories holdings respond to temporary
shocks, our results that imperfectly competitive economies tend to exhibit

positive correlations in employment and output in subsequent periods will
remain.

One important implication of our work is that inventory holdings in some
sectors of the economy create correlated behavior in output over time in all
sectors of the economy. This is a consequence of the demand spillovers across

25

sectors in a given time period.

Thus one need not appeal to inventory

holdings in all sectors of the economy as an explanation for observed
correlated behavior economy-wide.

Another important implication of our analysis concerns the co-movement of
output and employment across sectors of the economy. The analysis in Section
II suggests that through the mark-ups of price over marginal cost, imperfectly

competitive economies are more likely to be in an underemployment region and
hence exhibit positively correlated fluctuations in output and employment. In

contrast, the models explored in Section III are more likely to imply that
employment fluctuations are negatively correlated across sectors.

Shocks to

production functions in one sector of the economy cause a reallocation of
labor services from one sector to another. In their most extreme forms, the

imperfectly competitive economies thus have predictions about employment
fluctuations which contrast quite sharply with models of perfect competition.

To fully analyze the empirical predictions of the models in Sections II and

III is beyond the scope of this paper. However, a brief examination of the

data on employment across sectors is instructive to identify relevant
empirical regularities. In this regard, we examine the time series and cross

section behavior of employment across

sectors.

Table

1 presents

contemporaneous correlations of employment across sectors. The data used are

monthly observations on total manhours by sector for 1947:1 to 1985:12. The

data used to produce the tables are log values, detrended with linear and
quadratic time trends.15

Several features are worth noting from Table 1.

First, virtually all of

the off-diagonal terms are positive and several are quite large in magnitude.

This indicates that employment exhibits substantial positive co-movements
across sectors over the cycle. Further, the inventory holding sectors of the

26

economy (i.e., manufacturing, and wholesale and retail trade) are quite
important in this regard.

That is, employment in the inventory holding

sectors is highly and positively correlated with employment in the noninventory holding sectors (e.g. ,

services).

There are, of course, several potential explanations for the observed
positive co-movements across sectors. One explanation that is consistent with

much of the existing macroeconomics literature is that these sectors are
subject to common shocks. To shed some light on this difficult issue, Table 2
provides the correlations from the residuals from a VAR estimation using this

sectoral employment data.

Specifically, we estimated a VAR with the eight

employment series using log values, a lag length of six and including linear

and quadratic time trends in the estimation. Under some circumstances (see
Sims [1980]), the residuals from this VAR estimation can be interpreted as the

innovations to the respective series.

Under this interpretation, examining

the off diagonal elements of this correlation matrix provides evidence on
whether innovations (shocks) are correlated across sectors.

Further, by

comparing the off diagonal elements from Table 2 to those of Table 1, one can

gain some perspective on how much of the observed positive co-movements
indicated in Table 1 are due to common shocks.

A comparison of Tables 1 and 2 suggests that the observed positive co-

movements are not primarily due to common shocks.

For example, the

correlation in Table 1 between manufacturing and services is 0.63 but the
corresponding correlation in Table 2 is 0.08. This suggests that in this case

common shocks account for less than one seventh of the observed positive co-

movement in manufacturing and service employment. Other comparisons tend to
yield similar conclusions, although there are a few exceptions.

Another key issue is the nature of and the relationship between the

27

persistence in the employment movements across the sectors. Table 3 presents

the first order own and cross correlations across the sectors. Observe that

the detrended employment series all exhibit a high and similar degree of
positive serial correlation.

Further, the cross lagged correlations are

mostly positive and often large in magnitude. Note in particular that the

correlation between lagged values of employment in the inventory holding
sectors are highly correlated with contemporaneous values of employment in all

other sectors.

This suggests that changes in employment in the inventory

holding sectors often precede changes in employment in the non-inventory
holding sectors.

While these results are only suggestive, they are consistent with the
predicted patterns of Section II but are not consistent with the predicted

patterns of Section III.

That is, there are positive co-movements in

employment fluctuations across sectors which does not appear to be due to
sectors experiencing common shocks.

All sectors exhibit a high and similar

degree of positive serial correlation. The inventory holding sectors seem to

play a fundamental role in this regard as changes in employment in the
inventory holding sectors precede and contemporaneously move with changes in
employment in the non-inventory sectors.

VI. Conclusions

The twin observations of serially correlated output movements and positive

co-movements in output across sectors of a multi-sector economy are two
important "stylized facts" that guide macroeconomic researchers.

The

important paper by Long-Plosser [1983] provides one possible explanation for
these features based on the normality of consumption goods in preferences and

a technology which allows for the production of commodities by commodities.

28

As a consequence, the linkage highlighted in their paper are intersectoral
demands for intermediate goods.

This paper investigates an alternative approach which stresses linkages

across sectors from the demand for consumption goods and the presence of
imperfect competition. The market power of sellers produces an environment in
which an underemployment equilibrium is likely to arise. In that case, shocks

to one sector of the economy spillover to others and generate positively
correlated output and employment movements. The linkage across time explored

in this paper is the holding of inventories by a subset of agents in the
economy.

Because of the demand linkages across sectors, the holding of

inventories by some firms is enough to produce correlated output movements in
all sectors.

This model is then contrasted with a real business cycle model without the

factor demand flows stressed by Long-Plosser.

For that setting, positively

correlated employment fluctuations across sectors is not likely to occur.

Instead, shocks to one sector will generally generate a substitution of
factors to one sector from the others.

Hence, the predictions of the two

models with regards to employment fluctuations are quite different.

Drawing on these implications, we investigated detrended data on employment
fluctuations.

Our primary finding was positive co-movement in sectoral

employment over the cycle which does not appear to be due simply to sectors
experiencing common shocks. We interpret these findings as supportive of both

the model of imperfect competition explored in Section II of the paper and a

version of the Long-Plosser model in which technological complementarities
dominate.

These results do appear to be contrary to the predictions of many

simple real business cycle models in which sector specific shocks induce the
sectoral reallocation of labor.

29

Our analysis leaves open a number of interesting and important questions.

First, we have only analyzed a two period model and have interpreted the
differences between worker and shareholder preferences as a difference in
savings behavior. One important extension of our model would therefore be to
derive these differences more explicitly.

One avenue would be to allow the

firms as an institution to be infinitely lived. Shareholders could live for
finite periods of time and be able to operate in capital markets while workers

would live for a single period. In this setting, the non-produced good could

act as a store of value for shareholders, i.e. it could simply be money so
that the demand for this good was a means of obtaining future consumption.

Owing to their single period of life, which is a proxy for exclusion from
capital markets, workers would have no demand for this good.

Second, we have not really incorporated into our analysis any intertemporal

strategic interactions. While these are apparently not necessary to generate
the time series and cross-sector variations of interest in this paper, these
interactions by themselves might be worthy of attention.

Third, firms hold inventories in our model as a store of value. While this

is analytically convenient, this is unlikely to be the only (key) reason for
inventory holdings. In future work, we plan to integrate into our analysis a
more reasonable rationale for inventory holdings along the lines of production

bunching as discussed by Ramey [19871.16 Nonetheless, we conjecture that the

dynamic effects of inventories will remain even in a setting with a richer
explanation for inventory holdings.

Finally, a full comparison of this approach with that of Long-Plosser to
understanding co-movements across sectors seems warranted and would best be
achieved by the construction of a model which incorporated in it markets for

both final goods and intermediate products. This would allow us to evaluate

30

the role of imperfect competition at each stage of the production process and

to, perhaps, explore the causal linkages between sectors linked together by
both factor and final goods demands.

-

31

Appendix: Proof of Proposition 1

First, we must demonstrate that if e1=O and M'=M, then (4) and (16) will
characterize the prices and wages in an underemployment equilibrium. Because
of the homothetic preferences, the price of each good in each period will be
the same. Hence the wage rates must be the same each period for (16) to hold.
Since marginal revenue is assumed to be a monotonically increasing function of
price, prices will be the same each period.

We must verify that (w*,p*) solving (4) and (16) exist.

Figure 3 is a

graphical representation of (4) and (16). Marginal revenue, d[p(1+(p)]/dp, is

assumed to be strictly positive so that the graph of (4) has a strictly
positive slope for all p.

As p-O, so must w. Otherwise, the worker would

obtain infinite utility from positive w at p=O.

The slope of (16) is the

workers level of spending on the produced good which goes to infinity as p-'O
and approaches 0 as

These two limit properties plus the quasi-convexity

of the indirect utility function implies that there will be at least one
crossing in Figure 3.

To show that the left side of (17) expresses output in each period for each

sector, note that (13) is satisfied at 11=0 so that the sectors are identical
over time. Hence the solution will be symmetric and if (17) is satisfied, the

quantities demanded can be produced so that an underemployment equilibrium
will occur.

Clearly, this condition is more likely to be satisfied if N is

large and M small.

32

References

Abraham, K. and L. Katz, "Cyclical Unemployment: Sectoral Shifts or Aggregate
Disturbances?", Journal of Political Economy, 94 (1986), 507-522.

Aryan, L. "Some Examples of Dynamic Cournot Duopoly with Inventory," Rand
Journal of Economics, 16 (1985), 569-586.

Blinder, A. "Can the Production Smoothing Model of Inventory Behavior be
Saved?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101 (1986), 431-453.

__________and S. Fischer, "Inventories, Rational Expectations and the
Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics, 8 (1981), 277-304.
Cooper, R. "Optimal Labor Contracts, Imperfect Competition and Underemployment
Equilibria: A Framework for Analysis," NBER Working Paper #2060, 1986.

"Dynamic Behavior of Imperfectly Competitive Economies with
Multiple Equilibria," NBER Working Paper #2388, 1987.

_____________ and A. John. " Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian
Models,"
Cowles Foundation Working Paper #745R, revised September 1987,
forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Diamond, P. "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium," Journal of
Political Economy, 90 (1982), 881-94.
___________ and

D. Fudenberg, "Rational Expectations Business Cycles in

Search Equilibrium," minieo, 1986.

Dynarski, M. and S. Sheffrin, "Consumption and Unemployment," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 102 (1987), 411-428.

Eichenbaum, M. "Rational Expectations and the Smoothing Properties of
Inventories of Finished Goods," Journal of Monetary Economics 14 (1984),
71-96.

Hall, R. "A Non-competitive, Equilibrium Model of Fluctuations," Stanford
University, mimeo, l987a.

"The Volatility of Employment with Fixed Costs of Going to Work,"
Stanford University, mimeo, 1987b.

________

Hansen, G. "Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 16 (1985), 309-327.

Hart, 0. "A Model of Imperfect Competition with Keynesian Features,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 97 (1982), 109-38.

Heller, W. "Coordination Failure Under Complete Markets with Applications to
Effective Demand," in Equilibrium Analysis, Essays in Honor of Kenneth J.
Arrow . Volume II, edited by Walter Heller, Ross Starr and David
Starrett, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1986.

33

"Coordination Failure with Temporary Equilibria," Notes presented
at NBER Summer Institute, July 1987.

_________

Howitt, P. "Transactions Costs in the Theory of Unemployment," American
Economic Review, 75 (1985), 88-101.

Kiyotaki, N.

"Implications of Multiple Expectational Equilibria Under

Monopolistic Competition," Harvard University, mimeo, 1985.

Kydland, F. and E. Prescott. "Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,"
Econometrica, 50 (1982), 1345-70.

Lilien, D. "Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment," Journal of Political
Economy, 80 (1982), 777-793.
Long, J. and C. Plosser. "Real Business Cycles," Journal of Political Economy,
91 (1983), 39-69.

Lucas, R. "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic
Theory, 4 (1972), 103-24.

"An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," Journal of Political
Economy. 83 (1975), 1113-1144.

_________

"Understanding Business Cycles," in Stabilization of the Domestic
and International Economy, ed. by K. Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer,
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,5. Amsterdam:NorthHolland, 1977.

Rarney, V. "Two Studies of Inventory Investment: Inventories as Factors of
Production and Nonconvex Costs in the Production Smoothing Model,"
PhD.
dissertation, Stanford University, 1987.

Rogerson, R. " An Equilibrium Model of Sectoral Reallocation," Journal of
Political Economy, 95 (1987), 797-809.

Rotemberg, J. and C. Saloner, "The Cyclical Behavior of Inventories," mimeo,
1987.

Sims, C. "Macroeconomics and Reality," Econometrica, 48 (1980), 1-48.

Weitzman, M. "The Simple Macroeconomics of Profit Sharing," American Economic
Review, 75 (1985), 937-53.

Zarnowitz, V. "Recent Work on Business Cycles in Historical Perspective,"
Journal of Economic Literature,23 (1985), 523-580.

An
Empirical
Investigation," Working Paper #24-85, Wharton School, University of

Zeldes,

S.

"Consumption

Pennsylvania, 1985.

and

Liquidity

Constraints:

34

TABLE 1

Contemporaneous Correlations of Logs of Employment'

CON2

FIR

COy

MFC

MIN

TRC

SER

CON

1.00

FIR

0.62

1.00

GOV

0.19

-0.04

1.00

MFG

0.61

0.29

0.54

1.00

MIN

0.23

0.31

-0.13

0.14

1.00

TRC

0.71

0.44

0.56

0.76

0.13

1.00

SER

0.22

0.20

0.51

0.63

0.06

0.39

1.00

WRT

0.60

0.51

0.59

0.79

0.28

0.76

0.58

WRT

1.00

1Detrended--see text for explanation.

2Abbreviations: CON - Construction; FIR - Finance, Insurance, Real Estate;
Coy - Government; MFG Manufacturing; MIN - Mining; TRC - Transportation
and Public Utilities; SER - Services; WRT - Wholesale and Retail Trade.

35

TABLE 2

Contemporaneous Correlations of Employment Innovations1

CON
FIR

CON

FIR

GOV

MFG

MIN

TRC

SER

WRT

1.00

.06

.30

.30

.13

.09

.12

.28

1.00:

.05

.06

.05

.00

.10

.15

1.00

.17

.10

.10

.01

.06

1.00

.25

.27

.08

.31

1.00

.26

.04

.11

.05

.11

1.00

.16

GOV

MFG
MIN
TRC
SER
WRT

1See text for explanation.

-

1.00

-

-

1.00

36

TABLE 3

Correlation Matrix of the Logs of Employment at Lag 11

CON

FIR

GOV

MFG

MIN

TRC

SER

WRT

LCON2

0.90

0.63

0.17

0.60

0.23

0.70

0.23

0.61

LFIR

0.61

0.95

-0.07

0.27

0.32

0.41

0.20

0.50

LGOV

0.16

-0.04

0.91

0.53

-0.13

0.56

0.51

0. 5 9

LMFG

0.60

0.32

0.54

0.99

0.15

0.77

0.64

0.82

LMIN

0.21

0.30

-0.16

0.12

0.86

0.11

0.06

0.26

LTRC

0.70

0.46

0.56

0.75

0.15

0.98

0.40

0.78

LSER

0.19

0.21

0.51

0.60

0.06

0.37

0.89

0.59

LWRT

0.58

0.52

0.58

0.75

0.27

0.75

0.58

0.94

1Detrended- -see text for explanation.

2The prefix L indicates the lagged series.

Footnotes

1. Long-Plosser present simulation of output fluctuations in a multi-sector

setting using their model of factor demand linkages but do not discuss
We provide empirical evidence in Section V of this
employment variations.
paper on employment fluctuations.

2. There is a literature on sectoral flows of workers in the presence of
Lilien [1982] and Abraham-Katz [1986] for a
sector specific shocks.
See,
discussion of these flows and their relation to aggregate economic activity.
Rogerson [1987] discusses sectoral flows in a two-period model with sector
specific shocks. His model implies negative correlations in employment levels
as workers move from one sector to another.

3. Strictly speaking, imperfect competition is not necessary for the effects
As discussed in Section IV, the market power of
discussed here to occur.
firms increases the probability that the economy will be in an underemployment
region.

4. This assumption of competitive labor markets is reasonable if the economy
In our two sector
was composed of a large number of monopolized sectors.
model, this assumption is a bit strong. Cooper [1986] analyzes an alternative
way of characterizing labor market equilibrium through a contracting process
in which the variations in the market power of workers and firms are easily analyzed.

5. Additional properties of the demand curves are discussed in Hart [1982].

6. Zeldes [1985] provides empirical
important for explaining consumption
argue that the consumption behavior
status which is consistent with the

evidence that liquidity constraints are
Dynarski and Sheffrin [1987]
behavior.
is dependent upon an agent's employment
proposition that unemployed workers are

liquidity constrained.

7. We assume that marginal revenue is a strictly increasing function of p.
8.
If there are multiple equilibria, they will generically be locally unique
so that in response to variations in e1, the equilibrium is assumed to vary in
the neighborhood of the chosen stationary equilibrium. See Cooper [1987] for
a discussion of selection for economies of this type.

9. Figures 1 and 2 should be be viewed as representing quantity interactions
across sectors at the equilibrium prices (w*,p*) characterized in Proposition
The economy will remain in an underemployment equilibrium if it starts
1.
there for a sufficiently small change in e1.
10. Even if U() is so concave that income effects dominate, as long as go is
strictly convex, productivity shocks still generate substitution of employment
across sectors.
11.

Similar

arguments appear in Cooper [1986] and Hall [1987a].

12. This approach is described in Cooper [1986].

13. One objection to this approach is that this specification appears to
contradict evidence that the labor supply of full-time workers is relatively
inelastic. Our model is primarily concerned with variations of employment on
the extensive margin for which the evidence is much less conclusive. See
Hansen [1985] and Hall [1987a,l987b] for discussions of this point.
14. The discussion at the end of Section III provides a preliminary extension
of Proposition 3 to technology shocks. See Cooper [1986] for a discussion of
demand and supply disturbances in a model of imperfect competition.

15. We also considered alternative detrending methods, such as log first
Results on correlations in employment changes across sectors
were similar to those reported in Tables 1 and 2. However, this approach did
seem to over difference the data and hence generate some negative serial
differences.

correlation.

16. One possibility we will explore is a production bunching model in which
firms incur a fixed cost of 'starting up the plant" and a low marginal cost up
to capacity.
This setting is described by Ramey [1987] as capturing the
technology of a number of industries and implies that production is more
volatile as sales as suggested by recent empirical evidence (see, for example,
Blinder [1986]).

