                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        N-S TRADE WITH WEAK INSTITUTIONS

                                     James E. Anderson

                                     Working Paper 24251
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24251


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2018




An early version of this paper was presented to a workshop on economic interdependence and
war, UCIrvine, April 21-22, 2017. I am grateful to Ben Zissimos for helpful comments on the
penultimate version. The paper was completed while I was a visiting scholar at Oxford. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by James E. Anderson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
N-S Trade with Weak Institutions
James E. Anderson
NBER Working Paper No. 24251
January 2018
JEL No. F13,F16,O17,O19

                                         ABSTRACT

States with weak institutions (South) can lose from institutional response to trade with North. A
Ricardian model of trade subject to predation characterizes the case. South labor earns equal
returns in production and predation. Institutions are needed for security improvement because
equilibrium predation is invariant to globalization and productivity rises, contrary to casual
intuition. Enforcement reduces predation with terms of trade effects that typically imply opposing
North-South interests. Trade also incentivizes institutional regime change to counter or control
predation. North para-state institutions gain by promoting corrupt South institutions – Mafias or
their state equivalents – over welfarist South states.


James E. Anderson
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
james.anderson.1@bc.edu
   Classical political economy told a happy story about trade and institutions: mutual
gains from trade were assured (Ricardo, 1817), and trade would stimulate better institutions
(Smith, 1776). In contrast, other observers noted and theorized about examples where trade
was associated with possible losses and resulting conflict. (Smith himself condemned the
British East India Company’s effects on India.) This paper presents a formal model wherein
institutional response to predation on trade (extortion or theft) typically implies potential
losses for institutionally weaker parties. Historical examples motivate and illustrate the
model’s application. Contemporary use of private security forces to protect the trade of rich
world (North) firms with institutionally weak poorer (South) countries suggests continued
relevance of the model for thinking about trade.
   Institutions are interpreted here in the sense of Douglass North as constraints on the
actions of agents. Institutions coordinate collective action for productive agents to restrain
predation by ex ante identical peers. Their form here is state or para-state mechanisms of
enforcement that reduce predation on trade. Weakness of institutions (limits or inability) is
endogenous to economic equilibrium in a model with plausible primitives. In some range of
parameters, enforcement costs more than it gains in predation reduction, hence free entry
predation (or autarky) prevails. In other parameter ranges, enforcement is beneficial to the
institution deploying it. To pay for enforcement, institutions tax trade in some way, possibly
exploiting their power to extract a surplus over the cost of enforcement. A key feature of
North-South trade as modeled here is that multiple institutions are rivals in grabbing rents
generated from enforcement.
   The economic setting is a Ricardian model of trade extended to include endogenous
predation on goods in exchange, opposed or not by institutions of North and/or South.
Since predators and enforcers are drawn from the common labor supply, a labor market
channel modifies the standard mutual gains from trade argument. The model is otherwise
fully classical, with perfect competition and mobile labor.
   Equilibrium predation is invariant to globalization and productivity improvement in the


                                              1
model, implying that security improvement in South is likely to require institutional change.
Predation invariance is consistent with the persistence of extortion reported in surveys of
firms about their trade with the global South, though it contrasts with classical liberal
optimism and the casual intuition that higher productivity should reduce predation. (A
large enough productivity rise shifts trade equilibrium in the model from insecure to secure
and validates liberal optimism.)
   One form of predation reducing institution is collective action for weak enforcement,
such as to organize patrols by North or South. South may not be willing or able to prevent
patrols by North in South’s territory (e.g. acting on goods crossing South’s border, inward
or outward, or goods stored in warehouses). Enforcement in this form normally implies
opposed interests in the model: the richer state benefits from its enforcement and the poorer
less capable state loses.
   The mechanism of opposing interests is through the terms of trade, as in the standard
model, but terms of trade effects are amplified by the labor market effects of endogenous
predation and enforcement. For example, enforcement by North raises South (directly pro-
ductive) labor supply and reduces North labor supply, causing a terms of trade deterioration
for South through the relative size effect. These effects typically dominate the gains due to
reducing trade friction in the form of predation. It is possible that equilibrium trade with
North enforcement may be worse than autarky for South if the weak South state is unable
to coordinate an escape to autarky.
   Permanence of institutional authority in South enables a more powerful form of enforce-
ment. Permanence makes credible a commitment to pursue and punish predators resident in
South. Deterrence then makes direct control of predator entry feasible. Strong enforcement
is modeled below as requiring a fixed enforcement level of sufficient size in a static model. For
a large enough market size relative to the required fixed force size, strong enforcement can
be worth its cost. Because a Mafia cares only about its members, the market size enabling
Mafia control of predation is smaller than the market size enabling strong enforcement by


                                               2
a welfarist South state, assuming the same technology is available to both. (Plausibly, a
welfarist South state may be ethically constrained in enforcement relative to a Mafia.)
   South institutions that can credibly control predation are able to make tribute agreements
with the North institution. For simplicity tribute is modeled as agreement to eliminate
predation in return for payment. In the relevant range of market sizes relative to fixed
force requirements, North selects a selfish institution (a Mafia) over a welfarist institution
because the bargained tribute is less with the Mafia. Here weak capability in South also
means inability to eliminate rival institutions. Thus the weak welfarist South government
is unable to prevent the North state or non-state actors from dealing with the Mafia. (If
North is constrained ethically or legally by its own strong institutions, this ‘bad equilibrium’
for South is less likely.) If the welfarist South government has a sufficiently large market,
it commits to strong enforcement regardless of tribute, becoming a North-type government.
In this case its bargaining power with North arises because it has no South rival (a Mafia)
to constitute an outside option for North. The argument formalizes the insight of Weber’s
(2015) emphasis on the essential property of a state being a monopoly on violence.
   The model of the paper builds on that of Anderson and Marcouiller (2005). It shares
the feature that predators are drawn from the common labor pool of the poorer country in
a Ricardian model of trade. The present model introduces institutions of enforcement and
differs in some other details as well.
   The model resembles the Resource Curse literature (e.g. Frankel, 2010) in that an ex-
ogenously generated gain may lead to a social loss by stimulating predatory behavior. But
the mechanisms here are different: the gains and losses come through the terms of trade
and there is no actual conflict that consumes resources. The results of the model point to
economic determinants of conflict between states and within states, and to intervention by
more powerful states in the civil conflict of weaker states. Thus it relates to a wider literature
on economic determinants of conflict (Garfinkel and Skaperdas, 2007). The potential loss
in the paper resembles the well-examined analyses of loss from trade due to labor market


                                                3
failures or economies of scale, but in contrast the potential losses from trade are inherent
to the trade activity itself. With institutions endogenous to trade, the paper is part of a
literature suggesting that globalization may better or worse institutions (Nunn and Trefler,
2014).
   Further afield, the model suggests a new perspective for the theory of international trade
relations as it applies to North-South trade. The standard theory (Bagwell and Staiger, 2004)
treats trade relations between states of equivalent competency in control of their borders.
International institutions such as the WTO are understood as managing trade relations to
minimize negative terms of trade externalities. The terms of trade play a more powerful role
in the present model of North-South trade due to their effect on the labor market. More
importantly, trade can have negative effects on institutional quality affecting North-South
trade. Future work may consider international institutional design of North-South relations.
It may be that alternative mechanisms would do better for North-South trade relations.
   Section 1 motivates the model with a review of Britain’s 17th century trade with India.
Section 2 is a nontechnical outline of the theory. Section 3 begins formalization with fric-
tionless secure trade in a simple Ricardian production model of trade between North and
South. South is poorer due to less efficient technology. Cobb-Douglas preferences over the
two traded goods are identical. Section 4 introduces potential predation on trade in this set-
ting. Predation is at first competitive – there is free entry/exit of predators. Comparative
statics with respect to enforcement in the form of patrols reveal that North and South states
have conflicting incentives for enforcement. In Section 5, the supply of predators is con-
trolled by means of a durable commitment to a South force to pursue and punish unlicensed
predators in South’s territory. In Section 5.1, a predatory South state (a Mafia for empha-
sis) maximizes rents by selection of the level of predation. Comparative statics of North
enforcement differ slightly from the free entry case. Section 5.2 analyzes the case where a
welfarist South government bargains for tribute with North in return for the elimination of
predation. Section 5.3 analyzes the case where the Mafia bargains for tribute with North.


                                              4
Bargaining wth the Mafia always dominates bargaining with the welfarist South institution.
For context, a sufficiently strong South state (equivalent to a North state) has a monopoly
on control, thus can defeat Mafia challenge or North attempts to support the Mafia in order
to obtain a lower tribute payment. Section 6 concludes. Appendix Section 7 shows that the
analysis is qualitatively the same when predation is on South’s export. Appendix Section 8
presents analysis of Nash and bargained levels of enforcement in the form of patrols.



1     Historical Motivation

Predation (extortion or outright theft) is a prominent feature of North-South trade (e.g.,
Anderson and Marcouiller, 2002) now and was even more prominent in the 17th to 19th
centuries. Chaudhuri (1978) gives a richly detailed description of British East India Company
agents (factors) actions to deal with local predation and local rulers in Mughal India, based
on his monumental study of the trove of East India Company documents. The brief review
here motivates and illustrates the model’s use. See also Andrade (2004) for a description
of Dutch East India Company activities competing and colluding with pirates against the
weak and distant late Ming dynasty power in coastal China
    The East India Companies are plausibly taken as institutions of the North state. “During
the greater part of its history as an active commercial enterprise, the East India Company
was a state within a state.” (Chaudhuri, p. 20.) Trade was carried on in a number of coastal
towns, each approximating the North-South interaction of the model. North controlled the
sea with its powerful ships but its power on land was relatively weak. In harbor, unloading
and loading was vulnerable. More importantly, warehousing necessitated by nature of the
India trade was vulnerable to predation throughout the year. (i) Trade between India and
England was concentrated in time: Company ships arrived with English goods and bullion
(primarily the latter, some 70% to 90% of the value of exports) in the season of prevailing
west winds and left with Indian goods in the season of prevailing east winds. (ii) The arriving



                                              5
bullion was stored for payment over the next year for Indian goods that accumulated until
next year’s ships arrived. (iii) Local officials and rulers made uncertain demands for bribes
and returned uncertain enforcement against local predators.
   Some settlements (factories in contemporary terminology) in towns were unfortified but
the main ones (and an increasing portion over time in reaction to predation problems) were
fortified. The big exception was Surat, the most important town in this period, where the
Mughal Emperor was strong. Here the Company did not fortify or enforce, but paid trib-
ute, effectively for enforcement by the Mughals. (Surat trade thus resembled contemporary
practices in European trade.) Over time the importance of Surat declined as the Company
shifted trade to outlying towns.
   Chaudhuri argues persuasively that the form of Company activity in India evolved in the
period 1657-1709 to maximize profits given experience with the Indian conditions. Valuable
trade concentrated in space and exposed over time combined with the uncertain losses to pre-
dation and extortion induced a shift to defended warehouses despite the expense of garrisons.
The cost of garrisons and maintenance of fortifications vs. its benefit in protecting trade
is constantly weighed in the internal Company documents surveyed by Chaudhuri. Tribute
payments to local rulers were common: “... all local governors and officials demanded sepa-
rate presents as a condition of unhindered trade. ... The companies generally paid the price
because it was simpler and less expensive than sending embassies to the imperial court.”
(Chaudhuri, p. 123.)
   After the death of Aurangzeb (1707), the last strong Mughal emperor, the Indian side
is associated with more turnover of more corrupt local rulers, rebellions and conflicts. The
Company side is associated with worsening conflict of interest between headquarters and
distant agents, increasing intervention by local Company agents in internal Indian trade and
politics, culminating in an extension of control that ultimately was taken over by the British
government. (The analysis below abstracts from the agency problems that are a focus of
Chaudhuri inter alia.)


                                              6
       Chaudhuri constructs terms of trade data for the Company’s activities in India that
illustrate the operation of the economic model of succeeding sections. The model predicts
that both enforcement by North and tribute payments by North improve its terms of trade
as South’s expense.1 The crucial period 1657 (with the Company receiving a new charter
from the government and beginning its expansion) to 1709 sees a substantial improvement
in the Company’s terms of trade and a substantial fall in India’s terms of trade in most years
relative to the base. The Company’s main export (bullion, principally silver) had a nearly
constant price (and was available to India from other sources). India’s terms of trade is the
ratio of the import price index to the price of silver.2 The years 1664-98 show a significant
fall in European import price indices (a Laspeyres index of the Company’s import prices).
The resulting India terms of trade index has an average deterioration of more than 13%
relative to base, in some years much larger, ranging to 100%. Security improved, on average
at least, so on both counts the European terms of trade improved.
       A decline in India’s terms of trade seems well established in the data. The increase
in protection of its trade by the Company seem likely to have pushed predators out into
productive labor, as in the model. Other indirect evidence in Chaudhuri on this force tending
to worsen Indian terms of trade indicates that some regional officials pushed for the Mughal
Emperor to end the Company trading privileges, presumably reflecting their perception of
the regional disadvantage of the trade. Shuja-ud-Din Muhammad Khan, Nawab of Bengal
“... advised the Emperor in Delhi against the renewal of the Company’s privileges ... ”
(Chaudhuri, ch. 6). The Emperor’s disinclination to do so reflected financial advantages to
the Court from the relationship, not inability: “... the military defenses of the Company’s
settlements before 1757 could never have provided adequate protection from a determined
   1
     The quality of the data appears to be very high because it is based on voluminous Company records of
annual payments for its imports and the corresponding volumes. Given the detailed nature of the goods, the
problems of equating prices with unit values are attenuated.
   2
     The Company’s other exports (primarily woolens in this period) were probably cross-subsidized. The
government constantly pressured the Company to export goods in exchange for its privileged position, partly
due to the doctrine of bullionism. So it is more appropriate to construct a terms of trade using silver as the
Company’s export, differing from Chaudhuri’s treatment in this.



                                                      7
enemy in India.” (Chaudhuri, ch. 6). Welfare for India falls over time based on its negative
terms of trade movement.
    Welfare change for Britain remains ambiguous. Sections 2-4 analyze a competitive trade
framework for North that abstracts from the complexities of costly trade and middleman
monopoly power described in this section. Thus there is no monopoly power and no changes
in trade costs or payments for trade services. In the competitive setting, an improvement in
security and a deterioration of India’s terms of trade would necessarily mean a welfare gain
for Britain before accounting for the cost of enforcement, based on Britain’s terms of trade
defined as the inverse of India’s terms of trade.
    A proper welfare accounting for Britain consolidates consumer welfare with Company
profits. Was the Company profitable? Profits could come from markup on the import price
to the European sale price of its imports. For each good this is the product of India’s export
price, the trade cost factor, and the monopoly markup factor of the Company. Chaudhuri
reports the total markups for the years 1664-1709. Markups are huge in some years and
highly variable. The trade cost factor includes the cost of insecurity, presumably falling.
Efficiencies in trade presumably also were inducing a fall in trade costs. But the cost of
fortifying settlements and other protection costs presumably rose, the enforcement effort in
the model below. The Company seems to have been profitable for some years in the relevant
period, and lost money due to conflict in other years. Moreover, some enforcement costs using
naval power were borne by the government. Profitability obtained at least occasionally but
overall profitability remains an open question, a fortiori for British welfare improvement.



2     Theory Outline

Internal production and exchange is assumed secure to simplify the model sufficiently to
focus on international interaction of governments in enforcement. (Predation on production
at local levels induces emergence of local order provision to limit its damage but the order



                                               8
providers tend to enrich themselves at the expense of those protected. See Grossman, 2002,
for example. The present paper has a similar characteristic in that enforcement benefits
some and hurts others, but it differs in that the enforcers themselves get no surplus.)
       Start with the familiar 2 good 2 country Ricardian model with identical Cobb-Douglas
preferences. North has an absolute advantage in both goods, so it has a higher wage in
equilibrium. As in Anderson and Marcouiller (2005), labor may choose to prey on trade, while
in equilibrium the predators come exclusively from the poorer country (South). Predation
is either theft or, equivalently and more generally, extortion. Departing from Anderson-
Marcouiller, costly enforcement is introduced.3 Key characteristics of the two economies
and their iceberg costs of international trade determine the type of order provision that
emerges.
       Think of predation in South’s port.4 North’s exports may be exposed to extortion as they
are unloaded or pilfered afterward from the warehouse or as they leave the warehouse. On
the landward side, South’s exports may be exposed to extortion as approach the warehouse,
are in the warehouse or are leaving it to be loaded on ships. Specialization in predation
depending on the characteristics of the goods is likely, so the polar cases are analyzed.
Predation on trade of either country’s exports has similar implications for sources of conflict
in trade relations.5
       Two new parameters govern the interaction of predators, prey and enforcers. One pa-
rameter is the relative effectiveness of predators hunting prey. The other parameter is the
relative efficacy of enforcers against predation. South’s labor market clears with the popula-
   3
     Anderson-Marcouiller is altered in several other ways as well. Domestic order is assumed such that
insurance allows predation risk to be diversified, and predation is on trade falls asymmetrically on the two
goods. The predators are assumed to be integrated into the domestic market for exchange of goods.
   4
     Abstract from piracy on the sea, as it is apparently absent from the motivating example of British East
India Company trade with India.
   5
     Asymmetric predation results when some goods are more easily stolen or more attractive to steal.
For example, high value to weight or volume ratios makes goods more attractive to predators, all else
equal. Perishability and other handling characteristics also affect the relative attractiveness of shipments to
predators. While there are some interesting differences, the analysis confirms a deeper similarity. The model
development in the text thus focuses on the polar case of predation by poor South on rich North’s export.
The alternative polar case is analyzed in the appendix: predation by South on South’s export.



                                                      9
tion employed as workers, predators or enforcers. Equal returns are earned in all activities, a
key equilibrium indifference condition that governs the amount of predation and the choice
of enforcement levels. Depending on the parameters, the model may generate secure trade
with no enforcement, insecure trade with no enforcement, and insecure trade with some
enforcement provided by an active government, generally the North’s government.
   With the basic model in place, the comparative statics of equilibrium are derived. Glob-
alization shocks (falls in international trade costs modeled as iceberg costs) and growth
shocks (technological or population). A key implication is that predation is invariant to
globalization and productivity shocks. Thus the terms of trade effects are the same as in the
secure trade model. In contrast, a rise in North’s labor supply relative to South’s increases
predation, improves South’s terms of trade and worsens North’s terms of trade.
   Enforcement in the form of patrols that reduce the probability of extortion or theft may
on net benefit one of the parties. An important property of the model is that enforcement by
North or South shifts the gains from trade in opposing directions. The table below reports
the results of enforcement on North and South terms of trade for the two polar cases of
predation on North exports and on South exports and contrasts them with the benchmark
equilibrium case of no predation. Which cell is actually the equilibrium depends on under-
lying parameters. Equilibrium with no predation results when trade is sufficiently beneficial
for poor South. The cases of interest in this paper are when trade with no enforcement is
insecure. The bottom row of the table is the case where enforcement is free for North. Then
North chooses enforcement that eliminates predation. In the case of predation on South
exports, South loses from elimination of predation. With very costly enforcement, insecure
equilibrium is tolerated with no enforcement. With better enforcement capability, E and E ∗
are interior enforcement efforts of North and South respectively. The remaining cells report
the gains or losses in terms of trade for each country from each policy.




                                              10
                             Predation on N. Exports             Predation on S. Exports

                  E           North Gains, South Loses            North Gains, South Loses

                 E∗              North ?, South Gains                North Loses, South ?

          No Predation        North Gains, South Gains            North Gains, South Loses


The first row reports that North benefits from enforcement that is not too costly, whether
predation is on its own export or on its import from South. The second row reports that
South enforcement against predation on North exports is in South’s interest but may be
opposed by North. South enforcement against predation on South’s export, even if beneficial
to South in some range, will be against North’s interest and so opposed by North unless
enforcement rises so far that it is against South’s interest.
       The South may have an institution capable of deterring predators directly rather than
reducing their effects with patrols.6 The necessary condition for this deterrence capability is
permanence. If authority is long lived, it is credible that predators can be pursued and even-
tually caught and punished, perhaps with their families and friends. Permanent authority
can commit to effective pursuit and punishment in incurring a fixed (and effectively sunk)
capacity. At the same time it collects a payment from traders in return for secure trade.
With credible power to eventually punish, the potential predators can be deterred and the
gains from secure trade over the free entry of predation equilibrium are sufficient to pay for
the fixed cost. A key implication is that a sufficiently large market is required to support
the fixed cost of such capacity.
       If the permanent authority is a non-state actor (a Mafia, to fix ideas), a welfarist South
state loses from the Mafia outcome. An important property is that the Mafia’s profits
are not large enough to compensate South’s welfarist state for the loss, so no rent sharing
compromise is feasible. Another possibility is that North may be willing to pay tribute to
the South state in return for secure trade. In this case, it is cheaper for North to deal with
   6
    North has no such institution capable of operating on South’s territory, by plausible assumption. This
treatment abstracts from full colonial takeover or the transition, where such power is feasible.


                                                   11
a Mafia South than a welfarist South that by assumption (ruling out a South capability
equivalent to a North type capability) cannot afford to pay the fixed cost without a tribute
payment from North. Moreover, asymmetry in deterrence capability between Mafia and the
South state is plausibly associated with geopolitical asymmetry. For example, the Mafia
may share ethnic origin with the local population while the South state rulers are ethnically
different and seen as such.7 Mughal India had many such ethnic and religious differences,
exemplifying a common feature in South states.
        Changes in relative enforcement power can shift the cost/benefit balance between a steady
stream of tribute payments to a one time expense to eliminate the predators. East India
Company decisions to make war or pay off predatory rulers in India (Chaudhuri, ch. 6)
provide numerous examples.



3         The Cobb-Douglas Ricardian Trade Model

A Ricardian trade model suffices as a platform to illustrate the main principles of order
provision in the face of predation on trade. A Cobb-Douglas utility function (common to
both countries) is combined with a Ricardian technology that differs between countries. One
country (North) is richer than the other (South) due to its better technology. (Assigning a
richer country is useful later, when predators are introduced, who come only from the South,
subject to an equal utility condition in predation and production.) The familiar model and
its notation are reviewed here to set the stage for analysis of insecure trade equilibrium in
the next section.
        Utility of agents is a function xγ1 x1−γ
                                             2   of consumption bundle (x1 , x2 ) in North and x∗γ ∗1−γ
                                                                                                1 x2

in South. The Ricardian technology in North is a1 y1 + a2 y2 ≤ L, where L is the supply of
effective labor (in good 2 units), y1 and y2 are the production levels of goods 1 and 2,
and a1 , a2 are the unit labor requirements. The technology in South is a∗1 y1∗ + a∗2 y2∗ ≤ L∗ .
    7
    Mafia is metaphoric here. No criminality need be implied. The literal Mafia did function as an alternative
and locally more powerful government in some dimensions.


                                                     12
We assume a1 /a2 < a∗1 /a∗2 and ai < a∗i , ∀i. With this setup, North specializes in good 1,
South in good 2. With economies not too dissimilar in size, both are completely specialized
so North produces y1 = L/a1 , South produces y2∗ = L∗ /a∗2 . Let p denote the equilibrium
price of good 1 in terms of good 2. North income in terms of good 2 is wL = pL/a1 and
South income in terms of good 2 is w∗ L∗ = L∗ /a∗2 . Cobb-Douglas demand implies that
x1 = γpL/a1 p = γL/a1 . North exports are thus y1 − x1 = (1 − γ)L/a1 . South produces
y2∗ = L∗ /a∗2 and consumes x∗2 = (1−γ)L∗ /a∗2 , so it exports y2∗ −x∗2 = γL∗ /a∗2 . The equilibrium
terms of trade for North (under balanced trade) is

                                               γ L∗ /a∗2
                                        p=               .                                     (1)
                                             1 − γ L/a1

The larger is the South labor supply L∗ relative to the North labor supply L, the better are
North’s terms of trade p. Improvements in South technology (a fall in unit labor requirement
a∗2 ) have the same effect.
    Up to an irrelevant positive constant, indirect trade utility is given by v(p, L) = p1−γ L/a1
for North and v ∗ (p, L∗ ) = p−γ L∗ /a∗2 . (It is straightforward to confirm that there are mutual
gains from trade.) Because of the assumption that South has higher unit labor requirements
than North in both goods (an absolute disadvantage in all goods), the South real wage is
lower than the North real wage.



4     Trade with Predation

The model of Section 3 has no predation and no enforcement; markets work perfectly at no
cost to governments. Now and henceforth, in contrast, potential productive workers may
choose predation over production when predation (extortion or theft) pays well enough.
Given the low wage South economy it is natural to assume that predators come exclusively
from South. Denote predators as raiders R∗ . To counter the predators, governments in North
and South may employ enforcers E, E ∗ . Enforcers are drawn from national active populations

                                                13
N, N ∗ , hence the labor force is equal to L = N − E in North and L∗ = N ∗ − E ∗ − R∗ in
South. Until the next section, the enforcement efforts E, E ∗ are exogenous and may be equal
to zero.
   The specification of the state is simplified to ease the analysis. The state is assumed
to act in the interest of its members (including predators who are indistinguishable from
productive workers). This extreme public interest model sharpens the distinction between
the South state and the Mafia. The state in South or North is able to collect income taxes to
pay enforcers at some exogenous marginal cost of funds normalized to 1, reducing effective
labor by E or E ∗ . The exogeneity of the marginal cost of funds avoids the complexity
arising from formal analysis of South’s most obvious way to raise funds – taxation of trade,
either North’s exports coming in or South’s exports going out. Also avoided is smuggling
and predation on tax collectors. The normalization itself is harmless, forming part of an
exogenous parameter used below to represent the relative efficiency of North in providing
enforcement effort.
   The new element in the model is that endogenous predation R∗ is in the amount that
equalizes the return to South labor in production/trade and predation. Because R∗ is en-
dogenous, so is South’s labor N ∗ − E ∗ − R∗ . The insecure exchange environment resembles
that in Anderson and Marcouiller, but has some different features. One is specialized preda-
tion: in this paper the predators prey on one of the goods. Plausibly, it pays to specialize.
The main new feature is enforcement.
   The probability of successful shipment is

                                                        1
                                 π = E + (1 − E)           R∗
                                                                                          (2)
                                                    1 + θ L+L ∗




where the enforcement probability E is a function of enforcement labor by North and South:

                                                (AE + E ∗ )
                               E(E, E ∗ ) =                    .                          (3)
                                              1 + (AE + E ∗ )



                                               14
Parameter A ≥ 1 is the absolute advantage of North labor in enforcement. In (2) the shippers
and predators interact in evasion/pursuit with a logistic success rate π 0 = 1/[1+θR∗ /(L+L∗ )]
that decreases with the ratio of predators to shippers (Anderson and Marcouiller, 2005) and
the relative effectiveness of predators in finding prey, θ. Enforcers defeat a fraction E of
successful matches of predators to prey (assumed to always result in loss of shipments) with
full recovery of goods. Enforcement success is a logistic function of the effective number of
enforcers AE + E ∗ in (3). The numbers of predators and prey are suppressed as an argument
in (3), rationalized as thinking of density of patrols on the limited area of approach to the
port town where trade occurs. Note that EE (0, 0) = 0 = EE ∗ (0, 0) = E, so that coordination
of enforcement effort is required to have any effect. That is, institutions are required.


4.1    Free Entry Predation

This section focuses on predation on North goods by South predators. (North goods may
plausibly have higher value to weight than South goods; historically, think of manufactured
goods from North exchanged for primary agricultural goods from South.) The appendix
treats predation on South goods. (Think of gold or diamond exports.) The switch affects
many details but the main implications of the analysis are unaffected.
   The analysis shows that with South predation on North exports, North gains from en-
forcement that is sufficiently effective, and South loses from North’s enforcement. If South
gains from enforcement, North may gain or lose. These points are formally proved in the
Ricardian Cobb-Douglas model below. The intuition should be valid in a wider class of
models.
   The predators extort (or steal) (1 − π)(y1 − x1 ) of North exports. They can sell the goods
in a gray market that we assume is perfectly (for simplicity) integrated with the legitimate
domestic market in South. The domestic market price is p. North sellers receive expected
price πp. The income of predators is p(1 − π)(y1 − x1 ) = (p − πp)(y1 − x1 ). The left hand
side of the equation gives the value of goods taken by predators while the right hand side is


                                              15
in the form of tariff revenue generated by a tax p − πp times the quantity imported y1 − x1 .
   The integration of predators into the South economy implies that their income is spent
in the South economy in exactly the same form as tariff revenue lump sum redistributed to
identical consumers, the usual setup in trade policy models. The predators sell their goods
in the integrated domestic market at price p in terms of good 2, with a rent per unit (specific
tax equivalent) of p−πp per unit, effectively like a tariff in that amount. Two key differences
between predation and the tariff are: (i) the predators ‘ad valorem tax’ rate (1 − π)/π is
endogenous in contrast to an exogenous tariff, and (ii) more predation means less South
output, improving South’s terms of trade, all else equal.
   The equilibrium allocation of South labor between predation and production/trade equates
the wage in production/trade 1/a∗2 with the per predator income from predation:


                               p(1 − π)(1 − γ)L/a1 R∗ = 1/a∗2 .                                  (4)


   Use equation (2) to form an expression for 1−π and substitute into (4). Use labor market
clearance in South N ∗ − E ∗ − R∗ = L∗ and in North N − E = L to substitute for South
and North labor. Finally, solve the result for the supply of predators as a function of South
price p:

     R∗                                 θ a∗2 N − E
                                                                                      
                       ∗                                                  N −E              1
           = ρ(p, E, E   ) = p(1 − E)                    (1 − γ) −                +1           , (5)
  N ∗ − E∗                            θ − 1 a1 N ∗ − E ∗                 N ∗ − E∗          θ−1

where E(E, E ∗ ) is given by equation (3).
   Substitute the right hand side of (5) for R∗ in (2) to yield an implicit relationship between
π and p. After simplification this is

                                             N − E + N ∗ − E ∗ − ρ(p, E, E ∗ )
             Π(p, E, E ∗ ) = E + [1 − E]                                            .            (6)
                                           N − E + N ∗ − E ∗ + (θ − 1)ρ(p, E, E ∗ )

In general Π(p, E, E ∗ ) is decreasing in p since (5) ⇒ ρp > 0.


                                                 16
   The expected price received by North for its exports in insecure equilibrium is given by

                                           γ a1 N ∗ − E ∗ − R ∗
                                  πp =                                                       (7)
                                         1 − γ a∗2  N −E

where the right hand side is equivalent to (1), but now the South labor supply is endogenous
in p via R∗ given by (4).
   The equilibrium relative price of North’s export p as a function of π solves (7) for p:

                                                             c
                            p = P (π, E, E ∗ ) =                                             (8)
                                                   π + (1 − E)γθ/(θ − 1)

where
                                                   N − E + N ∗ − E∗
                                                                       
                          γ        a1                                 ∗
                     c=        ∗
                                                                    +N .
                        1 − γ a2 (N − E)                θ−1

Log-differentiating (8) yields

                         ∂ ln P              π
                                =−                       ∈ [0, −1).
                         ∂ ln π    π + (1 − E)γθ/(θ − 1)

   The analysis of insecure equilibrium is illustrated in Figure 1 below in (ln p, ln π) space.
The P (π) and Π(p) schedules are drawn as loglinear for simplicity, with slopes on either
side of −1. When E = E ∗ = 0 the elasticity of Π with respect to p is indeed in (0, −1) is
guaranteed for Π(p), as analyzed further below to provide sufficient conditions for insecure
equilibrium. Stability is guaranteed in this case.




                                                   17
                                                  Figure 1. Insecure Equilibrium: South on North Predation



                               Range of mutually beneficial ToT
                 ln (a1/a2)                                                     ln (a1/a2)*



                        ln (πp)S    ln P(1,0,0)                                                 ln ToT
             0
                                   co                       ln pS
                                   ns
                                    ta
                                        nt
                                         πp



                 rise in E*                                         rise in E
      ln π




                                                                    S
                               fall in ln (a1/a*2)                        rise in ln (a1/a*2)   rise in E+E*




                                                                                                               ∏(p)




                                                                                       P(π)




      The diagram is helpful in understanding the characteristics of equilibrium. The assump-
tion in the diagram is [ln(pS ), ln(πpS )] ∈ [ln(a1 /a2 ), ln(a∗1 /a∗2 )]. This condition assures
mutual gains from trade relative to autarky (in South’s case aggregating predators and
state). The standard secure Ricardian trade equilibrium is unique if Π(p) lies above P (π) in
the relevant range of feasible terms of trade [ln P (1, 0, 0), ln(a∗1 /a∗2 )].
      A sufficient condition for insecure equilibrium without enforcement adds intuition.8 Two
requirements must be met: North participation πp ≥ a1 /a2 and predation Π(p) ≤ 1. The
usual participation condition for South p ≤ a∗1 /a∗2 is not necessary, as argued below, but may
be met.
      Proposition 1 At E = E ∗ = 0 a unique stable insecure equilibrium exists if

                                                                                1 + N ∗ /N a2
                                                                                              > θ + 2.                (9)
                                                                                  1 − γ a∗2

Condition (9) assures that a value of p can be found in an interval that satisfies both North
  8
      Positive enforcement implies extra nonlinearity that greatly complicates the sufficient conditions.



                                                                                                18
participation and trade that is insecure. Intuitively, predator effectiveness θ cannot be too
large relative to parameters that raise p, the equilibrium value of the goods to be extorted
or stolen. Increases in South relative size N ∗ /N and in preference for North goods γ raise
equilibrium p. Rises in a2 /a∗2 similarly act to raise South’s relative size and thus p.
   Proof: to characterirze insecure trade, solve (4) for R∗ at E = E ∗ = 0 and substitute in
(2) to yield
                                           1 + N ∗ /N      1   1
                            Π(p) =                    ∗
                                                             −     .
                                      (1 − γ)(1 + θ)a2 /a1 p 1 + θ

To characterize North participation, multiply both sides by p to give an expression for πp.
North participation requires πp ≥ a1 /a2 , implying

                                   1 + N ∗ /N a1     p    a1
                                                 ∗
                                                   −     ≥ .
                                 (1 − γ)(1 + θ) a2 1 + θ  a2

Manipulate this condition to obtain

                                 1 + N ∗ /N a2                p
                                             ∗
                                               − (1 + θ) ≥        .
                                   1 − γ a2                a1 /a2

Insecure trade Π(p) ≤ 1 implies

                                             1 + N ∗ /N a2
                                                          
                                     p                       1
                                         ≥               ∗
                                  a1 /a2       1 − γ a2 2 + θ

A positive measure interval in which to locate p/(a1 /a2 ) exists if (9) holds. QED.
   If the insecure trade South participation condition p < a∗1 /a∗2 is added as a requirement,
then a sufficient condition is

                   a∗1 /a∗2     1 + N ∗ /N a2            1 + N ∗ /N a2 1
                                                                          
                            ∈                 − (1 + θ),                     .
                   a1 /a2         1 − γ a∗2                1 − γ a∗2 2 + θ

This sufficient condition for South’s participation in insecure trade need not be necessary,
as it would be in standard analysis of trade with frictions. An important possibility arises


                                                19
with equilibrium that drives p above South’s autarky price ratio a∗1 /a∗2 . This bad equilibrium
is possible when the weak government in South is unable to organize to escape the trap of
immiserizing trade.
       Individual South agents may always switch to production of good 1 and exchange some
of it for good 2 in the market.9 If South agents producing good 1 are able to sell on the same
terms as North, earning π S pS , then enough would switch so that autarky would emerge as
the equilibrium. In contrast, if North enforcers provide no protection to South producers
of good 1, the South producers earn less than π S pS and continued specialization in good 2
may be their best choice. In this case, coordination of South agents is required to escape
to autarky. A weak South government may be unable to manage the required coordination.
Section 5.1 shows that control of predation by a Mafia makes loss from trade relative to
autarky much more likely, and makes escape from loss-making trade equilibrium to autarky
much less likely.
       Proposition 1 assumes away potential problems with initial predation. Implicitly, coordi-
nation organized outside the model ensures a large enough starting mass of predators when
an insecure equilibrium exists.10


4.2       Comparative Statics of Globalization and Country Size

A key implication of the model is that equilibrium predation is invariant to globalization
(and the equivalent technological progress) in the model. Predation invariance implies that
insecurity of trade in poor countries is unlikely to fall from economic development and market
forces. Institutional change is needed to improve security.
       Invariance also implies that globalization (decline in trade costs) and productivity growth
   9
      Strictly speaking, the Ricardian model implies that each agent could incompletely specialize and con-
stitute an infinitesimal autarkic economy. More realistically, specialization is associated with sector specific
skills acquisition that make it efficient for individuals to specialize and use the domestic insecure market
for autarkic exchange. Anderson and Marcouiller (2005) analyze the pure Ricardian case with individual
autarkic incomplete specialization.
   10
      Coordination could be managed by a Mafia, analyzed in Section 5.1. Subsequent conflict over the
monopoly rents could end in the competitive free entry equilibrium.


                                                      20
have the same terms of trade effects in insecure and secure equilibrium. (The elasticity of
the terms of trade with respect to globalization or productivity growth is the same in secure
and insecure equilibrium.) In contrast, changes in relative country size do alter predation
and hence the terms of trade effects differ from the secure trade case.
    Predation invariance arises because (after multiplying both sides of (5) by a1 ) both (5)
and (7) imply that p is linear homogeneous in a1 /a∗2 given π. Then predation R∗ is invariant
and hence by equation (2) π does not change. The Cobb-Douglas Ricardian case here
conveniently illustrates a general property: there is no presumption that globalization or
technological progress will improve security.
    The general presumption holds up to relaxing in turn the Cobb-Douglas preferences and
Ricardian technology restrictions. Change first the Cobb-Douglas preferences of the model
to homothetic preferences. Then North’s export share for good 1 equal to 1 − γ in both
equations is replaced by 1 − γ(πp) while South’s expenditure share on good 1 γ in (7) is
replaced by γ(p). The Cobb-Douglas preferences case with elasticity of substitution equal
to 1 gives constant shares, hence Cobb-Douglas divides the cases where γ is decreasing in
relative price (elasticity greater than 1) from those where it is increasing in relative price
(elasticity less than one). Cobb-Douglas thus imposes an agnostic position on the effect of
endogenous expenditure share γ with respect to relative price. Similar arguments follow
about the effect of allowing general substitution in supply.11 Ricardian technology imposes
   11
      Let g(πp, L, K, a) denote the neoclassical GDP function for North, where K is a vector of endowments
other than labor and a is a technology parameter. South’s GDP function is g ∗ (p, L∗ , K ∗ , a∗ ). By Hotelling’s
Lemma, North’s supply of good 1 is gπp . With Cobb-Douglas preferences, North’s exports equal gπp −γg/πp.
South’s supply of good 2 is, after using the degree one homogeneity in prices of the GDP function, given by
g ∗ − gp∗ p. Then South’s export of good 2 is g ∗ − gp∗ p − (1 − γ)g ∗ . The terms of trade equation (7) becomes

                                                     γ − s∗ (p) g ∗
                                              πp =
                                                     s(πp) − γ g

where s(πp) and s∗ (p) are good 1’s share of GDP in North and South respectively. The equilibrium predation
equation (4) becomes
                                      p(1 − π)[s(πp) − γ]g/πpR∗ = gL
                                                                   ∗
                                                                     ∗.


The Ricardian case implies gπp πp/g = 1, gp∗ p/g = 0, and gL
                                                           ∗        ∗
                                                             ∗ = 1/a2 . In the general neoclassical case s, s
                                                                                                             ∗
      ∗
and gL∗ are increasing functions of p, with no presumption about their net effect at constant π on the new
versions of (5) and (7).



                                                       21
an agnostic position.
   Despite dependence of γ and a1 /a∗2 on the terms of trade in the general case, symmetric
globalization in (5) and (7) still implies predation invariance because symmetric globalization
also implies constant terms of trade. Asymmetric globalization will not generally imply
invariance, but the direction of change of predation is ambiguous.
   Return to the Ricardian Cobb-Douglas model to consider the terms of trade effects of
asymmetric globalization. A decline in North’s export cost to South is equivalent to a fall
in a1 in the model. The net effect is that π is constant and the entire fall in a1 is absorbed
by an improvement in South’s terms of trade, a fall in p. North ends up gaining none of
the productivity increase. Reversing the asymmetry, a fall in trade costs from South only
( equivalent to a fall in a∗2 ) results in the entire gain being absorbed by an improvement in
North’s terms of trade p at constant π. Symmetric globalization (technological progress)
has no effect on the terms of trade, all labor in the world enjoys a rise in real income. This
includes predators.
   Finally, consider the terms of trade and security effects of change in relative country size.
A rise in N − E relative to N ∗ − E ∗ increases predation, improves South’s terms of trade
and worsens North’s terms of trade. Increases in (N − E)/(N ∗ − E ∗ ) will at constant p
shift upward relative predator supply R∗ /(N ∗ − E ∗ ) less than proportionately, which in turn
shifts downward Π(p) less than proportionately. By (7), a rise in (N − E)/(N ∗ − E ∗ ) must
reduce πp more than proportionately, hence the line labeled “constant πp in Figure 1 shifts
down by more than does the line labeled Π(p). The leftward shift in the P (π) line must
intersect the Π(p) line somewhere along the new constant πp line, hence the new equilibrium
has both lower security π and lower p, better terms of trade for South. North terms of trade
πp deteriorate. In contrast to results with secure trade, South’s terms of trade improve at
less than the relative rate of growth of North. Part of the potential gain is lost to increasing
inefficiency due to rising predation.




                                              22
4.3    Comparative Statics of Enforcement

Enforcement in the form of patrols becomes profitable when effective enough relative to
predator efficiency. The garrisons of the East India Company’s settlements can be inter-
preted as North enforcement of this type, with the increasing proportion of such settlements
indicative of profit maximizing behavior. (The analysis abstracts from agency problems).
   The arrows in the Figure illustrate the effects of changes in enforcement efforts E and E ∗ .
The P (π) schedule shifts left as E ∗ rises and right as E rises due to the terms of trade effect
of reducing labor supply in North and South. The effect of enforcement on Π(p) is given by
differentiating (6) using (3) and (5). Enforcement acts directly via E to reduce R∗ in (5).
But indirectly, enforcement lowers R∗ because enforcement reduces productive labor and thus
lowers the payoff to predation. The net effect depends on the effectiveness of enforcement
parameter , inter alia. The arrows are drawn with the understanding that enforcement will
never be used unless the net effect is to reduce predation. Thus ΠE > 0, ΠE ∗ > 0. The effect
of North enforcement on P is given by differentiating (8) with respect to E:

                                             pγθ/(θ − 1)
                                 PE =                         .
                                        π + (1 − E)γθ/(θ − 1)

   The comparative statics of North enforcement are obtained from differentiating (6) and
(8) with respect to E:

                                   d ln π   ΠE + Π p P E
                                          =                                                 (10)
                                    dE      π(1 − Πp Pπ )
                                   d ln p   PE + Pπ Π E
                                          =                                                 (11)
                                    dE      p(1 − Πp Pπ )

The denominator above is positive, as shown in Section 4.1. The first term in the numerator
of the right hand side of each equation is the direct effect of North enforcement on security
and South’s inverse terms of trade p respectively. The second term is the cross effect. The
direct security effect of enforcement operates through the predator/prey relationship (2).


                                               23
The direct terms of trade effect of enforcement is a market size effect, as the productive
labor force in North relative to South falls.
   North’s terms of trade change is d ln πp = d ln π + d ln p, the sum of equations (10) and
(11). North’s terms of trade improve because

                                                             
                                  Πp p                   Pπ π
                               1+            PE /p + 1 +            ΠE /π > 0.
                                   π                      p

The bracketed terms are positive, as shown in Section 4.1, and both ΠE > 0 and PE > 0. In
contrast, South’s terms of trade deteriorate with North’s enforcement because PE + Pπ ΠE >
0. To see this, evaluate the total derivative of (8):

                                                  pγθ/(θ − 1)
                        P E + P π ΠE =                             (1 − EE ).
                                             π + (1 − E)γθ/(θ − 1)

EE < 1 for ( − 1)/ < E + E ∗ , the realistic range for positive enforcement.
   In contrast, South’s enforcement effort improves South’s terms of trade and may also
improve North’s terms of trade. The analysis substitutes PE ∗ < 0 for PE > 0 and ΠE ∗ > 0
for ΠE > 0 in (10)-(11).
   The analysis here differs substantially from simple intuition about predation on trade.
Predation is like a tax on trade with the revenue going to the predators. Reducing this
loss intuitively should help both seller and buyer. To make the contrast stark, suppose that
enforcement was free, so that raising E did not remove labor from productive activity. Then
PE = PE ∗ = 0, and both South and North have terms of trade improve from enforcement.
South predators switching to productive labor are paid their value of marginal product in
either activity, so there is no net effect at the margin. Reducing predation removes a pure
source of inefficiency with the gains split between North and South. The free enforcement
example reveals that it is the combination of costly enforcement and predation that makes
trade relations more conflicted than in standard trade policy analysis. (In contrast, the
appendix shows that with predation on South exports, the application of costless enforcement


                                                    24
makes trade relations conflicted. Combining the two cases, the source of conflict is the
combination of enforcement and predation.)
   The implication of the diagram and the comparative statics in (10)-(11) is that North’s
enforcement harms South via a negative terms of trade effect and South’s enforcement ordi-
narily harms North via a negative terms of trade effect. This arises due to the withdrawal of
labor for policing from the productive labor force and the further withdrawal of productive
labor into predation in South. South enforcement may improve the security of trade enough
to raise North terms of trade πp despite lowering p.
   A particularly stark implication of the analysis is that, starting from an insecure trade
equilibrium, the model can generate an enforcement equilibrium that is worse for South than
autarky. Strictly from the formal logic of the model, it is possible that reverse specialization
in South with secure exchange between locals could begin and would dominate insecure
exchange through South’s port. But internal exchange would be exposed to predation too,
and startup costs would inhibit its evolution. Given this plausible reality, nothing in the
model prevents point S being associated with a price to the right of a∗1 /a∗2 . The ability to
escape this bad equilibrium to autarky presumes a powerful enough South state to be able
to coordinate the choice of autarky, as noted in the discussion following Proposition 1.
   The local comparative statics of enforcement suggest implications for non-cooperative
Nash equilibrium of optimal enforcement and related potential for mutually beneficial agree-
ment on enforcement. As foreshadowed by the local comparative statics, there are two
cases, depending on whether dv/dE ∗ < (>)0 while dv ∗ /dE < 0. In the case where both
cross-effects are negative, Nash equilibrium implies excess enforcement and mutual benefit
is achieved by mutual reduction. Analogous to Nash tariffs, enforcement is over-used in
Nash equilibrium because it inflicts a negative externality via the terms of trade effect. The
case of dv/dE ∗ > 0 implies that mutual benefit is reached with North reducing Nash level
enforcement and South increasing it (from 0, its Nash level). Mutual benefit is achievable
in principle with North paying for South enforcers and adding a share of the surplus. More


                                              25
plausibly, as with local comparative statics, the conflict of interest suggests potential conflict
of force. Appendix Section 8 contains the details.



5     Controlled Predation

South institutions may plausibly arise that control predation directly rather than limiting
predators’ effectiveness with patrols. The mechanism of direct control is deterrence through
pursuit and punishment. The deterrence mechanism presupposes permanence of the au-
thority, so that would be predators find credible the commitment to pursue and punish.
Establishing the durability of the institution and its credibility is outside the model. For
simplicity deterrence is complete. The technology to enforce the permitted level of predation
requires a fixed and committed (effectively sunk) force of F ∗ units of labor.
    Two polar cases span the interesting range of institutions – a selfish South state (a Mafia
for emphasis) and a welfarist South state. F ∗ is common to both the welfarist South state
and the Mafia. In Section 5.1 North does not bargain with the Mafia state to reduce its
optimal level of predation, while in Section 5.3 North bargains with the Mafia state to obtain
secure trade in return for a tribute payment. The welfarist state in Section 5.2 bargains with
North for secure trade in exchange for a tribute payment.


5.1    Mafia Control

A Mafia state has the credible authority to control the entry/exit of predators. Considered
as a South state with permanence, it cares only for the ruler’s income (or, inessentially, the
per capita return to the Mafia gang of size F ∗ ). There are two sub-cases. In the first, North
does not attempt to bargain with the Mafia. (Perhaps North’s traders are uncoordinated,
or perhaps if coordinated they are ethically or legally constrained.) In the second, covered
in Section 5.3, North bargains with the Mafia state over tribute T ∗ to be secure in its trade.
    Assume the Mafia is a price taker, but understands the predator/prey determination of


                                               26
the probability of success 2. The Mafia maximizes its profit, the difference between the wage
bill R∗ /a∗2 and the expected revenue from extortion/theft. To deter entry the Mafia must
enlist a fixed size force F ∗ (the gang) assumed to be paid at the market rate 1/a∗2 . Mafias
organize only for insecure markets exceeding a critical size because the market must be large
enough to allow a non-negative profit. North trades only if Mafia dominated South offers
terms of trade π M pM ≥ a1 /a2 as in the competitive entry case. The conditions for existence
of insecure equilibrium change and some qualitative properties of equilibrium change.
   The labor market indifference equilibrium condition (4) is replaced by the Mafia first
order condition
                                                  L 1−π
                              p(1 − π)(1 − γ)                = 1/a∗2 .                     (12)
                                                a1 R ∗ 1 − E

The preceding analysis of equilibrium predation differs in some details from the free entry
case, but much of Figure 1 and its intuition still applies.
   Equilibrium predation is less than with free entry. In Figure 1 the Π(p, E, E ∗ ) function
shifts up and is positively sloped in contrast to the free entry of predators case. Solve (12)
for R∗ and substitute the resulting expression into (2) to yield (after solving the quadratic
equation for the positive root π)

                                                s
                                           1                  1 + N ∗ /N a1 1
                        ΠM (p) = 1 + θ/2 −           θ2 + 4                   .            (13)
                                           2                    1 − γ a∗2 p

ΠM (p) is increasing in p. (13) sets E = 0, inessentially.
   P (π, E, E ∗ ) is more steeply sloped and shifts to the right (F ∗ + R∗ falls if the Mafia is
to break even or better). Relative to competitive predation, North’s terms of trade improve
and South’s terms of trade deteriorate. The Mafia now earns a profit M. A capable South
state has an incentive to attack the Mafia, because even if the Mafia offered its entire profit
to the South state, this offer does not cover the loss from the terms of trade deterioration.
North, in contrast, has an incentive to protect the Mafia from attack by the South state.
   Profit M is equal to Mafia total revenue minus total cost, wages 1/a∗2 paid to R∗ + F ∗ .


                                                27
Substitute the profit maximizing level of R∗ solved from (12) into the Mafia profit to yield:


                        M(p, π) = pπ(1 − π)(1 − γ)L/a1 − F ∗ /a∗2 ≥ 0,


where the inequality is the necessary condition for Mafia participation. The Mafia partici-
pation condition can alternatively be expressed as

                                    p         1       F ∗ /N a2
                                        ≥ M                     .                          (14)
                                 a1 /a2  π (1 − π M ) 1 − γ a∗2

The smallest feasible value of p/(a1 /a2 ) for Mafia participation is given when (14) holds with
equality.
   North participation requires
                                                   p
                                       ΠM (p)          ≥ 1.
                                                a1 /a2

Using (14), the combination of Mafia and North participation implies

                                     F ∗ /N a2
                                             ∗
                                               ≥ 1 − ΠM (p).
                                     1 − γ a2

Evaluate ΠM using (13) at p = a∗1 /a∗2 as the highest feasible price consistent with South
benefit relative to autarky. Then:
   Proposition 2 Mafia-controlled predation equilibrium on North exports exists with South
benefit relative to autarky if

                                       "     s                      #
                         F ∗ /N a2   1               1 + N ∗ /N a
                                                                  1
                                   >     −θ + θ2 + 4                  .
                         1 − γ a∗2   2                 1 − γ a∗1

The condition in Proposition 2 is over-sufficient because it may be feasible to drive p lower
than South’s autarky terms of trade.
   The implications of Proposition 2 in terms of the model are intuitive. The right hand
side of the inequality is decreasing in θ. Higher θ reduces Π(p) given p, thus implying higher


                                                28
equilibrium p to satisfy the North participation condition. Higher F ∗ /N requires higher p
to meet the Mafia participation condition

                                pΠM (p)[1 − ΠM (p)   F ∗ /N a2
                                                   >           .
                                      a1 /a2         1 − γ a∗2

5.1.1   Comparative Statics of Trade with Mafia Predation

The comparative statics of security with a Mafia follow readily. Changes in F ∗ have no
effect on equilibrium p, π but shift M in the opposite direction. The comparative statics of
enforcement in the form of patrols have exactly the same sign pattern as in the competitive
case. The comparative statics of discrete changes introduce the possibility of flipping from
a Mafia equilibrium to a competitive one, or vice versa. Local directions of change inform
the possibilities and are developed below.
   The local comparative statics of Mafia predation with respect to trade costs and tech-
nology change differ from the competitive case and more closely resemble the secure trade
case. Symmetric trade cost changes have no effect on the effective a1 /a∗2 , while asymmetric
rises in North’s export cost relative to South will increase the effective a1 /a∗2 . Rises in N ∗ /N
and a1 /a∗2 raise equilibrium p and have ambiguous effect on equilibrium π. North’s terms
of trade πp improve and South’s terms of trade 1/p deteriorate. Rises in θ reduce π, harm
North’s terms of trade and have ambiguous effect on South’s terms of trade. The table below
summarizes results for the Mafia and competitive cases.

                              Competitive        Case Mafia               Case
                   Rise in:   N ∗ /N, a1 /a∗2     θ   N ∗ /N, a1 /a∗2      θ
                     πp       +                   -   +                    -
                      π       ?                   ?   ?                    -
                      p       ?                   ?   +                    ?




                                                29
5.2    Welfarist South State

A powerful welfarist South state is a useful benchmark for the context of weak South in-
stitutions. The state can impose a tribute charge T ∗ on North traders in return for the
enforcement it provides. A preliminary matter is whether South commits F ∗ whether it is
paid tribute T ∗ or not. A South state strong enough that it commits F ∗ regardless of North
is a North’s actions is presumably strong enough to deter a Mafia rival: it is a North-type
state. The relevant case for North-South trade is a South state that needs a tribute payment
from North to be able commit F ∗ . Then South and North’s institution bargain over the size
of payment.
   To formally characterize elimination of the North-type state in South, assume that
South’s welfare with insecure equilibrium is larger than with uncompensated elimination
of predation: Assumption L South Strength Limit

                                                             1−γ
                                                  N∗ − F ∗
                                              
                      ∗   ∗   ∗
                     v (F , T ) < v(0, 0) ⇒                         π(0)γ < 1.
                                                  N ∗ − R∗

The condition on the right is obtained using the equilibrium price expressions. While R∗
and π are endogenous variables, some intuition may be drawn from the rightmost inequality.
Evidently F ∗ < R∗ is necessary for violation of the condition. For given R∗ , π is decreasing
in θ, the relative effectiveness of predators. Manipulating other parameters to maintain R∗ ,
the increase in θ required to satisfy the inequality can be achieved.
   Modeling tribute T ∗ as a bargained transfer is convenient, standing in for both bargained
trade taxes or annual tribute charges. The necessary condition for South’s power to make
such deals is that it can eliminate (for simplicity) predation due to its permanent authority.
This power also makes its commitment to the bargain credible to North. North’s credibil-
ity is outside the model, provided by a strong permanent government in the case of trade
agreements or a monopoly firm such as the British East India Company. (In contrast, unco-
ordinated North traders cannot coordinate on an offer of T ∗ due to the free rider problem.)


                                              30
   The welfarist South state’s payoff if it enforces is v ∗ (F ∗ , T ∗ ) = p̃(F ∗ , T ∗ )−γ [(N ∗ −F ∗ )/a∗2 +
T ∗ ] where p̃ is the secure equilibrium price and T ∗ /a∗2 is the tribute paid by North to trade
securely at that price. The secure equilibrium price is

                                                   γ (N ∗ − F ∗ )/a∗2 + T ∗
                               p̃(F ∗ , T ∗ ) =                             .                            (15)
                                                  1−γ     N/a1 − T ∗

North gets payoff v(T ∗ ) = p̃1−γ (N/a1 − T ∗ ).
   The common Cobb-Douglas preferences in the model imply that the bargaining model
has the transferable utility property. Thus under Assumption L, efficient bargaining reduces
to finding T ∗ that maximizes joint welfare:


                               max
                                ∗
                                  [v ∗ (T ∗ ) − v ∗ (0)]ω [v(T ∗ ) − v(0)]1−ω
                                T



where ω is South’s bargaining power. The first order condition implies that T ∗S satisfies

                                                 ω
                       v(T ∗S ) − v(0) =            [v ∗ (T ∗S ) − v ∗ (0)]p̃(F ∗ , T ∗S ).              (16)
                                                1−ω

   Participation by both North and South requires that the required F ∗ not be too large
relative to the size of the trade. If this condition is met, the transfer (tribute) payment T ∗
divides the surplus with p̃ determined competitively by (15). A small enough required F ∗
could always make trade possible, even if the condition of Proposition 1 is violated. Too
large an F ∗ could make secure trade unattainable even if insecure trade is feasible.
   The details follow from analysis of the participation constraints. Consider North paying
South for its fixed cost F ∗ /a∗2 in numeraire units. Set the most favorable price for North p∗a ,
guaranteeing South’s participation at its autarky utility. North benefits and
   Proposition 3 Secure trade enforced by a tributary South state arises if

                                                1−γ
                                          p∗a
                                      
                                                               N
                                                       ≥                   .
                                          pa               N − F ∗ a1 /a∗2


                                                           31
The sufficient condition in Proposition 3 uses pa = a1 /a2 to simplify North’s participation
condition. Sufficiency is more likely the larger the difference in autarky relative prices (the
more important is comparative advantage) and less likely the larger is fixed enforcement cost
F ∗.
       The bargain will have larger T ∗ > F ∗ /a∗2 the more favorable is South’s bargaining power.
Greater bargaining power for South means more favorable North terms of trade p̃(F ∗ , T ∗ ) in
the bargained solution. Intuitively, the larger economy gets more of the gains from trade in
the bargain.
       The analysis so far implies that North prefers a strong South to a weak one. In contrast,
the India example by Chaudhuri’s account suggests that over time the Company shifted trade
to weak South principalities away from the strong South state at Surat. It also suggests a
potential Company interest in encouraging local princes to separate from Mughal power.
The model needs to be more complex with the South economy understood as not having a
unitary welfarist state over all its territory. The next section begins this understanding with
analysis of an alternative selfish ruler in South.


5.3       Mafia Tribute

North can pay tribute to the Mafia not to prey on the goods, improving on the passive
acceptance of the limited predation of Section 5.1. A key result of this section is that North
will always prefer the Mafia tribute equilibrium to a tribute equilibrium with welfarist South.
       A tax equivalence intuition for the tribute situation seems natural: insecurity is like a
tax on trade, tax incidence is shared, so paying off the predators should help both buyer and
seller. The equivalence is false because the interest of South’s weak welfarist government and
the Mafia diverge. First, tribute frees the Mafia from paying predators to collect the extortion
payments. They now earn their pay from productive work, but the real income of the workers
falls because of the terms of trade effect (more South productive labor worsens terms of
trade via the size effect). Divergence of interest holds even when the South government and


                                                 32
the Mafia split the tribute paid (as with the revenue from Mafia extortion without tribute
analysis of Section 5.1). Splitting tribute with the South government is consistent with a
Nash Bargaining equilibrium in the face of a government threat to break up the Mafia, or
more weakly to raise its fixed cost F ∗ . Because of the terms of trade deterioration of South,
the sum of Mafia profit plus South income falls in real terms, hence the Mafia cannot pay
enough to South’s government to induce it to prefer the Tribute equilibrium.
   Divergence of interest occurs more dramatically and consequentially when North offers
tribute directly to the Mafia along with a promise to help defend the Mafia from its govern-
ment. In this case South’s government is too weak to prevent the Tribute agreement, and
moreover loses its previous share of the Mafia profit. Effectively the Mafia becomes the state
in this equilibrium.
   Even more poignant, a powerful welfarist South state will be unable to secure a tribute
equilibrium with the North: North will always be able to get a better deal from the Mafia.
The intuition is that the Mafia does not care about the South people, so there is a bigger
surplus for North to obtain from dealing with the Mafia than with the South. The Mafia’s
outside option is the profit it earns with limited predation in Section Mafia. F ∗ is already
committed. In contrast the South state outside option is the insecure equilibrium with
F ∗ = 0. The North can always offer some T ∗M < F ∗ to the Mafia and obtain a surplus,
while there is no deal possible with the South welfarist state in this range. As long as
T ∗M < T ∗S , North will prefer the Mafia. Even with parameter values such that the Nash
bargained tribute T ∗S would be less than the Nash bargained T ∗M analyzed below, the
Mafia can always deter entry by the welfarist state by accepting an entry deterring tribute
T ∗M L < T ∗S . The Mafia may be driven by this outside competition to take T ∗M L such that
it makes less profit than before North traded off South against the Mafia, but the end result
is a Mafia deal with North, not welfarist South.
   The Mafia’s deal with the North yields a payment T ∗M that the Mafia receives to guaran-
tee secure trade (R∗ = 0 ⇒ π = 1) to North. Mafia surplus from the deal is T ∗M −M0 where


                                              33
the Mafia’s initial profit = M0 = pM π M (1 − π M )(1 − γ)L/a1 − F ∗ /a∗2 . To put the valuation
of the surplus on real income terms for comparability with the treatment of South’s welfarist
state, multiply by the surplus by p(T ∗M )γ . North’s gain is (pT )1−γ (N −T )/a1 −(pM )1−γ N/a1 .
p(T ∗M ) is solved from equation (15) evaluated at T ∗M .
    The Nash bargaining solution for the tribute payment (suppressing the irrelevant 1/a1 )
solves
                  max[(T − M0 )p(T )− γ]ω [(pT )1−γ (N − T ) − (pM )1−γ N ]1−ω
                   T


where ω ∈ (0, 1) is the bargaining parameter. The first order condition yields:

                                                 ω
                         v(T ∗M ) − v M (0) =       (T − M0 )p(T ∗M ),
                                                1−ω

where v M (0) denotes the utility earned by North in the Mafia controlled predatory equilib-
rium. Tribute T ∗M differs from T ∗S in Section 5.2 in that the selfish government’s (Mafia’s)
objective function differs from the from the welfarist government’s objective function. Propo-
sition 2 gives the a parametric sufficient condition for existence of a Mafia equilibrium. This
condition is over-sufficient for the tributary Mafia equilibrium with tribute T ∗M .
    The analysis differs only inessentially when predators prey on South’s export.



6     Conclusion

A Ricardian model of trade subject to predation yields new qualifications to the gains from
trade proposition. Poor countries (South) with weak institutions can lose from insecure trade,
especially when predation (extortion and theft) is controlled by a Mafia. The terms of trade
determine division of global gains from trade as in the standard Ricardian model, but terms
of trade effects are amplified by an endogenous size effect as predators and enforcers move
into or out of the labor force. Countries with strong institutions (North) have incentives to
resist South’s efforts to improve its situation with enforcement or anti-Mafia action. While


                                                34
the model is very simple, its lessons seem likely to obtain in more complex economic and
political settings.
   Unlike standard trade agreements theory, the institutional asymmetry of North and South
may prevent sharing the gains from trade. Standard trade agreements theory implicitly
assumes a world of capable states. Asymmetric capability as in the model of this paper
suggests a starting point for thinking about alternative design for North-South relationships.
The US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and similar laws in other rich countries may limit
the institutional problems for South caused by trade with North. Perhaps limits to use of
mercenary armies by North para-state actors are justified. Perhaps amendment to WTO
obligations or regional trade agreements might limit potential harm to South.
   Future application and development of the model looks promising in two directions. First,
the comparative statics of the model suggest an approach to empirical work on the cross
section variation of security of international trade and its relation to conflict and colonial-
type international relations. The type of institution observed can potentially be related to
comparative advantage, geography and South labor market conditions. Second, extensions
of the theoretical model could develop the implications for potential conflict involving North
institutions and rival predatory and welfarist South institutions in a dynamic setting where
the durability of the rival South powers is endogenous and North’s institutions that may
invest in the conflict may include both an altruistic state and a profit maximizing firm not
completely controlled by the North state. The degree to which welfarist South government
can succeed may be related to the deep economic parameters of the model.




                                              35
   References
   Anderson, James E. and Douglas Marcouiller (2002), “Insecurity and the Pattern of
Trade: An Empirical Investigation”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(2), 345-52.
   Anderson, James E. and Douglas Marcouiller (2005), “Anarchy and Autarky: Endoge-
nous Predation as a Barrier to Trade” International Economic Review, 46, 189-214.
   Andrade, Tonio (2004), “The Company’s Chinese Pirates: How the Dutch East India
Company Tried to Lead a Coalition of Pirates to War against China, 1621-1662”, Journal
of World History, 15 (4), 415-444.
   Bagwell, Kyle and Robert Staiger (2004), The Economics of the World Trading System,
Cambridge: MIT Press.
   Chaudhuri, K.N. (1978), The Trading World of Asia and the English East India Company,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Frankel, Jeffrey A. (2010), “The Natural Resource Curse: A Survey”, NBER WP No.
15836.
   Garfinkel, Michelle and Stergios Skaperdas (2007), “ Economics of Conflict: An Overview”,
Chapter 22 in Handbook of Defense Economics, vol. 2, pp 649-709, Elsevier.
   Grossman, Herschel I. (2002), ””Make us a king”: anarchy, predation, and the state,”
European Journal of Political Economy, Elsevier, vol. 18(1), pages 31-46, March.
   Nunn, Nathan and Daniel Trefler (2014), “Domestic Institutions as a Source of Compar-
ative Advantage”, Handbook of International Economics, Elsevier.
   Ricardo, David (1817), On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation.
   Smith, Adam (1776), The Wealth of Nations.
   Weber, Max (2015), “Politics as a Vocation”, Weber’s Rationalism and Modern Society
Translated and Edited by Tony Waters and Dagmar Waters, Palgrave MacMillan.




                                            36
7      Appendix 1: Predation on South Exports Case

If the predation by South raiders is on South goods coming into the market, the equilibrium
terms of trade for North are determined by

                                                           p     γ L∗ /a∗2
                          (1 − γ)pL/a1 = γπL∗ /a∗2 ⇒         =             .                         (17)
                                                           π   1 − γ L/a1

The South labor market indifference condition in terms of South’s product is market wage
equal to per predator return to predation ⇒ 1/a∗2 = (1 − π)(1 − γ)L∗ /R∗ . This implies that
predation on South goods, if it exists, is inelastic to the terms of trade. 1−π = (1−E)(N −E+
N ∗ −E ∗ −R∗ )/(N −E +N ∗ −E ∗ +θR∗ ), and substituting this expression into the indifference
condition yields a quadratic equation in R∗ as a function of the exogenous N, N ∗ , E, E ∗ and
the parameters  and θ. Thus Π(p) is invariant to p.12 The resulting insecure equilibrium, if
it exists, is shown in Figure 2. P (π) is given by p = π(γL∗ a1 )/[(1 − γ)La∗2 ] by (17), yielding
a ray from the origin in log space, with slope equal to the inverse of North’s terms of trade
p/π. The price p0 associated with certainty (ln π = 0) is given by

                                                   γ N ∗ /a∗2
                                          p0 =                .
                                                 1 − γ N/a1
  12
    It is convenient to solve for r∗ = R∗ /N ∗ , the proportion of population engaged in predation. Define
n = N/N ∗ and evaluate at zero enforcement. The roots of the quadratic are complex, with real parts that
both may lie in the unit interval. If so, use the smaller root.




                                                   37
                           Figure 2. Insecure Equilibrium: South on South Predation



                                                         rise in E*



           0                                                                   π=1
                                                Rise in E+E*

                                                                                rise in E

                                                                                      ∏(p)
                                                           S
    ln π




                                           )
                                       π
                                    P(




                                               ln p                    ln p0



   The implications are simpler than in the case of predation on North’s export. E and
E ∗ act directly on North’s terms of trade by rotating the P (π) schedule. Shifts in the Π(p)
schedule have no effect on North’s terms of trade p/π. In contrast, South’s terms of trade
move inversely to security. The implications for enforcement policy are that each opposes the
other’s enforcement, as follows. For North enforcement E increases, the rightward rotation
in P (π) guarantees a rise in North’s terms of trade p/π. The upward shift in Π(p) induces
a further rise in p, a further deterioration in South’s terms of trade. South enforcement E ∗
raises p and harms North by lowering p/π. South’s gain in terms of trade is offset by the
upward shift in Π(p) but South may still gain on net.


7.1            Mafia Predation by South on South Goods

As with predation on North goods, the indifference condition of predator free entry is re-
placed by a monopoly Mafia selection of the profit maximizing number of predators based on
understanding the predator prey relationship taking prices and the productive labor supply
as given. The analysis remains qualitatively identical to the free entry case and the logic of

                                                               38
Figure 2 continues to hold. The difference is that predation is lower and the Mafia makes a
profit M.



8     Appendix 2: Optimal Enforcement and Interaction

Enforcement of the temporary sort (patrols) is worthwhile to North or South states if it
increases utility. Enforcement must be paid for by labor drawn from production, a cost to
be set against the benefit of enforcement.
    North utility is v(pπ, E) = (pπ)1−γ (N −E)/a1 with South predation on North exports and
(p/π)1−γ (N − E)/a1 with South predation on South exports. Let p̃, π̃ denote the equilibrium
p, π pairs for any given levels of enforcement, depicted in Figures 1 and 2 as the intersection
points. The comparative statics in the preceding sections have signed the derivatives of the
reduced form functions p̃(E, E ∗ ) and π̃(E, E ∗ ). South’s reduced form utility is p−γ (N ∗ −
E ∗ )/a∗2 whether predation is on North goods or South goods.
    The rate of change of North’s utility with respect to own enforcement against South on
North predation is
                              d ln v           d ln(p̃π̃)     1
                                     = (1 − γ)            −                                (18)
                               dE                 dE        N −E

The right hand side gives the net benefit of shifting the fraction 1/(N − E) of North’s
population from production and trade to enforcement that reaps an improvement in the
terms of trade. Costless initial enforcement (N − E → ∞) would always be beneficial for
North, as in the classic optimal tariff analysis of terms of trade motives for tariffs. Allowing
for costly enforcement, as with costly collection of tariffs, raises the bar for initial active
policy to be desirable. Allowing for North labor to be relatively more effective with high A
lowers the bar for North enforcement to be desirable.
    The rate of change of South’s utility with respect to own enforcement is

                                d ln v ∗      d ln p̃     1
                                     ∗
                                         = −γ         − ∗     .                            (19)
                                 dE            dE      N − E∗

                                              39
The first term is always positive when predation is on North exports, and may be negative
or positive when predation is on South exports. For South on South predation, North’s
marginal payoff (18) changes to replace p̃π̃ with p̃/π̃. The analysis is essentially similar.
South’s payoff to own enforcement has the same form as in (19). In both cases the terms of
trade derivatives change to reflect the changing cases.
   Turning to the interaction of enforcement policies, suppose that North finds initial en-
forcement to be welfare improving. South may or may not find enforcement to be welfare
improving. Figure 3 below depicts enforcement space at Nash equilibrium. Point N has
E > 0 and E ∗ ≥ 0. South always loses from North enforcement, so South’s utility rises as
E falls. In contrast, North may gain or lose with South enforcement when predation is on
North exports. This results in two different iso-utility curves for North in Figure 3. The
shaded lens of mutually beneficial enforcement pairs that dominate Nash equilibrium thus
lies either down and to the right of N (when South enforcement is beneficial to North) or
down and to the left (when South enforcement harms North). When predation is on South
exports, North always loses from South enforcement, and the lens of mutually beneficial
enforcement pairs lies down and to the left of point N.




                                             40
                                     Figure 3. Mutually Beneficial Enforcement




                  V, dV/dE*<0 case




                                                               V, dV/dE*>0 case
    E




                                                   N




                                                                                  V*




                                                     E*



   When both countries engage in positive enforcement against predation on North’s export
or on South’s export, point N implies too much enforcement. As with tariffs, the terms of
trade motive for enforcement results in excessive enforcement in equilibrium. Because of the
waste involved in removing productive labor, Nash equilibrium resembles the beggar-thy-
neighbor trade policy model of 1930’s unemployment situations. Negotiated agreement on
enforcement resembles tariff negotiations. So far, so familiar.
   In contrast, consider the implications of point N lying at E ∗ = 0. In this case, the lens of
mutually beneficial enforcement policies is infeasible. Within the scope of the model, South
can do nothing; its best move is to accept North’s equilibrium enforcement choice. Outside
the model, conflict is suggested. South may choose resistance to impede or destroy E. The
other possibility is that North benefits from South enforcement against predation on North’s
export, so the lens of mutually beneficial enforcement slopes down and to the right from N



                                                          41
located at E > 0, E ∗ = 0. North can afford to pay South to enforce while reducing its own
enforcement. This equilibrium may be achieved with some conflict but suggests a degree of
benign paternalistic coordination resembling colonialism in some historical forms.
   A remaining possibility is that North enforcement is so comparatively cheap and effective
that elimination of predation is optimal. In that case South gains too, as the initial table
reported. But this is true only for the case of predation on North’s export. South loses when
predation on South’s export is eliminated.
   Section 8.1 draws out the comparative statics of optimal enforcement equilibrium.


8.1    Comparative Statics of Optimal Enforcement

Shifts in technology or trade costs alter the equilibrium values of π and p, and change the
enforcement incentives. Symmetric trade cost changes have no effect on the equilibrium
while utility of both parties rises uniformly as the trade cost falls. If iceberg costs from
North to South fall, in contrast, the equilibrium shifts. The price of North’s export becomes
pπ/τ , utility is v = (pπ/τ )1−γ (N − E)/a1 = (pπ)1−γ (N − E)/τ 1−γ . The equilibrium price is

                                       γ N ∗ − E ∗ − R∗ τ a1
                               pπ =                          .
                                      1−γ    N −E        a∗2

Effectively, a fall in τ is like a productivity improvement (fall in a1 ) in North. The fall in
τ thus raises R∗ from (5). Both forces lower pπ, hence P (π) in Figure 1 shifts left; Pτ < 0.
The rise in R∗ due to the fall in τ lowers Π(p) in Figure 1; Πτ < 0. While the directions of
change of ln p and ln π are indeterminate, the same steps used to sign dpπ/dE reveal that
dpπ/dτ < 0: North’s terms of trade deteriorate due to its effective growth in size.
   Interior Nash equilibrium enforcement is a rather implausible outcome and technically
intricate in this setting. A plausible special case is where South does not choose to enforce,
E ∗ = 0 in Nash equilibrium. Then the knock on effect of a fall in trade costs from North
to South is ordinarily an increased incentive for resistance to North enforcement by South


                                              42
because utility falls with a rise in E.




                                          43
