NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AI AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Avi Goldfarb
Daniel Trefler
Working Paper 24254
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24254

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018

The authors thank Dave Donaldson and Hal Varian for their thoughtful feedback. Trefler
acknowledges the support of the “Institutions, Organizations and Growth” Program of the
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24254.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Avi Goldfarb and Daniel Trefler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

AI and International Trade
Avi Goldfarb and Daniel Trefler
NBER Working Paper No. 24254
January 2018
JEL No. F1,O33
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the international dimensions of the economics of artificial intelligence.
Trade theory emphasizes the roles of scale, competition, and knowledge creation and knowledge
diffusion as fundamental to comparative advantage. We explore key features of AI with respect to
these dimensions and describe the features of an appropriate model of international trade in the
context of AI. We then discuss policy implications with respect to investments in research, and
behind-the-border regulations such as privacy, data localization, standards, and competition. We
conclude by emphasizing that there is still much to learn before we have a comprehensive
understanding of how AI will affect trade.

Avi Goldfarb
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
agoldfarb@rotman.utoronto.ca
Daniel Trefler
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
dtrefler@rotman.utoronto.ca

AI and International Trade
The last 200 years have produced a remarkable list of major innovations, not the least of which is
artificial intelligence (AI). Like other major innovations, AI will likely raise average incomes and
improve well-being, but it may also disrupt labor markets, raise inequality and drive non-inclusive
growth. Yet, even to the extent that progress has been made in understanding the impact of AI,
we remain largely uninformed about its international dimensions. This is to our great loss. A
number of countries are currently negotiating international agreements that will constrain the
ability of sovereign governments to regulate AI, such as NAFTA and TPP-11. Likewise,
governments around the world are freely spending public funds on new AI clusters designed to
shift international comparative advantage towards their favored regions, including the Vector
Institute in Toronto and the Tsinghua-Baidu deep learning lab around Beijing. The international
dimensions of AI innovations and policies have not always been well thought out. This work
begins the conversation.
China has become the focal point for much of the international discussion. The U.S.
narrative has it that Chinese protection has reduced the ability of dynamic U.S. firms such as
Google and Amazon to penetrate Chinese markets. This protection has allowed China to develop
significant commercial AI capabilities, as evidenced by companies such as Baidu (a search engine
like Google), Alibaba (an e-commerce web portal like Amazon), and Tencent (the developer of
WeChat, which can be seen as combining the functions of Skype, Facebook and Apple Pay). While
no Chinese AI-intensive company has household recognition outside of China, everyone agrees
that this will not last. Further, a host of behind-the-border regulatory asymmetries will help
Chinese firms to penetrate Canadian and U.S. markets.
Even the Pentagon is worried. Chinese guided-missile systems are sufficiently
sophisticated that they may disrupt how we think of modern warfare; large and expensive military
assets such as aircraft carriers are becoming overly vulnerable to smart weapons.1 This may do
more than transform the massive defense industry; these AI developments may radically shift the
global balance of power.
As international economists, we are used to hype and are typically dismissive of it. Despite
AI’s short life – Agrawal, Gans, and Goldfarb (2017) date its commercial birth to 2012 – AI’s rapid
insinuation into our daily economic and social activities forces us to evaluate the international
1

New York Times, February 3, 2017. See also Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence, Office of the
President, October, 2016.

1

implications of AI and propose best-policy responses. Current policy responses often rest on a
U.S. narrative of a zero-sum game in which either the U.S. or China will win. 2 Is this the right
premise for examining AI impacts and for developing AI policies? Further, calls for immediate
action by prominent experts such as Bill Gates, Stephen Hawking and Elon Musk will likely
encourage governments to loosen their pocket books, but will government subsidies be effective
in promoting broad-based prosperity or will subsidies become yet another form of ineffective
corporate welfare? What specific policies are likely to tip the balance away from ineffective
corporate handouts?
Using comparative advantage theory, trade economists have thought long and hard about
the right mix of policies for successfully promoting industry. Many of our theories imply a laissezfaire free-trade approach. However, since the early 1980s our theories have shown that certain
types of government interventions may be successful, e.g., Krugman (1980), Grossman and
Helpman (1991), and the more informal theories of Porter (1990). These theories emphasize the
role of scale and the role of knowledge creation and diffusion. Unfortunately, the precise policy
prescriptions produced by these theories are very sensitive to the form of scale and the form of
knowledge creation/diffusion. And competition can play an important role too, e.g., Aghion et al.

(2001, 2005) and Lin, Trefler and Yu (2017).
We therefore start in section 2 by identifying the key features of AI technology in regard
to scale and knowledge. To date there are no models that feature the particular scale and
knowledge characteristics that are empirically relevant for AI. In section 3 we use these features
(1) to offer some suggestions for what an appropriate model might look like and (2) to draw
implications for policy. This leads to high-level thinking about policy. For example, it provides a
foundation for our positive assessment of recent proposals put forward by AI researcher Geoff
Hinton and others on the potential benefit of public investments in AI. 3 However, these models
are not sufficiently fine-grained to directly capture existing regulatory issues that “go behind the
border” such as privacy policy, data localization, technology standards and industrial regulation.
In section 4 we therefore review the many behind-the-border policies that already impact AI and
discuss their implications for comparative advantage and the design of trade agreements. We
begin with a factual overview of the international dimensions of AI.

E.g., https://www.economist.com/news/business/21725018-its-deep-pool-data-may-let-it-lead-artificialintelligence-china-may-match-or-beat-america and http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-chinaartificialintelligence/u-s-weighs-restricting-chinese-investment-in-artificial-intelligence-idUSKBN1942OX?il=0
3
“Artificial intelligence is the future, and Canada can seize it” by Jordan Jacobs, Tomi Poutanen, Richard Zemel,
Geoffrey Hinton and Ed Clark. Globe and Mail, January 7, 2017.
2

2

1. FROM HYPE TO POLICY
Statistics about where AI is being done internationally and how it is diffusing can be tracked in a
number of ways, e.g., the number of basic research articles, patents and patent citations produced
in a region; the number of start-ups established in a region; or the market capitalization of
publicly traded AI-based companies in a region. We look at two of these indicators: basic research
and market capitalization. For the former, we collected time-series data on the institutional
affiliation of all authors of papers presented at a major AI research conference, namely, the
Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) Conference on Artificial
Intelligence. In table 1, we compare the 2012 and 2017 conferences. In 2012, 41 percent of authors
were at U.S. institutions, but by 2017 this was down to 34 percent. The two other largest declines
were recorded by Canada and Israel. While these countries all increased their absolute number of
participants, in relative terms they all lost ground to China, which leapt from 10 percent in 2012
to 24 percent in 2017.
Table 1. Participants at a Major AI Conference

Notes: Participation rates at the Association for the Advancement of
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
For example, of the papers presented at the 2017 conference, 34
percent of authors had a U.S. affiliation.

3

We have not examined patent numbers, but suggestive work by Fujii and Managi (2017)
points to weaker international diffusion of AI: U.S. technology giants such as IBM and Microsoft
remain far and away the world’s dominant patent applicants.
Another indication of the economic future of AI comes from the largest public companies
in the world by market capitalization. Table 2 lists the 12 largest companies worldwide. What is
striking about the table is the number of companies that might subjectively be described as “AI
intensive.” Seven of the 12 companies are heavily engaged in AI (such as Alphabet/Google), three
are in finance (where the use of AI is growing rapidly) and one has a substantial pharmaceutical
presence (where AI is likely to soon be reducing development costs). What makes table 2 relevant
for international trade is the fact that two of the largest companies worldwide are now Chinese
AI-intensive firms (Tencent and Alibaba). It is truly remarkable that two high-tech companies
based out of China – private companies, not state-owned enterprises – are among the largest
companies in the world. While we had to move beyond the round number of 10 to make this point,
it is striking nonetheless. It points to the major global shake-up that is coming.
Table 2. World’s Largest Public Companies and AI Exposure

Notes: Market capitalization of the largest public companies as of March 31,
2017, from PWC (2017). “AI Exposure” is our subjective assessment of the
role of AI in company performance.

Some would conclude from tables 1 and 2 that almost all of the world’s largest companies
will soon be competing directly against Chinese companies when – not if – these Chinese
4

companies go global. In 2000, Robin Li signaled his agreement by moving to China to establish
Baidu. The flood of U.S.-trained talent returning to China has continued. This year, former
Microsoft executive Qi Lu joined Baidu as COO. In describing China, Lu writes, “We have an
opportunity to lead in the future of AI.” 4 Not everyone agrees. Some have argued that China’s AIintensive companies will not be globally competitive until they compete head on in China with
global leaders such as Google. This flies in the face of a long history of Chinese export successes
in other fields. Indeed, Sutton and Trefler (2016) describe both theoretically and empirically how
developing countries such as China initially enter new markets at a low level of quality, but over
time develop the capabilities to deliver high-quality, internationally competitive goods and
services.
Many experts are weighing in on how to counter the “Chinese threat” and, more generally,
how to enrich local economies through cluster policies that support sustained competitive
advantage in AI-based market segments. Geoff Hinton and collaborators have convinced
Canadian governments to develop a major AI institute that would “graduate the most machinelearning PhDs and Masters students globally” and “become the engine for an AI supercluster that
drives the economy of Toronto, Ontario and Canada.” 5 Hinton also emphasizes the importance of
access to data. “Why? Because for a machine to “think” intelligently, it must be trained with lots
of data.”
While we are supportive of Hinton’s initiative, it raises two important points that loom
large in our thinking. First, economists who specialize in clusters are deeply skeptical about the
efficacy of cluster policies (e.g., Duranton, 2011). Such policies have failed more often than not
and the theoretical justification for cluster policies is highly sensitive to assumptions about
knowledge diffusion. For example, will Hinton’s PhDs stay in Canada and will the knowledge they
generate be commercialized in Canada? Second, a host of behind-the-border regulations on
privacy, data localization, technology standards and industrial policy will affect the ability of
Canadian firms to access data relative to their competitors in larger markets such as the U.S.,
Europe and China. What is the current state of these domestic data regulations, how do they effect
trade patterns, do they serve a public interest, are they being used as disguised protection to
generate comparative advantage, and should they be covered by international trade agreements
(as some would have been in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) e-commerce chapter)?

4
5

The Economist, July 15 2017.
Globe and Mail, January 7, 2017.

5

The following sections help answer these questions and move us towards better policies
for promoting AI and preventing both corporate welfare and welfare-reducing disguised
protection.
2. THE TECHNOLOGICAL BACKDROP:
SCALE, SCOPE, FIRM SIZE AND KNOWLEDGE DIFFUSION
The Oxford English Dictionary defines AI as “the theory and development of computer
systems able to perform tasks normally requiring human intelligence.” This has meant different
things at different times. In the 1960s and 1970s, computer scientists approached this using rules,
if-then statements, and symbolic logic. It worked well for factory robots and for playing chess. By
the 1980s, it became clear that symbolic logic could not deal with the complexities of non-artificial
settings, and AI research slowed substantially. Various approaches continued to be supported in
a small number of locations, including by the Canadian Institute for Advanced Studies (CIFAR).
The recent resurgence in AI research is driven by one such approach: the insight that
computers can “learn” from example. This approach is often called “machine learning” and is a
field of computational statistics. The algorithm that has received the most attention is back
propagation in neural networks, most notably through “deep learning,” but there is a large suite
of relevant technologies including deep learning, reinforcement learning, etc. Because the current
excitement about AI is driven by machine learning, we focus on this particular set of algorithms
here.
For our purposes, we need to zero in on those aspects of AI technology that are central to
thinking about the economics of AI. We identify four aspects: economies of scale associated with
data, economies of scale associated with an AI research team, economies of scope in the use of the
team for multiple applications, and knowledge externalities.
A. Economies of Scale from Data
Statistical predictions improve with the quantity and quality of data. Recall from statistics 101
that the quality of prediction increases with N (or, more precisely with root N). All else being
equal, this means that companies that have more observations will generate more accurate
predictions. It is in this sense that economies of scale matter. Still, because predictions increase
in root N, then, while scale matters, there are decreasing returns to scale in terms of the accuracy
of prediction.

6

It is subtler than this, however. Google and Microsoft both operate search engines. Google
has claimed their search engine has higher market share because it has better quality. 6 Microsoft
has claimed the higher quality is a direct consequence of scale. By having more data, Google can
predict what people want in their search results more accurately. Google responds that Microsoft
has billions of search results. While Google has more data, surely the law of large numbers applies
before one billion results. And so, more data does not give a meaningful advantage. Microsoft’s
response is the essence of where economies of scale bind. While they have billions of searches,
many search queries are extremely rare. Microsoft may only see two or three. And so Google can
predict those rare queries much better. If people choose search engines based on quality
differences in rare searches, then Google’s better data will lead to a substantial increase in market
share. Having a larger share gives Google more data, which in turn improves quality and supports
an even larger share.
The source of economies of scale here is therefore in the form of direct network
externalities. More customers generate more data, which in turn generates more customers. This
is different from the literature on two-sided markets and indirect network externalities. The
network externalities resemble the phone network, rather than externalities between buyers and
sellers on a marketplace like Ebay. This is significant in a trade context because the trade literature
has emphasized two-sided matching, e.g., Rauch (1999) and McLaren (2000). This is also
different from all of the trade and market structure literature, which emphasize economies of scale
that are driven by fixed costs. So trade theory does not currently have models that are applicable
to the AI technology environment.
The direct network externalities environment leads to a core aspect of competition in AI:
competition for data. The companies that have the best data make better predictions. This creates
a positive feedback loop so that they can collect even more data. In other words, the importance
of data leads to strong economies of scale.
B. Economies of Scale from the Overhead of Developing AI Capabilities
Another source of economies of scale in AI involves the fixed cost of building an AI capability
within a firm. The main cost is in personnel. Much of the software is open source, and in many
cases hardware can be purchased as a utility through cloud services. The uses of AI need to be big
enough to justify the substantial cost of building a team of AI specialists. World leaders in AI

6

There is a chicken and egg problem, whether good algorithms drive market share or whether market share drives
hiring that leads to better algorithms. For one point of view, see https://www.cnet.com/news/googles-varian-searchscale-is-bogus/.

7

command very high pay, often in the millions or tens of millions. Top academic researchers have
been hired to join Google (Hinton), Apple (Salakhutdinov), Facebook (LeCunn), and Uber
(Urtasun). So far, there has been a meaningful difference between employing the elite researchers
and others in terms of the capabilities of the AI being developed.
C. Economies of Scope
Perhaps more than economies of scale, the fixed cost of building an AI capacity generates
economies of scope. It is only worth having an AI team within a company if there are a variety of
applications for them to work on. Many of the currently leading AI firms are multiproduct firms.
For example, Google parent Alphabet runs a search engine (Google), an online video service
(YouTube), a mobile device operating system (Android), an autonomous vehicle division
(Waymo), and a variety of other businesses. In most cases, the economies of scope happen on the
supply side through AI talent, better hardware and better software.
Another important source of economies of scope is the sharing of data across applications.
For example, the data from Google’s search engine might be valuable in helping determine the
effectiveness of YouTube advertising, or its mapping services might be needed for developing
autonomous vehicles. The sharing of data is a key source of international friction on disguised
protection behind the border. Differences in privacy policies mean that it is easier to share data
across applications in some countries compared to others. For example, when Ebay owned PayPal,
it faced different restrictions for using the PayPal data in Canada compared to the United States.
We will return to this subject below.
This contrasts with the main emphasis in the trade literature on economies of scope, which
emphasizes the demand side. Economies of scope in AI do not seem to be about demand
externalities in brand perception or in sales channels. Instead, they appear to be driven by
economies of scope in innovation. A wider variety of potential applications generates greater
incentives to invest in an AI research team, and it generates more benefits to each particular AI
project due to the potential to share data across applications.
D. Knowledge Externalities
There is a tension in discussing knowledge diffusion in the AI sphere. On the one hand, the
spectacular scientific advances are often taught at universities and published in peer-reviewed
journals, providing businesses and government personnel with quick and easy access to frontier
research. Further, there is the migration of personnel across regions and countries as the above

8

examples of Robin Li and Qi Lu show. This suggests that knowledge externalities are global in
scope.
On the other hand, AI expertise has also tended to agglomerate in several narrowly defined
regions globally. As with other information technologies, much of the expertise is in Silicon Valley.
Berlin, Seattle, London, Boston, Shanghai, and to some extent Toronto and Montreal can all claim
to be hubs of AI innovation. This suggests that AI involves a lot of tacit knowledge that is not easily
codified and transferred to others.
In fact, the traditional discussion of knowledge externalities takes on a more nuanced hue
in the context of AI. Can these researchers communicate long distance? Do they have to be
together? How important are agglomeration forces in AI? As of 2017, AI expertise remains
surprisingly rooted in the locations of the universities that invented the technologies. Google’s
DeepMind is in London because that is where the lead researcher lived. Then the first expansion
of DeepMind outside the U.K. was to Edmonton Alberta because Richard Sutton, a key inventor
of reinforcement learning, lives in Edmonton. Uber opened an AI office in Toronto because it
wanted to hire Raquel Urtasun, a University of Toronto professor.
Generally, there are a small number of main AI research departments: Stanford, Carnegie
Mellon University, the University of Toronto and several others. Their location is often
surprisingly disconnected from headquarters. And so companies open offices where the talent is,
rather than forcing the talent to move to where the company is.
As we shall see, the exact nature of knowledge externalities is terribly important for
understanding whether cluster and other policies are likely to succeed. The nature of these
externalities also has some unexpected implications such as the implications of non-compete
clauses (Saxenian 1994) and the asymmetries in access to knowledge created by asymmetries in
who can speak English versus who can speak Chinese versus who can speak both.
3. TRADE THEORY AND THE CASE FOR INDUSTRIAL AND STRATEGIC TRADE POLICIES
There are many voices in the industrialized world arguing for industrial policies and
strategic trade policies to promote rising living standards. Many of these voices point to the
achievements of China as an example of what is possible. Much of what is claimed for China, and
what was once claimed for Japan, is of dubious merit. China has redirected vast resources from
the rural poor and urban savers towards state-owned enterprises that have massively
underperformed. Those firms continue to be major players in the economy and a major drag on
economic growth (Brandt and Zhu 2000). It is thus significant that China’s greatest commercial
9

successes in AI have come from private companies. So if we are to make the case for industrial
and strategic trade policies, we cannot blithely appeal to Chinese state-directed successes. Rather,
we must understand the characteristics of industries that increase the likelihood that government
policy interventions will be successful.
To this end, we start with a vanilla specific factors model of international trade (Mussa,
1974; Mayer, 1974) in which the case for departures from free trade is weak. We then add on
additional elements and examine which of these is important for policy success. The first
conclusion is that scale and knowledge externalities are critical. The second is that these two
elements alone are not enough: their precise form also matters.
A. Scientists, Heterogeneous Scientists and Superstar Scientists
Many factors enter into the location decisions of AI firms including access to local talent, local
financing/management and local markets. In this section, we focus on the role of universityrelated talent. Among the participants of this conference are three head researchers at top AI
companies: Geoffrey Hinton (University of Toronto and Google), Russ Salakhutdinov (Carnegie
Mellon University and Apple), and Yann LeCun (New York University and Facebook). Each joined
his company while retaining his academic position and each continues to live near his university
rather than near corporate headquarters. These three examples are not exceptional, as indicated
by the above examples of DeepMind, Richard Sutton and Raquel Urtasun.
Scientists: We begin with the simplest model of trade that allows for two types of
employees, scientists and production workers. There are two industries, search engines and
clothing. Production workers are employed in both industries and move between them so that
their wages are equalized across industries. Scientists are “specific” to the search engine industry
in that they are very good at AI algorithms and useless at sewing. We also assume that scientists
and workers cannot migrate internationally. Then it is immediately obvious that the more
scientists a country has, the larger will be both the size and service exports of the search engine
industry.
We start with this benchmark model because in this setting without scale or externalities,
there is no scope for market failure and hence there is no simple case for any trade policy other
than free trade. For example, consider a policy of restricting imports of search engine services, as
China has done with Google. This restriction helps Chinese scientists but can hurt Chinese
production workers and consumers (Ruffin and Jones, 1977).
There are several departures from this benchmark model that lead to welfare-enhancing
export subsidies and other departures from free trade. As we shall see, the two most important
10

are economies of scale and knowledge creation. However, we start instead with profits because
profits are at the core of arguments supporting strategic trade policies (Krugman, 1986). Since
there are no profits in the specific factors model we introduce profits by introducing scientists of
heterogeneous quality.
Heterogeneous Scientists: Consider an industry in which firms provide a search engine
and generate advertising revenue. There is a continuum of scientists distinguished by their
“quality” q. A firm is distinguished by the quality of its chief scientist and hence firms are also
indexed by q. A higher quality scientist produces a better search engine. A firm engages in activity
a that increases advertising revenues r(a) where ra > 0. Let p(q) be the proportion of consumers
who choose firm q’s search engine. It is natural to assume that pq > 0 i.e., a better scientist
produces a more desirable search engine. The firm’s profit before payments to the scientist is
π(a,q) = p(q) r(a) – c(a) where c(a) is the cost of the firm’s ad generating activity. In this model
the firm is essentially the scientist, but we can delink the two by assuming that the scientist is paid
with stock options and so receives a fraction (1 – µ) of the profits. It is straightforward to show
that profit π(a,q) is supermodular in (a,q). This implies positive assortative matching; firms with
better scientists engage in more ad-generating activity. This means that firms with better
scientists will also have more users (pq > 0), more revenues [∂r(a(q),q)/∂q > 0], and higher
profits [∂π(a(q),q)/∂q > 0]. Putting these together, better scientists anchor bigger and more
profitable firms. 7
To place this model into an international trade setting, we assume that there are multiple
countries, a second constant-returns-to-scale industry (clothing) and no international migration
of scientists or workers. Because there are profits in the search engine industry, policies that
expand that industry generate higher profits. This is the foundation of strategic trade policy. In
its simplest form, if there are super-normal profits then tariffs and other trade policies can be
used to shift profits away from the foreign country and to the domestic country.
Strategic trade policy was first developed by Brander and Spencer (1981) and variants of
it have appeared in many of the models discussed below. Unfortunately, the case for strategic
trade policy is not as clear as it might seem. Its biggest logical problem is the assumption of

The first-order condition for advertising activities is µπa = µ(p ra – ca) = 0. We assume that the secondorder condition is satisfied: µπaa < 0. Supermodularity is given by ∂2µπ(a,q)/∂a∂q = pq ra > 0. The result
that advertising activity levels a(q) are increasing in q comes from differentiating the first-order condition:
µpq ra + µπaa aq = 0 or aq = –pq ra / πaa > 0. The result that average revenues p(q)r(a) are increasing in q
follows from ∂p(q)r(a(q))/∂q = pqr + praaq > 0. The result that profits π(a(q),q) are increasing in q follows
from ∂µπ(a,q)/∂q = µπa aq + µpq r(a) = µpq r(a) > 0 where we have used the first-order condition (πa = 0).
7

11

positive profits: If there is free entry, then entry will continue until profits are driven to zero. 8 This
means that any government policy that encourages entry of firms or training of scientists will be
offset by inefficient entry of firms or scientists. Put simply, strategic trade policies only work if
there are profits, but with free entry there are no profits. See Eaton and Grossman (1986). The
conclusion we draw from this is that the model needs enriching before it can be used to justify
trade policy.
Before enriching the model, we note that there are two other compelling reasons for being
skeptical about the efficacy of strategic trade policy. First, such policies set up political economy
incentives for firms to capture the regulatory process used to determine the amount and form of
government handouts. Second, the logic of strategic trade policy fails if there is retaliation on the
part of the foreign government. Retaliation generates a trade war in which both countries lose. AI
meets all the conditions that Busch (2001) identifies as likely to lead to a trade war. We now turn
to enriching our model.
Superstar Scientists: 9 Strategic trade policies are more compelling in settings where scale
and/or knowledge creation and diffusion are prevalent. To this end we follow section 2 above in
assuming that there are economies of scale in data. This will cause the market to be dominated by
a small number of search engine firms, that is, it will turn our model into something that looks
like a superstar model. To be more precise, it is a little different from standard superstar models
that make assumptions on the demand side (Rosen, 1981). The superstar assumptions here are
on the supply side.
Modifying our model slightly, we introduce scale in data by assuming that the share of
consumers choosing a search engine (p(q)) is increasing at an increasing rate (pqq > 0). 10 pqq > 0
implies that profits and scientist earnings increase at an increasing rate, i.e., they are convex in
q. 11 This, in turn, implies that the distribution of firm size becomes highly skewed towards large
firms. It also implies that the shareholders of large firms will make spectacular earnings, i.e., the
1 percent will pull away from the rest of society.
In this setting we expect that a small number of large firms will capture most of the world
market for search engines. Further, these firms will be hugely profitable. We have in mind a
situation like that found empirically in the search engine market. The top five leaders are (billions
Free entry implies that ex ante profits are zero. Of course, ex post profits (operating profits of survivors)
are always positive; otherwise, survivors would exit.
9 To our knowledge there are no superstar-and-trade models beyond Manasse and Turrini (2001), which
deals with trade and wage inequality.
10 This is an ad hoc assumption, but to the extent that it has the flavor of scale economies, we will see less
ad hoc variants in the models reviewed below.
11 From a previous footnote, ∂π(a(q),q)/∂q = p r(a). Hence ∂2π(a(q),q)/∂q2 = p r + p r a > 0.
q
qq
q a q
8

12

of monthly visitors in parentheses): Google (1.8), Bing (0.5), Yahoo (0.5), Baidu (0.5) and Ask
(0.3). 12 If the Chinese government subsidizes Baidu or excludes Google from China, then Baidu
captures a larger share of the market. This generates higher profits and higher earnings for
shareholders within China, making China better off both absolutely and relatively to the U.S.
Depending on the details of the model, the U.S. may or may not be absolutely worse off.
This example is very similar to the mid-1980s discussions about commercial jet
production. At a time when it was understood that there was room for only two players in the
industry (Boeing and McDonnell Douglas were the leaders), the European Union (EU) heavily
subsidized Airbus and ultimately forced McDonnell Douglas to exit. These EU subsidies were
enormous, but may nevertheless have been valuable for EU taxpayers. 13
Our superstars model provides a more compelling case for government intervention
because scale in data acts as a natural barrier to entry that prevents the free-entry condition from
offsetting the impacts of government policies. Thus, the government can beneficially subsidize the
education of AI scientists and/or subsidize the entry of firms, e.g., by offering tax breaks,
subsidies, expertise, incubators, etc. This establishes that scale economies and the super-normal
profits they sometimes imply strengthen the case for strategic trade policy.
There is, however, one more assumption we have made that is essential to the argument
for strategic trade policy, namely, that there are no international knowledge spillovers. In the
extreme, if all the knowledge created, for example, by Canadian scientists, moved freely to the
U.S. or China, then a Canadian subsidy would help the world, but would not differentially help
Canada. This establishes the critical role of knowledge diffusion (in addition to scale) for thinking
about government policies that promote AI.
Empirics: What do we know about superstar effects empirically? Nothing from the trade
literature. We know that superstars matter for the rate and direction of innovation in academic
research. We know that universities have played a key role in developing AI expertise and that a
small number of university-affiliated chief scientists have played a key role in developing new
technologies. We also have some evidence of a knowledge externality. Azoulay et al. (2010) show
that the death of a superstar scientist in a field slows progress in the research area of the superstar.
The field suffers as scientists associated with the deceased superstar produce less research. While

Source: http://www.ebizmba.com/articles/search-engines, July, 2017.
The subsidies have continued unabated for over four decades. In 2016, the WTO found that WTOnoncompliant EU subsidies were $10 billion. This does not include the WTO-compliant subsidies. Likewise,
the WTO found comparable numbers for WTO-noncompliant U.S. subsidies of Boeing. See Busch (2001)
for a history. This raises the possibility that subsidies that are intended to get a firm “on its feet” become
permanent, which is yet another reason to be sceptical about strategic trade policies.
12
13

13

Azoulay et al. do not consider AI, their work points to the existence of knowledge spillovers that
are local rather than global.
Inequality: This discussion has not had much to say about inequality. In our superstars
model, industrial policy and strategic trade policies are successful precisely because they promote
large and highly profitable firms. We know that these firms account for an increasing share of
total economic activity and that they are likely major contributors both to falling labor shares
(Autor et al., 2017) and to rising top-end inequality. Thus, the policies being supported by our
model do not lead to broad-based prosperity. This cannot be ignored.
Extensions: While the above model of AI science superstars is useful, it has a number of
other problems. It is beyond the scope of this paper to resolve these problems through additional
modeling. Instead, we highlight each problem and review the related international trade and
growth literatures in order to provide insights into how the model might be improved and what
the implications of these improvements are for thinking about trade and trade policy. The
problems we cover are the following.
1. The scale assumption pqq > 0 is ad hoc. In subsection B below, we consider scale returns
that are external to the firm and show that the form of the scale returns matters for policy.
2. In our model, there is no knowledge creation within firms and no knowledge diffusion
across firms and borders. In subsection C below, we review endogenous growth models
and show that the form of knowledge diffusion, whether it is local or global, matters for
policy.
3. Our model ignores the geography of the industry and so does not speak to economic
geography and “supercluster” policies. We review the economic geography literature in
subsection D below.
4. In section E below we discuss the implications for supercluster policies.

B. Increasing Returns to Scale External to the Firm – A Basic Trade Model
We start with a simple trade model featuring economies of scale whose geographic scope is
variable, i.e., regional, national or international. The model captures the core insights of richer
models developed by Ethier (1982), Markusen (1981) and Helpman (1984) along with more recent
developments by Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2010, 2012).

14

Firm i produces a homogeneous good using a production function
qi = QαF(Li,Ki)
where Li is employment of labor, Ki is employment of capital, F displays constant returns to scale,
Q is industry output (Q = Σi qi) and 0 < α < 1. Qα is like a Solow residual in that it controls
productivity. The idea is that a firm’s productivity depends on the output of all firms. 14 If Q is
world output of the industry then productivity Qα is common to all firms internationally and scale
has no implications for comparative advantage. On the other hand, if Q is national output of the
industry then the country with the larger output Q will have higher productivity Qα and hence will
capture the entire world market.
AI as an industry has a technology that lies somewhere between national returns to scale
(Q is national output) and international returns to scale (Q is international output). With national
returns to scale, a government policy such as tariffs or production subsidies that increases
domestic output will increase national welfare because the policy raises average productivity at
home and also drive exports. Whether it helps or hurts the foreign country depends on a number
of factors such as the strength of the scale returns (the size of α) and the size of the countries
(Helpman, 1984). Most importantly, the domestic benefits of industrial and trade policies depend
on the geographic extent of scale, i.e., how much of it is national versus international.
Whether scale operates at the national or international level is not easy to assess and has
not been attempted for AI. For the DRAM market in the 1980s, Irwin and Klenow (1994) show
that external economies of scale were entirely international rather than national. Other evidence
that AI economies are international is the fact that AI algorithms have been disseminated
internationally via scientific journals and teaching, and R&D-based AI knowledge has diffused
internationally via imitation and reverse engineering. On the other hand, the co-location of AI
researchers in Silicon Valley and a handful of other technology hubs is suggestive of national and
even sub-national returns to scale. Azoulay et al. (2010) also suggests the existence of sub-national
returns to scale. Clearly, more research is needed on the extent of national versus international
returns to scale in AI.
C. Knowledge Creation and Diffusion: Endogenous Growth
In the previous section, scale was external to the firm and, relatedly, firms did no research. We
now introduce firm-level research. Conveniently, some of the key implications of firm-level

Each firm ignores the impact of its output decision on Q so that returns to scale can be treated as external
to the firm.

14

15

innovation are similar to those from the previous section, namely, that trade policy depends in
large part on the extent to which knowledge spillovers are national or international. To see this,
we review the main endogenous growth models that feature international trade. These are
Grossman and Helpman (1989, 1990, 1991), Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991), and Aghion and
Howitt (2009, ch. 15). In these models, firms conduct costly R&D and there is an externality that
affects these costs. The dominant model in the trade literature features quality ladders (Grossman
and Helpman, 1991) featuring vertical (quality) differentiation. The highest-quality firm takes the
entire market and earns profits. 15
Innovation improves the quality of the frontier firm by a constant proportion λ. At date t
> 0, let n(t) be the number of quality improvements during the time interval (0,t) so that the
frontier quality is λn(t). Firms invest an amount r in R&D and this generates an endogenous
probability p(r) of becoming the quality leader (with quality λn(t)+1).
A key feature of the R&D process is an externality: Innovators stand on the shoulders of
giants in the sense that they improve on the frontier level of quality. Had they improved on their
own quality, there would be no externality. A two-sector, two-country quality ladder model
appears in Grossman and Helpman (1991). Grossman and Helpman assume that there is a
standard constant-returns-to-scale sector and a quality sector. 16
Another popular approach is Romer’s (1990) expanding-varieties model. Final goods
producers combine varieties of intermediates using a CES production function so that there is
love of variety. At any date t there is a measure N(t) of varieties. The marginal returns to new
varieties are positive, but diminishing. The key “building on the shoulders of giants” externality is
that the cost of developing a new variety is inversely proportional to the measure of varieties. As
a result, innovation costs fall over time, generating endogenous growth. A one-sector, two-country
extension appears in Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991). A two-sector, two-country extension
appears in Grossman and Helpman (1991).
This brief review leads to a number of observations. As in the previous section, the benefit
of trade policy depends on whether the externality operates at the national or international levels.
Q of the previous section is replaced here by either λn(t) or N(t). Hence, if each firm builds on the
international frontier λn(t) or the international number of varieties N(t) then there are no
implications for comparative advantage; however, if each firm builds on its national λn(t) or
15 Ex post profits are needed in order to justify R&D expenses. However, these models have a free-entry
condition which drives ex ante profits to zero.
16 Placing endogenous growth into a two-sector model so as to facilitate a discussion of comparative
advantage is not easy because the sector with improving quality slowly takes over the entire economy unless
other price or non-price “congestion” forces prevent this.

16

national N(t) then the frontier country will develop an increasingly strong comparative advantage
in the quality or expanding-varieties sector. With national-level externalities one country will
capture the lion’s share of the quality/varieties sector. Further, a country can capture this sector
by using R&D and trade policies.
Endogenous growth models provide important insights into the details of R&D and trade
policies. R&D policies directly target the knowledge externality and so are preferred to (secondbest) trade policies. One R&D policy avenue is to promote knowledge diffusion. This can be done
through subsidies to non-profit organizations targeting local within-industry interactions and
industry-university collaborations. A second R&D policy avenue is to promote knowledge
creation through R&D subsidies that are available to all firms, universities and students. There is
a tension between these two avenues; knowledge diffusion can discourage knowledge creation
since knowledge diffusion to competitors reduces the returns to innovation. However, the tension
is sometimes constructive: Silicon Valley emerged from the shadows of Massachusetts’ Route 128
partly because of an “open-source attitude” (Saxenian, 1994) and Californian restrictions on noncompete clauses (Marx and Fleming 2012). It is less likely that diffusion of knowledge to foreign
countries will be as beneficial domestically.
This class of models discourages policies that target individual firms or that “pick
winners.” To understand why industry leaders should not be advantaged by policy, note that
counter-intuitively, industry leaders will be the least innovative firms due to the “market-stealing”
effect. If an entrant innovates, it steals the market from the leader. If a leader innovates, it
cannibalizes itself. Leaders therefore have less of an incentive to innovate. Aghion et al. (2001,
2005) address this counter-intuitive result by developing a model in which leaders innovate in
order to escape the competition. Aghion et al. (2017) and Lim, Trefler and Yu (2017) are currently
developing international trade models featuring escape the competition.
In the context of AI, none of the above endogenous growth models is ideal, leading us to
conjecture about what an appropriate model might look like. The advantage of endogenous
growth models is that they emphasize knowledge creation and diffusion. Thinking more deeply
about AI development and commercialization, it is useful to distinguish two aspects of what is
done in the AI research departments of large firms. First, they improve AI algorithms, which have
the flavor of quality ladders. (Recall that quality can be something that is perceived by consumers
or, as is relevant here, something that reduces marginal costs.) Second, AI research departments
develop new applications of existing AI, e.g., Google uses AI for its search engine, autonomous
vehicles, YouTube recommendations, advertising network, energy use in data centers, etc. This
suggests an expanding-varieties model, but one that operates within the firm. We are unaware of
17

any endogenous growth models that have both these features. Grossman and Helpman (1991)
have the first and Klette and Kortum (2004) have the second. Combining them in one model is
not trivial and analytic results would likely have to be replaced with calibration.
D. New Economic Geography and Agglomeration
The discussion in the previous section points to the possibility that knowledge spillovers are
subnational and this leads naturally to a theory of regional clusters such as Silicon Valley. New
economic geography or NEG (Krugman, 1980) does not typically consider knowledge spillovers,
but it does consider other local externalities that drive regional clusters. Three mechanisms have
been particularly prominent: (1) demand-side “home-market effects,” (2) upstream-downstream
linkages, and (3) labor-market pooling. All of these theories feature two key elements: costs of
trading across regions (e.g., tariffs) and increasing returns to scale at the firm level (which can be
thought of as the fixed costs of developing a new product). We explain the role of these two
elements in the context of home-market effects.
Consider a model with CES monopolistic competition and two regions (j = 1, 2). There are
varieties of machines and the larger the set of machines to choose from, the more productive are
the producers. Let Nj be the measure of machine varieties available in region j. Then with CES
production functions, productivity is proportional to Nj. 17 The fundamental factor pushing for
agglomeration is the strength of this love-of-variety/productivity externality. (This is related to
the externality in Romer’s expanding varieties model, which is also proportional to Nj.) As in
previous models, the externality operates at the local level rather than at the international level.
This externality encourages firms to co-locate or agglomerate since the agglomeration of firms
drives up Nj and productivity. The fundamental factor pushing against this agglomeration is trade
costs: A firm can avoid trade costs by locating close to consumers rather than close to other
producers. The main insight of this model is that in equilibrium a disproportionate share of the
world’s firms will locate in a single region, and this region will thus have higher productivity. As
a result, this region will be richer. Notice that firms are choosing to set up where the competition
is greatest and where wages and property values are the highest.
The above model of agglomeration has been extended in countless ways (e.g., Krugman
and Venables, 1995; Fajgelbaum et al., 2011; Duranton and Puga, 2001) and it is easy to think of
applications where the force for agglomeration is not the variety of machines, but the variety of
knowledge held by firms. If this knowledge is tacit, meaning it cannot be codified and transmitted
More precisely, productivity is proportional to N1/(σ–1) where σ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between
varieties.

17

18

in a document) then knowledge spillovers are only transmitted locally via face-to-face
interactions. In this case, knowledge externalities lead firms to agglomerate. The result is regions
like Silicon Valley.
E. Cluster Policies
Cluster policies have long been the politician’s best friend. Yet economists remain highly critical
of them. In surveying the evidence for the success of these policies, Uyarra and Ramlogan (2012)
write:
“There is no clear and unambiguous evidence that over the long term
clusters are able to generate strong and sustainable impacts in terms of
innovation, productivity or employment.”
One of the world leaders in the economics of clusters, Gilles Duranton titled his 2011 survey
“California Dreamin’: The Feeble Case for Cluster Policies.” Yet clusters remain fashionable.
In light of what we have described, the first question is: When are cluster policies likely to
succeed? The answer is that they are most likely to succeed when there is clear evidence of scale
economies and of knowledge creation together with local knowledge diffusion. AI displays these
characteristics, though the extent of international knowledge diffusion cannot be ignored.
The second question is: What policies are likely to work? To answer this question we turn
to the insights of Ajay Agrawal, Director of Rotman’s Creative Destruction Lab (CDL) and Michael
Porter, the business guru of cluster policies. We start with Agrawal. Agrawal identifies two
problems with developing AI in the Canadian context. First, there is a shortage of people with the
skills to scale up companies. Agrawal calls these people 1000Xers. Second, the cost of information
about a start-up’s quality is so high that capital markets cannot identify the best and the brightest
start-ups. Agrawal’s CDL addresses both of these problems by linking start-ups with serial
entrepreneurs who can identify a good start-up, tap into 1000Xers for growth and pass on
valuable information about start-up quality to investors globally.
Another approach to the question of what policies are likely to work utilizes Porter’s (1990)
diamond, which emphasizes four features of clusters: (1) Factor conditions such as universities
and an abundant supply of AI scientists, (2) home-market-demand externalities for AI, (3)
externalities flowing from suppliers of specialized intermediate inputs into AI such as financial
services, and (4) a competitive environment. Items 2-4 involve effects that have already been
described in our discussion of knowledge spillovers and lie at the heart of local agglomeration.
Item 1 is a more conventional economic factor, i.e., drive down the price of the key input by
subsidizing its supply. Yet Porter’s research shows that many clusters are driven primarily by 1.
19

That is to say, the single most important policy in practice is simple: Follow Hinton’s advice in
training a large number of AI scientists locally.
Our models also suggest two difficulties with Hinton’s advice that must be shored up. First,
there is international rather than national knowledge diffusion due to the fact that, for example,
Canadian-trained scientists are likely to leave Canada for Silicon Valley, China and other AI
hotspots. This suggests value in programs like those used successfully in Singapore that require
student loans to be repaid if the student does not work in Singapore for a minimum number of
years.
Second, scale in data is a huge problem for a small country like Canada. To understand
appropriate solutions for this, we now turn to the details of national regulatory environments that
affect data and the use of AI.
4. BEHIND THE BORDER TRADE BARRIERS: THE DOMESTIC REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT
Given these models, we next turn to the specific regulatory issues that are likely to impact
trade policy. Many of the core trade issues around AI involve access to data. Data is a key input
into AI, and there are a number of government policies that affect data access and data flows. To
the extent these regulations vary across countries, they can advantage some countries’ AI
industries. The models above suggest that this advantage can have consequences if there are
economies of scale, local externalities and/or rents.
We highlight five policies in particular. The first three involve data: domestic privacy
policy, data localization rules and access to government data. The others are development of the
regulation of AI application industries (such as autonomous vehicles) and protection of source
code. Privacy policy, data localization and source code access have already become significant
trade issues. For example, the TPP addresses all three of these, as do the U.S. Trade
Representative’s NAFTA renegotiation objectives. The U.S. position is that strong Canadian and
Mexican privacy rules, localization requirements and access to foreign source code are all
impediments to U.S. exports of AI-related goods. In other words, the emphasis on trade policy in
these areas is that regulation could be disguised protection that helps domestic firms and hurts
foreign firms. In the discussion below, we explore the extent to which this starting assumption is
appropriate.
Privacy regulation: Privacy regulation involves policies that restrict the collection and use
of data. Such regulation differs across locations. Privacy policy has the power to limit or expand
the ability of firms to use AI effectively. Restrictions on the use of data mean restrictions on the
20

ability to use AI given the data available; however, restrictions on the use of data may also increase
the supply of data available if it leads consumers to trust firms that collect the data. Although the
theory is ambiguous, thus far, the empirical evidence favors the former effect on balance. Stricter
privacy regulations reduce the ability of firms and nonprofits to collect and use data and therefore
leads to less innovative use of data (Goldfarb and Tucker 2012). Thus, firms in some countries
may benefit from favorable privacy policy.
We believe the most useful analogies for privacy policy in trade relate to labor and
environmental regulations. Such regulations also differ across countries for a variety of reasons.
They could reflect differences in preferences across countries, or could be perceived as normal
goods that wealthier countries are willing to pay for but poorer countries are not (Grossman and
Krueger, 1995). There is room for reasonable disagreement on how data might be collected or
used. Some countries will restrict the information used in prediction while others will not. For
example, for insurance, the data that can be used varies by state, with different states providing a
variety of restrictions on the use of race, religion, gender and sexual orientation in insurance. 18
Even with such restrictions, if other variables provide surrogates for such categories, it is possible
that firms may be forced to abandon AI methods entirely, for more transparent prediction
technologies. In terms of privacy policy, we think it is useful to take as given that there are
differences across countries in their preferences for policies that restrict the collection and use of
data.
Given these differences in preferences, what are the implications for trade? Suppose that
the optimal privacy policy for growing an AI industry involves relatively few restrictions on data.
AI requires data, and so the fewer government restrictions on data collection, the better the
industry. 19 To the extent that young firms tend to grow by focusing on the domestic market, this
will advantage the growth of AI firms in some countries relative to others. Thus, lax privacy
policies may help domestic industry relative to countries with strict policies just as lax labor and
environmental regulation may help the domestic industry.
This suggests the potential of a “race to the bottom” in privacy policy. Evidence for such
races has been found in enforcement of labor policies (e.g., Davies and Vadlamannati 2013) and
in environmental policies (e.g., Beron et al 2003 Fredriksson and Milliment 2002). There is
evidence that privacy regulation does disadvantage jurisdictions with respect to their advertising-

http://repository.law.umich.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1163&context=law_econ_current
Importantly, this is not a statement about the optimal privacy policy from the point of view of a firm. If
consumers have a preference for privacy, the private sector can provide it even in the absence of
regulation. For a richer debate on this point, see Goldfarb and Tucker (2012) and Acquisti, Taylor and
Wagman (2016).

18
19

21

supported software industries. In particular, Goldfarb and Tucker (2011) examined a change in
European privacy regulation (implemented in 2004) that made it more difficult for European
internet firms to collect data about their online customers. This regulatory change was particularly
likely to reduce the effectiveness of advertising on websites that relied on customer tracking data.
Using a consistent measure of the effectiveness of thousands of online advertising campaigns, the
results showed that European online advertising became about 65 percent less effective after the
regulation took effect, compared to before the regulation and compared to advertising in other
jurisdictions, mainly the United States. In other words, privacy regulation seemed to reduce the
ability of companies to use data effectively. In a different context, Miller and Tucker (2011) show
that state-level privacy restrictions can reduce the quality of health care. While this evidence does
not pertain to AI, just like AI, online advertising and health care use data as a key input. In other
words, the same forces will likely be at play for privacy regulation that restricts the ability of AI to
operate.
Under strategic trade models, such races to the bottom are likely to matter if there are
rents to be gained from AI. Under endogenous growth models with local spillovers and various
agglomeration models, this could create an equilibrium in which the AI industry moves to the
country with the most lax policies. Currently, privacy policies are much stricter in Europe than in
the U.S. or China. 20 Furthermore, there are a number of differences in such policies between the
U.S. and China. This may give the U.S. and China an advantage over Europe in this industry.
If stricter privacy policy is likely to hamstring domestic firms in favor of foreign ones, we
would expect policy to emphasize avoiding such a race to the bottom; however, recent trade
negotiations have instead focused on privacy regulation as disguised protection. For example, this
argument is at odds with the current U.S. trade negotiation objectives, which want to weaken
Canadian privacy laws. Based on the existing evidence from other data-driven industries, we
believe this will help the Canadian industry relative to the U.S. industry in the long run, even if it
benefits American companies that already do business in Canada in the short run. In addition,
TPP’s chapter 14 on Electronic Commerce contains provisions that attempt to limit disguised
protection, but contains almost no language that encourages harmonization in privacy policies
beyond a request in Article 14.8.5 to “endeavor to exchange information on any such [personal
information protection] mechanisms … and explore ways to extend these or other suitable
arrangements to promote compatibility between them.” The words “endeavor” and “explore” are
Canada sits somewhere in the middle. Europe is strict on both data collection and its uses. Canada’s
core restrictions involve use for a purpose different from the collection context. The U.S. emphasizes
contracts, and so as long as the privacy policy is clear, companies can collect and use data as they wish (at
least outside of certain regulated industries like health and finance).

20

22

what are known in the trade policy literature as “aspirational” language and generally have no
force. The CETA agreement is even more vague with respect to electronic commerce generally.
The electronic commerce section, chapter 16, says little but “recognize the importance of”
electronic commerce regulation and interoperability and that “the Parties agree to maintain a
dialogue on issues raised by electronic commerce.” 21
It is important to note that this is not a statement about company strategy. The market
may discipline and provide consumer protection with respect to privacy. Apple, in particular, has
emphasized the protection of the personal information of its customers as it has rolled out AI
initiatives, and it is an open question whether this strategy will pay off in terms of consumer
loyalty and access to better quality, if limited, data.
We also want to emphasize that we do not have a position on the optimal amount of privacy
as enforced by regulation. In fact, we think this is a difficult question for economists to answer.
Given that the empirical evidence suggests that privacy regulation, on balance and as
implemented thus far, seems to reduce innovation, the determination of the optimal amount of
privacy should not focus on maximizing innovation (through, as the TPP emphasizes in article
14.8.1, “the contribution that this [privacy protection] makes to enhancing consumer confidence
in electronic commerce”). Instead, it is a balance of the ethical value of (or even right to) privacy
and the innovativeness and growth of the domestic AI industry.
To reiterate, privacy regulation is different from many other regulations because privacy
(perhaps disproportionately) hamstrings domestic firms. Therefore, trade negotiations should
not start with the assumption that privacy regulation is disguised protection. Instead, discussions
should start with the public policy goal of the “social benefits of protecting the personal
information of users of electronic commerce” that is also mentioned in article 14.8.1 of the TPP.
Then, if needed, discussions can move to any particular situation in which a privacy regulation
might really be disguised protection. As we hope is clear from the above discussion, domestic
privacy regulations that restrict how firms can collect and use data are unlikely to be disguised
protection. We next turn to two other regulations that might use privacy as an excuse to favor,
rather than hamstring, domestic firms.
Data Localization: Data localization rules involve restrictions on the ability of firms to
transmit data on domestic users to a foreign country. Such restrictions are often justified by

https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/TPP-Final-Text-Electronic-Commerce.pdf,
http://www.international.gc.ca/trade-commerce/trade-agreements-accords-commerciaux/agr-acc/ceta-aecg/texttexte/16.aspx?lang=eng
21

23

privacy motivations. Countries may want data to stay domestic for privacy and (related) national
security reasons. In particular, the argument for data localization emphasizes that governments
want the data of their citizens to be protected by the laws of the domestic country. Foreign national
security agencies should not have access to data that occurs within a country. And foreign
companies should be bound by the laws of the country where the data were collected. The
argument against such localization (at least in public) is technical: Such localization imposes a
significant cost on foreign companies wanting to do business. They need to establish a presence
in every country, and they need to determine a system that ensures that the data is not routed
internationally (something that is technically costly, particularly for integrated communications
networks such as within Europe or within North America). U.S.-based companies have lobbied
against such requirements. 22
On the technical side, consider two parties, A and B, who reside in the same country.
Internet traffic between A and B cannot be confined within national borders without specific
technical guidance (and some cost to quality) because the internet may route data indirectly. In
addition, data on a transaction between A and B may be stored on a server located in a different
country. Furthermore, if A and B reside in different countries, then the data on that transaction
will likely be stored in both countries. 23
Data localization is an issue for AI because AI requires data. And it often involves merging
different data sources together. The quality of aggregate predictions from AI will be lower if the
scale of data is limited to within a country. In other words, localization is a way to restrict the
possible scale of any country in AI, but at the cost of lower quality overall.
Put differently, data localization is a privacy policy that could favor domestic firms. Unlike
the consumer protection privacy policies highlighted above, it can favor domestic over foreign
firms because the foreign-firm AI experts may not have access to the data. TPP recognizes this
and explicitly restricts it in Article 14.11.3a, which states that the cross-border transfer of
information should not be restricted in a manner that would constitute “a disguised restriction on
trade.” 24

https://publicpolicy.googleblog.com/2015/02/the-impacts-of-data-localization-on.html
Dobson, Tory and Trefler. 2017.
24
Related to the issue of data localization is the question of who owns data collected on domestic individuals
by foreign individuals or firms. For example, consider an American company that uses Peruvians’ cell
phones to gather data on agriculture and climate. Who owns the rights to that data? Are the Americans
allowed to profit from that data? Are contracts between the individual actors enough, or is there a need for
international laws or norms? The data might not be collected if not for the private companies, but the
companies use the data in their own interest, rather than in the public interest or in the interest of the
Peruvians who provided the data. The recent attempts at a joint venture between Monsanto and John Deere,
22
23

24

Privileged Access to Government Data: Another potential restriction on trade that might
be justified by privacy concerns involves access to government data. Governments collect a great
deal of data. Such data might be valuable to training AIs and improving their predictions. Such
data include tax and banking data, education data and health data. For example, as the only legal
provider of most health care services in Ontario, the Ontario government has unusually rich data
on the health needs, decisions and outcomes of 14 million people. If domestic firms are given
privileged access to that data, it would create an indirect subsidy to the domestic AI industry.
We think the most useful analogy in the current trade literature is the perennial softwood
lumber trade dispute between Canada and the United States. In the softwood lumber case, most
timber in Canada is on government-owned land, while in the United States, most timber is on
privately owned land. The U.S. complaints allege that Canadian timber is priced too low, and is
therefore a government subsidy to the Canadian lumber industry. While there have been various
agreements over the years, the disagreement has not been fully resolved. The superficial issue is
what a fair price should be for access to government resources. The real issue is whether legitimate
regulatory differences can be argued to convey unfair advantage and therefore constitute a tradeillegal subsidy.
Government data can be seen similarly. Links between the state and the corporation vary
by country, and this might help some corporations more than others. What is a fair price for access
to the data? Importantly, governments may not want to give foreign firms access to such data for
the same privacy and national security issues that underlie motivations for data localization. Thus,
seemingly reasonable differences across countries in their data access policies can end up favoring
the domestic industry.
Industrial regulation: Most international agreements have a section on competition
policy and industrial regulation. This is because regulation can be a source of unfair comparative
advantage or disadvantage. In AI applications, this list is long. In addition to the points around
data and privacy highlighted above, many applications of AI involve complementary technologies
in which standards might not yet exist and the legal framework might still be evolving.
For example, in autonomous vehicles, a variety of standards will need to be developed
around vehicle-to-vehicle communication, traffic signals and many other aspects of automotive
design. Most of these standards will be negotiated by industry players (Simcoe 2012), perhaps
along with the U.S. Department of Justice anti-trust concerns that scuttled the deal, highlight how tangible
this issue is.

25

with some government input. As in other contexts, national champions can try to get their
governments to adopt standards that raise costs for foreign competition. This leads to the
possibility of international standards wars. This is particularly true of standards that are likely to
involve a great deal of government input. For example, suppose governments require that the AI
behind autonomous vehicles be sufficiently transparent that investigators are able to determine
what caused a crash. Without international standards, different countries could require
information from different sensors, or they could require access to different aspects of the models
and data that underlie the technology. For companies, ensuring that their AI is compatible with
multiple regulatory regimes in this manner would be expensive. Such domestic regulations could
be a way to favor domestic firms. In other words, domestic technology standards around how AI
interacts with the legal regime is a potential tool for disguised restriction on trade.
The autonomous vehicle legal framework is evolving, with different countries (and even
states within the U.S.) allowing different degrees of autonomy on their public roads. Drones are
another example where, in the U.S., the FAA strictly regulates American airspace while China and
some other countries have fewer restrictions. This may have allowed China’s commercial drone
industry to be more advanced than the industry in the U.S. 25 Thus, regulation can also impact the
rate of innovation and therefore comparative advantage.
Source code: To the extent that AI may discriminate, governments may demand
information about the algorithms that underlie the AI’s predictions under anti-discrimination
laws. More generally with respect to software, including AI, governments may demand access to
source code for security reasons, for example, to reduce fraud or to protect national security. Thus,
using consumer protection or national security as an excuse, governments could reduce the ability
of foreign firms to maintain trade secrets. Furthermore, cyberespionage of such trade secrets may
be widespread, but that is beyond the scope of this chapter. 26 Broadly, this issue has been
recognized in the TPP negotiations, with Article 14.17 emphasizing that access to source code
cannot be required unless that source code underlies critical infrastructure or unless the source
code is needed to obey other domestic regulations that are not disguised restrictions on trade.

25 https://www.forbes.com/sites/sarahsu/2017/04/13/in-china-drone-delivery-promises-to-boostconsumption-especially-in-rural-areas/#47774daf68fe
26

https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/omb/IPEC/admin_strategy_on_mitigating_t
he_theft_of_u.s._trade_secrets.pdf

26

Other policies that might affect the size of domestic AI industries include intellectual
property, antitrust, R&D subsidies and national security. If AI is the next important strategic
industry, then all of the standard questions arise with respect to trade policies in these industries.
We do not discuss these in detail because we think the trade-specific issues with respect to these
policies are not distinct to AI but are captured more generally by the discussion of innovation and
trade. The main point for these other aspects of domestic policy with respect to AI and trade is
that there are economies of scale in AI at the firm level. Furthermore, we expect some of the
externalities from the AI industry to remain local.
AI and International Macroeconomics
Before concluding, it is important to recognize that AI will have implications for
international macroeconomics. For example, suppose that China does succeed in building a large
AI industry. This will likely increase its trade surplus with the rest of the world, particularly in
services. Furthermore, suppose that China manages to control wage inflation through promoting
migration from rural to urban areas, and by relaxing the one-child policy. Then, this is likely to
put upward pressure on the RMB and downward pressure on the dollar.
This will have implications for U.S. labor markets. At the low end of the market, a
weakening dollar might repatriate manufacturing jobs. At the high end of the market, skilled U.S.
workers will for the first time be exposed to competition from a low-wage country. In isolation,
this would reduce one dimension of domestic U.S. inequality.
If the Chinese market becomes open to U.S. technology giants (and vice versa), both the
Melitz (2003) model and the Oberfield (forthcoming) model of trade predict that the giants will
grow even larger. In the context in which these companies have already absorbed one-fifth of U.S.
value added, and may have contributed to U.S. top-end inequality, the impact of international
trade in further growing these impacts may increase top-end inequality.
Conclusion
How will artificial intelligence affect the pattern of trade? And how does it make us think
differently about trade policy? In this article we have tried to highlight some key points.
First, the nature of the technology suggests that economies of scale and scope will be
important. Furthermore, as a knowledge-intensive industry, knowledge externalities are likely to
be important. Prior literature on other industries suggests that such externalities are often local,
but more evidence is needed. Second, the trade models that are likely to be most useful in
understanding the impact of AI are those that account for these points, specifically, scale,
27

knowledge creation and the geography of knowledge diffusion. These models suggest that whether
AI-focused trade policies (or AI-focused investments in clusters) are optimal will depend very
much on the presence of scale and the absence of rapid international knowledge diffusion. Third,
we discussed whether and how regulation might be used to favor domestic industry. We
highlighted that privacy policy that targets consumer protection is unlike many other regulations
in that it is likely to hamstring domestic firms, even relative to foreign ones. So, rather than
focusing trade discussions on how privacy policy might be used as a disguised restriction on trade,
such discussions should emphasize regulatory harmonization so as to avoid a race to the bottom.
In contrast, several other policies may be used to favor domestic firms including data localization
rules, limited access to government data, industry regulations such as those around the use of
drones, and forced access to source code.
Generally, this is an exciting new area for trade research and policy. There is still much
to learn before we have a comprehensive understanding of these questions.

References
Acquisti, Alessandro, Curtis Taylor, and Liad Wagman. 2016. "The
Privacy." Journal of Economic Literature, 54(2): 442-92.

Economics

of

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, The Economics of Growth, MIT Press, July 2009.
Aghion, Philippe, Antonin Bergeaud, Matthieu Lequien, and Marc Melitz, “The Impact of
Exports on Innovation: Theory and Evidence,” Working Paper, Harvard University,
March 2017.
Aghion, Philippe, Christopher Harris, Peter Howitt, and John Vickers, “Competition,
Imitation and Growth with Step-by-Step Innovation,” Review of Economic Studies, 2001, 68
(3), 467–492.
Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt,
“Competition and Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2005, 120 (2), 701–728.
Agrawal, Ajay, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb. 2016. The Simple Economics of Machine
Intelligence. Harvard Business Review Online. November 17
Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, “Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and International
Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118 (3), 433–484.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen,
“Concentrating on the Fall of the Labor Share,” Working Paper 23108, NBER January 2017.
28

Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, and Jialan Wang, “Superstar Extinction,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (2), 549–589.
Beron, Kurt J., James C. Murdoch, and Wim P.M. Vijverberg, “Why cooperate? Public Goods,
Economic Power, and the Montreal Protocol,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85 (2) (2003),
286–297.
Brander, James A. and Barbara J. Spencer, “Tariffs and the Extraction of Foreign Monopoly
Rents under Potential Entry,” Canadian Journal of Economics, August 1981, 14 (3), 371–
389.
Busch, Marc L., Trade Warriors: States, Firms, and Strategic-Trade Policy in High-Technology
Competition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Davies, Ronald B., and Krishna Chaitanya Vadlamannati, “A Race to the Bottom in Labor
Standards? An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Development Economics, 2013, 103, 1–14.
Duranton, Gilles, “California Dreamin’: The Feeble Case for Cluster Policies,” Review of
Economic Analysis, July 2011, 3 (1), 3–45.
Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga, “Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Innovation, and
the Life Cycle of Products,” American Economic Review, December 2001, 91 (5), 1454–1477.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Gene M. Grossman. 1986. Optimal Trade and Industrial Policy Under
Oligopoly. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2), 383-406.
Ethier, Wilfred J., “National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern Theory of
International Trade,” American Economic Review, June 1982, 72 (3), 389–405.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Gene M. Grossman, and Elhanan Helpman, “Income Distribution,
Product Quality, and International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, August 2011, 119
(4), 721–765.
Fredriksson, Per G., and Daniel L. Millimet, “Strategic Interaction and the Determination of
Environmental Policy across U.S. States,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2002, 51 (1), 101–122.
Goldfarb, Avi and Catherine Tucker, “Privacy Regulation and Online Advertising,” Management
Science, 2011, 57(1), 57–71.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker, “Privacy and Innovation,” in Innovation Policy and the
Economy, eds. Josh Lerner and Scott Stern, 2012, 12. NBER, University of Chicago Press, 65–89.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, “Product Development and International
Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, December 1989, 97 (6), 1261–1283.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, “Trade, Innovation, and Growth,” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 1990, 80 (2), 86–91.
29

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global
Economy, Cambridge, Mass. and London: MIT Press, 1991.
Grossman, Gene M. and Alan B. Krueger, “Economic Growth and the Environment,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, May 1995, 110 (2), 353–377.
Grossman, Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “External Economies and International
Trade Redux,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (2), 829–858.
Grossman, Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “Task Trade Between Similar Countries,”
Econometrica, 2012, 80 (2), 593–629.
Helpman, Elhanan, “Increasing Returns, Imperfect Markets, and Trade Theory,” in Peter B.
Kenen Ronald W. Jones, ed., Handbook of International Economics, New York and
Amsterdam and Oxford: NorthHolland, 1984, pp. 325–365.
Irwin, Douglas A and Peter J Klenow, “Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the Semiconductor
Industry,” Journal of Political Economy, December 1994, 102 (6), 1200–1227.
Klette, Tor Jakob and Samuel Kortum, “Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation,”
Journal of Political Economy, October 2004, 112 (5), 986–1018.
Krugman, Paul, Strategic Trade Policy and the New International Economics, Cambridge: MA:
MIT Press, 1986.
Krugman, Paul R., “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,”
American Economic Review, December 1980, 70 (5), 950–959.
Krugman, Paul R. and Anthony J. Venables, “Globalization and the Inequality of Nations,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1995, 110 (4), 857–880.
Lileeva, Alla and Daniel Trefler, “Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-Level
Productivity ... for Some Plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2010, CXXV (3),
1051–1100.
Lim, Kevin, Daniel Trefler, and Miaojie Yu, “Trade and Innovation: The Role of Scale and
Competition Effects,” Working Paper, University of Toronto, January 2017.
McLaren, John, “ ‘C=Globalization’ and Vertical Structure,’ American Economic Review,
December 2000, 90 (5), 1239–1254.
Manasse, Paolo and Alessandro Turrini, “Trade, Wages, and Superstars,” Journal of
international Economics, 2001, 54 (1), 97–117.
Markusen, James R., “Trade and the Gains from Trade with Imperfect Competition,” Journal
of International Economics, November 1981, 11 (4), 531–551.
30

Marx, M., and L. Fleming. “Non-compete Agreements: Barriers to Entry…and Exit?” in J. Lerner
and S. Stern, eds., Innovation Policy and the Economy 12. (2012).
Mayer, Wolfgang, “Short-Run and Long-Run Equilibrium for a Small Open Economy,”
Journal of Political Economy, September-October 1974, 82 (5), 955–967.
Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity,” Econometrica, November 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725

Miller, A. R. and C. Tucker. 2011. Can healthcare IT save babies? Journal of Political Economy.
119(2), 289-332.
Mussa, Michael L., “Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of Factor
Specificity, Substitutability, and Intensity in the Short and Long Run,” Journal of Political
Economy, November-December 1974, 82 (6), 1191–1203.
Oberfield, Ezra, “A Theory of Input-Output Architecture,” Econometrica, forthcoming.
Porter, Michael E., “The Competitive Advantage of Nations,” Harvard Business Review,
March- April 1990, 68 (2), 73–93.
Rauch, James E., “Networks versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of International
Economics, 1999, 48 (1), 7–35.
Rivera-Batiz, Luis A. and Paul M. Romer, “Economic Integration and Endogenous Growth,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1991, 106 (2), 531–555.
Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy,
October 1990, 98 (5), S71–102.
Rosen, Sherwin. "The Economics of Superstars." The American Economic Review 71, no. 5
(1981): 845-58.
Ruffin, Roy J. and Ronald W. Jones, “Protection and Real Wages:
Ambiguity,” Journal of Economic Theory, April 1977, 14 (2), 337–348.

the Neoclassical

Saxenian, AnnaLee, Regional Advantage Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route
128, Cambridge: MA: Harvard University Press, 1994.
Simcoe, Timothy, “Standard Setting Committees: Consensus Governance for Shared Technology
Platforms,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 305–36.
Uyarra, Elvira and Ronnie Ramlogan, “The Effects of Cluster Policy on Innovation
Compendium of Evidence on the Effectiveness of Innovation Policy Intervention,” Technical
Report, Manchester Institute of Innovation Research Manchester Business School, March
2012.
31

