                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   EXCHANGE TRADED FUNDS 101 FOR ECONOMISTS

                                        Martin Lettau
                                       Ananth Madhavan

                                      Working Paper 24250
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24250


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2018




Martin Lettau is the Kruttschnitt Family Chair in Financial Institutions, Haas School of Business,
University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California. He is a Research Associate at the
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts and a Research Fellow at the
Centre for Economic Policy Research, London, United Kingdom. Ananth Madhavan is Managing
Director, Global Head of ETF and Index Investing Research, BlackRock, Inc., San Francisco,
California. The views expressed here are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily
represent the views of BlackRock, Inc nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
BlackRock the largest worldwide provider of ETFs.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Martin Lettau and Ananth Madhavan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Exchange Traded Funds 101 For Economists
Martin Lettau and Ananth Madhavan
NBER Working Paper No. 24250
January 2018
JEL No. G0,G12,G2

                                         ABSTRACT

Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) represent one of the most important financial innovations in
decades. An ETF is an investment vehicle that trades intraday and seeks to replicate the
performance of a specific index. In recent years ETFs have grown substantially in assets,
diversity, and market significance. This growth reflects the rise in passive asset management
where investors seek to track a benchmark index rather than outperform the market as a whole.
As a consequence, there is increased attention by investors, regulators, and academics seeking to
assess and understand the implications of this rapid growth. This article explains the key drivers
of ETF growth and their implications for economists and policy makers.


Martin Lettau
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Bldg. #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
lettau@haas.berkeley.edu

Ananth Madhavan
BlackRock
400 Howard Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
Ananth.Madhavan@blackrock.com
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) represent one of the most important financial innovations in
decades. As such, they are of considerable interest to economists, but the literature on ETFs is, as
we shall see, still at an early stage. An ETF is an investment vehicle, with an architecture shown
in Figure 1 (to be discussed), that typically seeks to track the performance of a specific index,
like an index mutual fund does. But an ETF is not a mutual fund. The first US-listed ETF, the
SPDR, was launched by State Street in January 1993 and seeks to track the S&P 500 index. It is
still today the largest ETF by far with assets of $178 billion as of September 2017. Following the
introduction of the SPDR, new ETFs were launched tracking broad domestic and international
indices, and more specialized sector, region, or country indexes. In recent years, ETFs have
grown substantially in assets, diversity, and market significance, including substantial increases
in assets in bond ETFs and so-called “smart beta” funds that track certain investment strategies
often used by actively traded mutual funds and hedge funds. These trends have the potential for
dramatically reshaping the broader investment landscape, as we discuss below. Globally, assets
of exchange-traded funds under management are $4.3 trillion in September 2017 (exceeding the
hedge fund industry) in roughly 6,300 investment vehicles (according to the BlackRock 2017b).
These totals should be viewed against the global total market value of equity and fixed income
securities in excess of $160 trillion.
          In this paper, we begin by describing the structure and organization of exchange-traded
funds. We offer a number of contrasts with mutual funds, which are close relatives of exchange-
traded funds, describing the differences in how ETFs operate and their potential advantages in
terms of liquidity, lower expenses, tax efficiency, and transparency.
          We then turn to concerns over whether the rise in ETFs may raise unexpected risks for
investors or greater instability in financial markets. Some of the potential issues include what
happens when an ETF is delisted; risks when ETFs lend their securities to short-sellers; concerns
about ETFs that trade intraday but are based on infrequently traded assets; and whether ETF
flows could lead to price distortions or additional volatility. While concerns over financial
fragility are worth serious consideration, some of these concerns are overstatements, and for
others, a number of rules and practices are already in place that offer a substantial margin of
safety.




                                                  3
       The conclusion of the article offers some suggestions for future research in this growing
field. For more comprehensive treatments of ETFs and related investment vehicles, interested
readers might start with Hill, Nadig, and Hougan (2015) and Madhavan (2016).


Structure and Ecosystem: Comparing Exchange-Traded Funds and Mutual Funds


       Most economists are familiar with mutual funds, so it is useful to describe how ETFs
function by comparing them with mutual funds (for a survey of the literature on mutual funds,
see Elton and Gruber 2013).1


Who Creates and Trades Shares?

       A mutual fund holds the underlying assets: for example, an S&P 500 index fund holds a
portfolio of stocks that makes up the S&P 500 index. The manager of a mutual fund will contract
with a pricing provider to determine a “net asset value” (NAV) of the fund based on the last
recorded prices of the component securities.2 In a mutual fund, all transactions occur at the end
of the day and at net asset value. If this index fund experiences a net in-flow of investment at the
end of the day, the mutual fund itself will purchase more shares of stock.
        An exchange-traded fund also holds a portfolio of assets; however, in contrast to a
mutual fund, it does not interact with capital markets directly Instead, the ETF manager (or


1 In particular, we focus here on “open-end” mutual funds, in which the number of “shares” in
the fund, and hence its size, can expand and contract. In a closed-end mutual fund, by contrast,
the fund’s shares, once issued, are fixed in supply and they trade on the open market at prices
that could be quite different from net asset value. There is typically a discount on closed-end
funds, which represents a puzzle for economists because, in theory, a substantial discount should
mean that the fund could benefit its investors by liquidating and returning the proceeds. There is
a large literature on the nature and properties of the closed-end fund discount (in this journal, see
Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler 1990; see also Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler 1991; Elton, Gruber, and Busse
1998; Berk and Stanton 2007).

2 For international mutual funds, net asset value is often adjusted, or “fair valued,” based on
market movements in other markets (for example, by adjusting valuations in emerging markets
based on US futures market movements) to prevent gaming. Similarly, bond fund valuations may
also be adjusted by the pricing provider because component securities might have traded days,
even weeks, ago. Grégoire (2013) finds evidence that mutual funds do not fully adjust their
valuations to reflect fair value, and returns remain predictable.

                                                 4
sponsor such as Vanguard or State Street) enters into a legal contract with one or several
“Authorized Participants” (APs), typically large financial institutions or more specialized
market-makers, who in turn interact with the markets (see Figure 1). In particular, the ETF
manager can issue or redeem shares with Authorized Participants in large blocks, known as
creation units, in exchange for a basket of securities and/or cash. This mechanism, by which the
shares of the ETF are adjusted in response to supply and demand, is known as the
creation/redemption mechanism. Here, “creations” refer to increasing the supply of ETF shares;
“redemptions” refer to a decrease in the shares outstanding of the ETF.
       Both current fund holdings and the basket of securities that the ETF will accept for
creations or redemptions on the next business day are published at the end of each trading day.
The transactions between an ETF manager and an Authorized Participants are typically either for
cash or “in-kind” where the Authorized Participants delivers or receives a basket of securities
identical (or very similar) to the ETF’s holdings. Like other investors, Authorized Participants
can buy or sell ETF shares in the secondary market exchange, but they also can purchase or
redeem shares directly from the ETF if they believe there is a profit opportunity. The process of
ETF share creation or redemption for an ETF is illustrated in Figure 1, where we show the “in-
kind” exchange of securities for ETF shares. The process of a cash creation (not typical) is
similar.
       Early ETFs were almost exclusively seeking to track broad value-weighted equity indices
(for example, the S&P 500) but ETFs today track a wide variety of equity and fixed-income
indices. There are also active ETFs that are akin to active mutual funds in that they seek to
outperform a benchmark index, but to date they are still a small fraction of total ETF assets.




How is the Price of Shares Determined?
       Managers of exchange-traded funds are, like mutual funds, required by the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) to publish a “net asset value” for their funds. In contrast to mutual
funds, investors in exchange-traded funds mostly do not trade the fund directly. Instead, they
deal with each other on an exchange, or with Authorized Participants and other liquidity
providers. Investors can buy and sell shares in ETFs through a broker, just as they buy and sell
shares of publicly listed companies. This secondary market trading does not lead to transactions



                                                 5
in the underlying securities, which greatly reduces the transaction costs that arise when investors
redeem from the fund. The secondary market (exchange-traded) trading volume for most ETFs is
typically a multiple of the volume of creation/redemption activity by the Authorized Participants.
According to Investment Company Institute statistics for 2014, this ratio is about 4:1 over all
ETFs.
        Although shares of exchange-traded funds can be created or redeemed at the end of each
trading day, the Authorized Participants will typically lock in any profits intraday. For example,
when an ETF is trading at a premium to an Authorized Participant’s estimate of value (which
need not be the net asset value of the fund), the Authorized Participants may choose to deliver
the creation basket of securities in exchange for ETF shares, which in turn it could elect to sell or
keep. The creation/redemption mechanism works through arbitrage to help keep the price of an
exchange-traded fund close to the intrinsic value of an ETF’s holdings in the underlying market.
        In the context of an exchange-traded fund, deviations of price from the announced net
asset value do not necessarily imply the existence of arbitrage opportunities, especially for
international funds and for funds whose constituents may be difficult to value because of
infrequent trading. As noted above, the ETF sponsor contracts with market data vendors (or other
third parties) to calculate and publish net asset value based on past prices. Vendors also provide
an Intraday Indicative Value that is disseminated at regular intervals during the trading day,
typically every 15 seconds. This value is usually based on the most recent (possibly stale) trade.
Thus, if the exchange-traded fund holds Japanese stocks, say, the closing price (or quote) from
Tokyo is used throughout the US trading day and a foreign exchange adjustment is made for any
change in the yen/dollar relationship since the Tokyo markets are closed. For fixed-income
funds, the provider of the Intraday Indicative Value may not necessarily fully update the prices
of securities that do not trade, or include adjustments for accrued fees or liabilities that vendors
usually reflect in their end-of-day net asset value.
        Madhavan and Sobczyk (2016) develop and test a model of exchange-traded fund price
dynamics where arbitrage corrects deviations between the price of ETFs and the underlying
value of the basket. In their model, the actions of arbitragers reduce these deviations over time,
yielding a metric for the speed of price discovery. The model explains why premiums and
discounts to net asset value need not necessarily constitute mispricing or the existence of
arbitrage opportunities, as well as why ETF returns may be more volatile than the returns of the



                                                  6
benchmark index. They empirically estimate the model for the universe of US-listed exchange-
traded funds and find that, on average, the speed of price discovery (measured by the half-life to
correct any given deviation of price from basket value) is shortest for US equity-focused funds
and greatest for international-bond funds, which is consistent with the observed pattern of
liquidity.
         Ultimately, the intraday tradability of exchange-traded funds is really a by-product of
having the price of the fund determined by the market through the interaction of buyers and
sellers, unlike an open-ended mutual fund where liquidity is offered only at the close and only at
net asset value. As such, ETFs can serve as important vehicles for price discovery when the
underlying markets are stressed or illiquid. International funds provide daily examples of this
point.


Transaction Costs: Externalized
         An important difference from a mutual fund structure is that transaction costs in an ETF
are “externalized.” Consider a hypothetical mutual fund with assets of $100 million and one
million shares outstanding. The average bid–ask spreads of the underlying assets are for
illustrative purposes assumed to be 0.20 percent, and so one-way transaction costs are 0.10
percent. Suppose on a given day there are $5 million of inflows (subscriptions) and $20 million
of outflows (redemptions) for a net outflow of $15 million. Say also that fundamental values
remain constant over the day. In the traditional open-ended mutual fund example, subscriptions
and redemptions occur at the net asset value of $100, and the fund manager must sell $15 million
of the underlying assets. These sales will tend to occur at the bid price of the underlying assets,
and hence an average discount of 0.10 percent to net asset value. At the start of the following
day, net asset value is––assuming no change in fundamentals––equal to $84,985,000, which is
calculated as the original $100 million, minus the $15 million in sold assets, and also minus the
transaction costs of selling. In other words, remaining investors in the mutual fund bear the
transaction costs incurred by the participants who redeemed or subscribed.
         In contrast, in exchange-traded funds, the sellers of the fund will transact directly with
buyers at a market determined price. Net selling does not require the ETF manager to interact
with the capital markets, meaning that in this example, fund investors who do not sell will hold a
fund whose assets are valued at $85 million.



                                                   7
       Moreover, in exchange-traded funds the distribution fees are externalized. In a
“compensation model” for financial advisers, which is increasingly common worldwide,
financial advisors are paid directly by the client for their services typically based on the amount
of assets managed. For these professional advisors, ETFs are attractive because distribution,
account servicing, or maintenance fees are not included in the expense ratio. Mutual fund
managers often pay financial advisers a commission, called a "retrocession," for selling their
products to clients. In Europe, the recent trend towards eliminating these payments (through laws
that state that advisors should act in their clients' interests) puts ETFs and mutual funds on par in
terms of compensation, from the perspective of a financial advisor. That change should also
increase incentives for advisors to offer their clients ETFs as an element of portfolio
construction.


Other Considerations
       Compared to active mutual funds or to hedge funds, ETFs offer greater transparency
because their investment strategies are specified in advance and their holdings are listed daily
versus quarterly. The ETF structure also enables lower fees than traditional active mutual funds.
Since mutual funds interact directly with investors (Antoniewicz and Heinrichs 2014; Hill,
Nadig, and Hougan 2015) they accrue distribution and record-keeping costs. Indeed, mutual
funds may levy fees (such as transfer agency fees or 12b-1 fees that compensate the fund for
distribution and service) that ETFs do not, raising the cost to own mutual funds.
       An investor in ETF shares, unlike a traditional mutual fund investor, can short shares,
lend shares, and can buy on margin, as with stocks. (With short sales, an investor faces the
potential for unlimited losses as the security’s price rises. There are special risks associated with
margin investing. As with stocks, an investor may be called upon to deposit additional cash or
securities to their account, there is no guarantee that there will be borrower demand for the ETF,
and a short sale may or may not be recalled.)
       Relative to open-ended index mutual funds, exchange-traded funds can potentially offer
significant tax advantages that derive from the ability to use in-kind transfers to reduce capital
gains distributions, as explained in detail in Poterba and Shoven (2002). The ability to trade
ETFs intraday also makes them attractive to hedge funds and other institutions seeking to hedge
risks or gain exposure based on macroeconomic and other news events.



                                                  8
Potential Issues for ETFs


       One potential issue for ETFs is that some investors may not have the financial
sophistication to distinguish between the types of ETFs (for example, funds that are levered or
that are based on unsecured debt) in the absence of a common classification scheme. A second
issue is that, intraday liquidity might induce “too much” trading. Barber and Odean (2000) show
that individual investors who trade actively in individual stocks suffer lower returns than
investors who trade less. The liquidity of ETFs might lead to a similar effect relative to less-
liquid mutual funds. Finally, the proliferation of indices, some custom and others concentrated,
pose challenges for ordinary investors. Asset managers may create indices that are designed to
do well in backtesting but might not do well going forward. We will address potential concerns
about the growth of ETFs in more detail later in the paper.


The Size and Types of Exchange-Traded Products


       Equity-based exchange-traded funds still dominate the ETF landscape, accounting for
over 78 percent of the $4.3 trillion in exchange-traded product assets, but other asset classes
(including fixed income, which is 17 percent of assets) have become more important recently
(according to BlackRock 2017b).
       Distinguishing among different kinds of exchange-traded products is useful given that
regulatory concerns about the possible disruptive effects of ETFs often focus on a relatively
small subset of the universe of exchange-traded products. For example, exchange-traded notes
are senior, unsecured (either collateralized or more likely uncollateralized) debt securities that
are exposed to the credit risk (solvency) of the issuer, typically an investment bank. Only 2.3
percent of global assets in all exchange-traded products are held in exchange-traded notes. A
small subcategory of exchange-traded notes includes ETFs that are not backed by publicly traded
holdings; ETFs backed by bank loans are about $7 billion or 0.2 percent of total assets in
exchange-traded products. Exchange-traded commodity funds are funds that hold physical
commodities such as silver or gold. Leveraged and inverse exchange-traded products, which




                                                  9
represent 1.3 percent of global assets in exchange-traded products, hold the individual index
stocks as well and thus have elements of physical-backing (Madhaven 2016).
       Table 1 shows the assets under management (AUM) of broad categories of exchange-
traded funds, including equity, fixed income, commodity, currency, and alternative/asset
allocation ETFs. The vast majority of ETFs, representing 92.5 percent of global assets of
nondebt funds are traditional ETFs that typically hold a portfolio of securities (stocks or bonds)
that closely resembles, but need not necessarily fully replicate, their benchmark index
(Madhavan 2016). These funds seek to provide one-to-one exposure to the index, usually broad
market gauges offered by index providers. Beyond helping investors distinguish among
exchange-traded products, a sensible classification scheme could help speed up the regulatory
process for "plain vanilla" funds comprised of stocks/bonds that do not use leverage, swaps, and
other financial tools.
       Table 1 also shows the number of different indices tracked by ETFs for a variety of
different asset classes. Exchange-traded funds track 130 US large cap indices, the largest ETF
sector. In addition to these broad market indices, ETFs seek to track 208 sector indices and
hundreds of other more specialized indices. ETFs also span 180 indices across different fixed-
income markets as well as 126 commodities and 22 currency indices.


Equity Exchange-Traded Funds
       Table 2 takes a closer look at equity ETFs.
       The growth of ETFs is linked to a broad shift from actively managed mutual funds to
passive investment vehicles. During the period from 2007 to 2015, over $425 billion flowed into
passive mutual funds and $730 billion into exchange-traded funds, while actively managed
mutual funds lost $835 billion in assets under management (Investment Company Institute
2016). It is also worth noting that until the advent of electronic data delivery and cheaper
computing technology, it was quite costly to manage an index portfolio of several hundred or
thousand constituents relative to a concentrated active portfolio of, say, 50–70 stocks. Indeed, it
was only in the 1970s that it became cost effective to manage an index fund. ETFs succeeded in
the 1990s as a result of regulation that saw them as a way to provide market stability after the
crash of 1987 without portfolio trading of individual stocks (as reported in Balchunas 2016).




                                                 10
       Yet despite the shift into index vehicles, considerable room for growth remains. The
global investable universe for equities—the value of all publicly traded company stocks—is an
estimated $68 trillion (according to BlackRock 2017a). Traditional open-end mutual funds, index
and active, hold approximately 15.2 percent and 4 percent, respectively, of the investable equity
universe. (Among open-end mutual funds, index funds represent 7.4 percent of the equity
universe.)
       Fee differentials and the difficulties of beating a benchmark may explain some of the
movement from active to passive indexing, including exchange-traded funds. The management
fees for mutual funds have declined in recent years: in 2000, management fees of active mutual
funds on average were 106 basis points, about 80 basis points higher than fees of index mutual
funds. By 2015, average fees of active funds declined by about 20 basis points while average
fees of index funds have declined by 16 basis points (Investment Company Institute 2016).
Average fees of bond mutual funds have declined by a comparable margin. The fees for
exchange-traded funds are typically lower than actively traded mutual funds but higher than
those for passive index mutual funds. The majority of mutual funds have not outperformed their
benchmarks once fees are taken into account (for example, Carhart 1997; Grinblatt and Titman
1992; Elton, Gruber, and Blake 2011).
       On Table 2, the second category of equity ETFs (after the market-cap-based ETFs) is the
sector exchange-traded funds, which typically seek to track market-weighted capitalization
benchmarks for each sector. The main sectors that are represented by ETFs, each with about
$10–$13 billion in assets under management, are (from larger to smaller) natural resources, real
estate, financial services, health, technology, and consumer goods. It is interesting to note that
the shares of these specific sectoral funds among the total for all sectoral funds are similar to the
corresponding sector weights in the S&P 500 index.
       The third category of equity ETFs on Table 2 is so-called “smart beta” or factor
exchange-traded funds. These ETFs follow weighting schemes that differ from traditional market
cap-based indices and are primarily driven by the desire to outperform the market portfolio by
focusing on certain factors that have been linked to stock returns. Smart beta ETFs blur the lines
between traditional active versus passive investment strategies. On the one hand, these ETFs
offer exposure to risk factors that traditionally have been exploited by active mutual funds and
hedge funds. On the other hand, smart beta ETFs track specific indices in a transparent and rule-



                                                 11
based manner, and there is no active money manager who “picks” stocks. Consequently, the
expense ratios of factor ETFs are typically lower than those of comparable active mutual funds
and hedge funds. These ETFs have become more popular recently, but as Table 2 shows,
factor/smart beta ETFs accounted for about 25 percent of total equity assets under management.
The importance of factor/smart beta ETFs is expected to grow as investors seek to capture factor
premia.
       What are some of the common factors that smart beta funds seek to capture? The largest
factor ETF category focuses on “value stocks” and “growth stocks,” a categorization that goes
back to Graham and Dodd (1934). Growth stocks tend to have high ratios of stock prices to
fundamentals, such as earnings, sales, and book values. In contrast, value stocks have low price-
to-earnings and high book-to-market ratios. A large academic literature has investigated the risk
and returns of value and growth stocks going back to Ball (1978) and Basu (1983), as
summarized by Bali, Engle, and Murray (2016). The key finding is that value stocks have
outperformed growth stocks, and this “value premium” cannot be explained by traditional risk
models, such as the classic single-factor Capital Asset Pricing Model. Before the advent of factor
ETFs, investors had two options to gain exposure to value/growth stocks: either they had to
purchase individual stocks directly from a broker or they invested in actively managed
value/growth mutual funds. Both options carry significant transaction costs and/or management
fees. Factor ETFs enable investors a similar objective at significantly lower cost.
       While growth/value ETFs represent by far the largest fraction of factor ETFs, many ETFs
track other “factors” such as dividend yield or momentum. For example, long–short factors
discussed in Fama and French (2015) include: “high minus low,” which is a long–short portfolio
that invests in high book-to-market value stocks and shorts high book-to-market growth stocks;
“small minus big," which is long in small stocks and short in large stocks; “up minus down,”
which is a momentum factor that is long in stocks that have had high return over the previous
year and short in stocks that had low returns; “robust minus weak,” which is the difference
between returns of profitable firms and unprofitable firms; and “conservative minus aggressive,”
which is the difference between returns of firms that invest a lot and firms with low investment
rates. Unlike the long/short factors used in academic research, most ETF factor funds are long-
only. Factor ETFs are low-cost investment vehicles for investors who seek long-only exposure to




                                                12
well-known factor risks with lower fees than active mutual fund and hedge fund managers.3
Some recent “smart beta” ETFs combine multiple factors to exploit diversification and
correlations across factors, and seek exposure to risk premia (for example, exchange-rate risk)
beyond just equities.
       In 2008, the Securities and Exchange Commission adopted new guidelines for listing of
active ETFs. These ETFs have a benchmark index, as passive ETFs, but allow the ETF manager
discretionary portfolio decisions with the goal of outperforming the benchmark. Unlike active
mutual funds and hedge funds, active ETFs are required to disclose their portfolio holdings daily.
Active ETFs, while still a fraction of total assets, further blur the lines between active and
passive investment management. The complexity of mutual funds and ETFs requires careful
research and financial sophistication on the part of potential investors.


Fixed Income and Commodity Exchange-Traded Funds
       Fixed income exchange-traded funds (going back to Figure 1) have grown dramatically in
recent years. Initially, these were typically portfolios of investment grade and government bonds;
more recently, bond ETFs have been created based on high-yield bonds and even bank loans. As
of September 2017, bond ETFs account for about 17 percent, or $740 billion, of total assets
invested in ETFs.
       What explains this rapid growth in bond exchange-traded funds? Investors in individual
bonds face a number of challenges. First, many corporate bonds are traded primarily in the
opaque, dealer (“over-the-counter”) market. By contrast, bond EFTs trade intraday on electronic
exchanges, many with low bid–offer spreads compared to the underlying bonds (for example,
Hendershott and Madhavan 2015). Second, unlike individual bonds, fixed income ETFs offer a
high degree of transparency, meaning that bid and offer quotes are readily available. Third, many
individual bonds are illiquid and trade infrequently. Bid–ask spreads in bond markets can be
significantly higher than spreads in equity markets, while exchange-traded bond funds typically
offer greater liquidity and diversification. Fourth, keeping the maturity of a bond portfolio




3 The Appendix includes calculations of how the returns to actively managed mutual funds
compare with the returns from a portfolio based on these kinds of factors, along with sector
funds.

                                                 13
constant requires constant trading, but a bond ETF can be designed to do this without the need
for ongoing attention and trading.
       Bond exchange-traded funds are attractive to individual bond buyers—either retail or
institutional—in the context of these challenges. Pension funds have started to embrace the
concept of passive investing in fixed income assets because of low cost, diversification, and
transparency. Other investor types, such as hedge funds or large institutions, may use bond ETFs
as exposure vehicles or ways to invest cash.
       There has also been considerable interest in commodity-based exchange-traded funds,
often viewed as a hedge against inflation or a source of diversification, although the role of
commodity ETFs has declined since 2013 when prices of many commodities fell dramatically.
Commodity ETFs for the most part must invest indirectly via futures contracts, with the
exception of certain precious metals (including gold), because the physical costs of storage of
commodities would push the expenses of a commodity ETF far too high (Madhavan 2016).
Because ETF commodity funds offer exposure via futures contracts (including those on esoteric
asset classes such as volatility), they need not always reflect spot returns.4


Concerns and Misconceptions


       An investor can lose money with exchange-traded funds, of course, just as an investor
can lose money with mutual funds, hedge funds, or any of the underlying assets. The salient
question here is whether there may be certain kinds of risks with exchange-traded funds that
make them riskier than commonly perceived—either for individual investors, or for financial
markets, or even for the economic system as a whole. We will argue that while certain concerns
do exist with regard to ETFs, as they do for other financial markets, the concerns are often based
on misconceptions. We begin with concerns for individuals and then move to questions of the
broader impact of index investing on the markets and the macro economy.


Fund Closures, Shorting, and Counterparty Risk


4 Madhavan (2016) shows the impact of the futures forward curve for volatility, where the
normal upward slope of the curve implies negative returns on average to an investor who rolls
from near to far contracts to gain exposure to spot volatility.


                                                 14
        Individual investors often worry about the risk of losing their entire investment. Closures
of exchange-traded funds, like the closures of mutual funds, are not uncommon. Anywhere from
50 to 80 exchange-traded funds close each year (Madhavan 2016).
        While the closure of an ETF can attract attention, it does not create investment risk in
itself (unlike a firm’s bankruptcy), as the fund’s underlying assets should not be affected. When
an ETF closes, its price should converge to its net asset value. A plain-vanilla unlevered fund is
just a pool of assets, and should the fund be redeemed in full, the assets can potentially simply be
returned in kind. Of course, investors in a fund to be closed may experience unanticipated capital
gains taxes and, for a time, a possible lack of liquidity.
        For other exchange-traded products, these risks may be greater. In 2008, Lehman
Brothers had issued exchange-traded notes that were unsecured debt obligations. When Lehman
Brothers declared bankruptcy, there were no underlying assets to be returned to investors. This
case highlights our earlier remarks regarding the need for a classification scheme to help
investors distinguish between the various types of exchange-traded products. There can also be
counterparty risk, when certain synthetic exchange-traded funds enter into swap positions with
investment banks. However, the risk that any given counterparty might fail is mitigated by
diversification rules that spread the risk across multiple swap counterparts. It is unlikely that
such losses could exceed the assets of an exchange-traded fund, because even a leveraged fund is
collateralized with cash and securities.
        Let us turn now from fund closures to other concerns that could lead to significant
individual investor losses, and possibly larger impacts on the financial system. Specifically, one
possible concern is that when exchange-traded funds are sold short, the aggregate long and
synthetic long positions can exceed the total actual number of outstanding ETF shares (for
example, Bradley and Litan 2010). If many investors simultaneously redeem their shares in an
ETF at the same time, some argue that this could theoretically “bankrupt” the fund, as
redemptions would exceed available assets to be redeemed. However, institutional details around
ETF settlement make this scenario remote. On the settlement day, ETF managers only release
redemption proceeds against actual delivery of the ETF shares. An attempt to redeem by a party
that does not actually physically have ETF shares to deliver (say, because they have lent their
shares to a short seller) will simply fail to settle. It is possible that the failure of a large number




                                                   15
of such attempted “redemptions” could itself result in market disruption, but this scenario seems
remote.
          A closely related set of concerns involves securities lending and counterparty risk.
Securities lending is the temporary transfer of a security by its owner (for example, a pension
fund) to another party (for example, a hedge fund), typically for the purposes of a short-sale. The
lender remains the owner of the security, and hence is exposed to any security price movement
over the life of the loan. The borrower usually provides collateral (typically in excess of the
security’s value ranging from 102–112 percent) to compensate the lender in the rare case that the
borrower fails to return the borrowed security.
       Can securities lending by an exchange-traded fund pose a threat to investors? First note
that in the United States there is presently a 50 percent aggregate statutory limit on the extent to
which exchange-traded funds can lend their underlying securities. Moreover, other safeguards on
lending include the ability to recall loans from borrowers and possibly even the liquidation of the
borrower’s collateral. Securities lending may help enhance ETF returns when safeguarded in
these ways. From a market perspective, securities lending can help improve liquidity and price
efficiency by reducing the costs of expressing negative views through short-selling, helping to
keeps asset bubbles from forming. Although securities lending is prevalent and economically
significant, the academic literature on securities lending is nascent.


Flash Events and Systemic Risk
       Another issue that concerns both individuals and regulators concerned with the broader
markets are “flash events,” marked by sharp price movements and subsequent reversals in
compressed time intervals). In the “Flash Crash” of May 6, 2010, the Dow Jones Industrial
Average dropped almost 1,000 points in 20 minutes. Many well-known stocks briefly traded at
clearly unreasonable prices, including some that traded at pennies.
       Exchange-traded funds were disproportionately represented among the securities most
affected (for discussion, see Borkovec, Domowitz, Serbin, and Yergerman 2010), with prices
diverging widely from their underlying net asset values, which led some commentators to draw a




                                                  16
connection from the sharp market moves on May 6 to the pricing and trading of these
instruments (for example, Wurgler 2011).5
       Madhavan (2012) also describes some market structure issues, including increased
market fragmentation and the proliferation of new venues, which could be factors in a flash
event. He also finds evidence that aggressive “order-sweeping” trades—that is, a large trade
executed all at once at whatever range of prices are being offered at the moment, rather than
spread out over time in an attempt to get the best possible price—were related to the market
dislocation, as opposed to structural problems with ETFs. A similar flash event in August 2015
has led many industry participants, including asset managers, brokers, and exchanges, to
organize and implement many important changes to market structure.
       Flash events have taken place in other asset classes since 2010, including US Treasury
bonds and currencies, where ETFs are minor. On October 15, 2014, the yield on the 10-year US
Treasury note fell to 1.86 percent before reversing to 2.13 percent within a 15-minute time
interval. A Joint Staff Report (US Department of the Treasury et al. 2015) by staff of US
Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and financial regulators found that the intraday yield change was
eight standard deviations greater than normal and noted: “For such significant volatility and a
large round-trip in prices to occur in so short a time with no obvious catalyst is unprecedented in
the recent history of the Treasury market.” This report found that speed and size of the yield
changes seems to trace back to the evolving structure of the Treasury market, including the role
of automated trading. As another example, the value of the UK pound sterling dropped by more
than 6 percent against the US dollar in just a few minutes on October 6, 2016, falling to a record
low of $1.1378 (as reported in McDonald 2016). These recent flash events highlight that the
need for further research on liquidity gaps in increasingly fast markets.


Liquidity Mismatch




5 Ramaswamy (2011) examines the operational frameworks of exchange-traded funds and
relates these to potential systemic risks. The role of leveraged ETFs has also been discussed (for
example, Cheng and Madhavan 2009) in the context of end-of-day volatility effects.




                                                17
       Liquidity is often described as the ability to buy or sell without causing substantial price
changes. In the case of exchange-traded funds, liquidity concerns can arise at several levels.
Liquidity in the primary market, where the underlying securities trade, refers to the ability of
Authorized Participants to acquire the underlying assets and transfer them in-kind (or vice versa)
to the ETF provider for shares in the fund or vice versa. The key role of Authorized Participants
in adjusting the ETFs shares outstanding to reflect supply and demand has often given rise to
questions of systemic risk if they should “step away” in a crisis. But if a particular Authorized
Participants ceased its activities in a certain ETF, other Authorized Providers seem highly likely
to provide liquidity. A comprehensive analysis of 931 US exchange-traded funds covering $1.8
trillion of assets under management by the Investment Company Institute (Antoniewicz and
Heinrichs 2015) shows that the largest ETFs—those of most concern from a systemic risk
viewpoint—have an average of 38 Authorized Participants. These issues are unlikely to be a
concern for ETFs with many Authorized Participants (which is most ETFs) since it is an unlikely
event that all Authorized Participants jointly cease their activities at the same time, but may be
relevant for smaller niche ETFs with just a few Authorized Participants. If all Authorized
Participants were to withdraw, the ETF would likely trade like a closed-end mutual fund (that is,
a fund with a fixed number of shares) with possibly wider premiums or discounts.
       A second set of concerns relate to the so-called secondary markets, the venues where
shares of exchange-traded funds actually trade. The liquidity (measured by dollar volume) in the
secondary market can be many times that of the primary market, as discussed earlier. In that
sense, the ETF liquidity in the secondary market (via the creation/redemption mechanism of
arbitrage) is generally greater than or equal to the liquidity of the underlying assets. The trading
of ETF shares on exchanges in the secondary market does not directly drive buying and selling
of the underlying stocks but rather reflects changes of ownership of the ETF. Purchases and sales
of stocks driven by the ETF creation and redemption process account for only 5 percent of all US
stock market trading. In other words, the existence of ETFs can add a layer of incremental
liquidity to the financial markets. From a financial stability viewpoint, this buffer is additive.


Impact on Underlying Markets
       Some commentators have raised questions about the effect of index investing—including
index mutual funds and exchange-traded funds—as a potential distortion of the prices of



                                                  18
underlying securities. From an academic perspective, the implications of the introduction of a
“basket” security like a diversified index mutual fund or ETF are not clear. Individual investors
can reduce their own costs of trading with informed agents by using basket securities as their
asymmetric information costs will be lower (Kyle 1985). To the extent that “noise traders
migrate to the basket market, liquidity in the underlying stocks or bonds may decline. However,
the creation of a low-cost diversified basket instrument may also open up access to new liquidity
investors who were previously unable to access the market due to cost or other constraints. This
means that the impact of a basket security on liquidity of the underlying market bonds is an
empirical question (for arguments that ETF trading adds additional volatility, see Dannhauser
2017; Ben David, Franzoni, and Moussawi 2017.)
       But in practical terms, the scale of index investing is still relatively small. Index investing
overall represents less than 20 percent of global equities (BlackRock 2017b). Index funds and
ETFs together represent just over 12 percent of the US equity universe, and 7 percent of the
global equity universe. Also, focusing on the dollar size of indexed assets diverts attention from
the real issue, namely the turnover by fund managers. Specifically, if we look more closely at US
equities, the majority of the assets in funds are actively managed, and active fund managers have
significantly greater turnover than passive index funds or ETFs.
       As previously noted, there is general agreement on the private benefits of indexing as an
efficient way to invest in lieu of paying for security selection. Questions and concerns have
increasingly shifted to the impact of index investments on pricing in financial markets (that is,
social impact), and some commentators have suggested that the growth of indexing can cause
prices to decouple from value. Index trackers are typically based on market capitalization
weighted schemes, so some argue that pricing errors in underlying stocks might feed on
themselves; a bubble in, say, tech stocks is reinforced by the mechanical action of index funds
who are price takers. Could ETF flows distort prices? Index funds are price-takers, not price-
makers. They invest, proportionally at whatever price is determined by the buying and selling of
active participants. So index assets are a proportional slice of the overall market—that is, a slice
of the aggregate value of all securities. The value of all active and other, non-indexed assets is
just the overall market less all index assets. Therefore, the money coming into index funds/ETFs
must come from the pool of non-indexed/active assets, which (from above) is a slice that is
proportional to the overall market, at all points in time.



                                                  19
       For index flows to distort prices, one would have to argue that despite having an origin in
a pool proportional to the overall market, the desire for index exposures is manifested very
differently in characteristics such as capitalization, sector, and so on. While this is possible, there
is no evidence that this is true. What about smart beta and other tilts that systematically deviate
from capitalization weights? They are still tiny relative to the overall market (Ang, Madhavan,
and Sobczyk 2017).
       Now consider the arguments about the impact of index inclusion on return correlations
and comovement of stocks. As many studies have shown, the average pairwise return correlation
between any two stocks has increased since 2000, a period of rapid growth in ETF and index
assets, but this trend followed a dramatic decline in pairwise correlations from the 1970s to the
late 1990s (Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu 2001). Moreover, cross-stock correlations were
higher in the 1930s before the advent of indexing (Madhavan 2016). Comovements among
currencies—an area with no meaningful index penetration—have similarly risen in the past
decade, again a reflection of the importance of central bank policy and a macro-driven
environment. Correlations have diminished significantly since 2013 despite significant increases
in ETF and index assets (as of March 2017).
       The success of active fund management has more to do with the dispersion of returns
than correlations. When common factors explain a large fraction of return movements relative to
security-specific return, correlations will by definition be large, and the opportunities for
professional managers will be correspondingly lower. Moreover, active bets are zero sum
irrespective of the correlation environment. That is not to say that active managers cannot profit
from active bets by other investors who may hold active positions for behavioral or other reasons
(like tax reasons or desire for stock in a certain company). Our point is that the share of active
and passive management is determined in a self-regulating manner. Markets will reach an
equilibrium when security selectors as a group break even after taxes and fees (Berk and Green
2004; Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor 2015).




                                                  20
Conclusions


       Exchange-traded products provide exposure to a wide range of asset classes (for example,
equities, fixed income commodities, and currencies), strategies (for example, passive index,
model-based, and active), and regions. Exchange-traded funds have grown substantially in
diversity and size in recent years along with the rise of passive, index investing. Equities still
account for over 78 percent of assets under management in ETFs as of 2017 (but there is rapid
growth in all asset classes, and fixed income in particular, with assets now in excess of $740
billion or 17 percent of the total in all exchange-traded products (according to BlackRock 2017b).
       The discussion in this paper has suggested a number of reasons behind this growth. First,
there are the traditional advantages of exchange-traded funds in terms of liquidity, low fees,
transparency, and potential tax advantages. Second, the universe of ETFs has been expanding
beyond the traditional equity-based funds, including funds providing access to fixed income,
commodities, currency, volatility, multi-asset class structures, and “smart beta” or factors. Many
of these new ETFs represent a blurring of the traditional line between active and passive
management. Third, the investor base of ETFs has also been expanding. As bank balance sheets
shrink in the new regulatory environment after the 2008–2009 financial crisis, ETFs are being
used by institutional investors as a substitute for futures, credit derivatives, swaps, and individual
bond trading. Professional financial advisers and hedge funds are making greater use of ETFs in
a number of ways. Model portfolios using ETFs and the rise of robo-advisors are also longer-
term trends that favor ETF use and adoption.
       There is little evidence of pressures or flaws that have uniquely affected ETFs compared
to other equity investment vehicles. Is turnover excessive? Do ETFs encourage overtrading?
These are valid questions that also arise for other low-cost vehicles for broad market price
discovery such as futures or swaps. Indeed, US futures trade approximately $250 billion a day,
with a high concentration of volume in S&P 500 and Russell 2000 portfolios; by contrast, ETFs
are traded in far more diverse portfolios including domestic and international equity,
commodities, fixed income, and alternatives. Moreover, the advent of discount brokerages has
dramatically reduced the cost of participating in financial markets. While such decreasing cost of
trading can be a double-edged sword (allowing broader participation in financial markets while
encouraging excessive trading), there is no evidence that financial markets have become less



                                                  21
efficient. In modern well-developed financial markets there are many vehicles for correcting
mispricing at the individual security level—for example, trading by individuals or sovereign
wealth funds, along with share repurchase and issuance, trading of stock options, and the ability
to take companies private/public.
       This paper also surveyed potential concerns for individuals as well as markets as a whole,
echoing the increased scrutiny of exchange-traded funds in the media and by regulators. A
problematic aspect of this discussion is that not enough attention is paid to the diversity of the
ETF landscape. There is no single “ETF.” Instead, potential concerns apply to some ETF types
but not to others. The vast majority of market share is invested in traditional passive, unlevered,
cap-based ETFs, which share many features of index mutual funds. It seems important to take a
more nuanced view that distinguishes the various ETF types in the same way we assess the pros
and cons of mutual fund types differently. From the perspective of an individual investor, the
increased variety and complexity of investment options, while providing more opportunities,
requires more financial sophistication. ETFs are part of this trend with advantages and possible
disadvantages.




                                                 22
References


Ang, Andrew, Ananth Madhavan, and Aleksander Sobczyk. 2017. “Crowding, Capacity, and
Valuation of Minimum Volatility Strategies.” Journal of Index Investing 7(4): 41–50.

Antoniewicz, Rochelle, and Jane Heinrichs. 2014. “Understanding Exchange-Traded Funds:
How ETFs Work.” ICI Research Perspective, September, vol. 20, no. 5, Investment Company
Institute, Washington DC. https://www.ici.org/pdf/per20-05.pdf.


Antoniewicz, Rochelle, and Jane Heinrichs. 2015. “The Role and Activities of Authorized
Participants of Exchange-Traded Funds.” March. Investment Company Institute,
Washington DC. http://www.ici.org/pdf/ppr_15_aps_etfs.pdf.


Balchunas, Eric. 2016. “The ETF Files: How the U.S. Government Inadvertently Launched a
$3 Trillion Industry.” Bloomberg Markets, March 7. https://www.bloomberg.com/features/2016-
etf-files/.


Bali, Turan G., Robert F. Engle, and Scott Murray. 2016. "Empirical Asset Pricing: The
Cross Section of Stock Returns." Wiley.


Ball, Ray. 1978. “Anomalies in Relationships between Securities' Yields and Yield-Surrogates.”
Journal of Financial Economics 6(2–3): 103–26


Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean. 2000. “Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The
Common Stock Investment Performance of Individual Investors.” Journal of Finance 55(2):
773–806.


Basu, Sanjoy. 1983. “The Relationship between Earnings' Yield, Market Value and Return for
NYSE Common Stocks: Further Evidence.” Journal of Financial Economics 12(1): 129–56.




                                              23
Ben-David, Itzhak, Francesco Franzoni, and Rabih Moussawi. 2017. “Exchange-Traded
Funds.” Annual Review of Financial Economics 9: 169–89.


Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard C. Green. 2004. “Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in
Rational Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 112(6): 1269–95.


Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard Stanton. 2007. “Managerial Ability, Compensation, and the
Closed-End Fund Discount.” Journal of Finance 62(2): 529–56.


BlackRock. 2017a. “Index Investing Supports Vibrant Capital Markets.” ViewPoint, September.
https://www.blackrock.com/corporate/en-us/literature/whitepaper/viewpoint-index-investing-
supports-vibrant-capital-markets-oct-2017.pdf.


BlackRock. 2017b. "BlackRock Global ETP Landscape: Monthly Snapshot, October 2017."
https://www.blackrock.com/au/intermediaries/literature/market-commentary/global-etp-
landscape-en-aus.pdf.


Borkovec, Milan, Ian Domowitz, Vitaly Serbin, and Henry Yegerman. 2010. “Liquidity and
Price Discovery in Exchange-traded Funds: One of Several Possible Lessons from the
Flash Crash.” Journal of Index Investing 1(2): 24–42.


Bradley, Harold, and Robert E. Litan. 2010. Choking the Recovery: Why New Growth
Companies Aren’t Going Public and Unrecognized Risks of Future Market Disruptions.
Kauffman Foundation.


Campbell, John Y., Martin Lettau, Burton G. Malkiel, and Yexiao Xu. 2001. “Have
Individual Stocks Become More Volatile? An Empirical Exploration of Idiosyncratic Risk.”
Journal of Finance 56(1): 1–43.


Carhart, Mark M. 1997. “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance.” Journal of Finance
52(1): 57–82.



                                                 24
Cheng, Minder, and Madhavan, Ananth. 2009. "The Dynamics of Leveraged and Inverse
Exchange-Traded Funds." Journal of Investment Management, Fourth Quarter, 7(4). (Also
available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1539120.)


Dannhauser, Caitlin D. 2017. “The Impact of Innovation: Evidence from Corporate Bond
Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs).” Journal of Financial Economics 125(3): 537–60.


Elton, Edwin J., and Martin J. Gruber. 2013. "Mutual Funds." Chapt 15 in Financial Markets
and Asset Pricing: Handbook of Economics and Finance, Vol. 2 (Part B), edited by George M.
Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene M. Stultz. Elsevier.


Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Christopher R. Blake. 2011. "Holdings Data,
Security Returns, and the Selection of Superior Mutual Funds." Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 46(2): 341–67.

Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Jeffrey A. Busse. 1998. "Do Investors Care about
Sentiment?" Journal of Business 71(4): 477–500.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 2015. "A Five-Factor Asset Pricing Model."
Journal of Financial Economics 116(1): 1–22.


Graham, Benjamin, and David L. Dodd. 1934. Security Analysis. New York: McGraw-Hill
Book Company.


Grégoire, Vincent. 2013. “Do Mutual Fund Managers Adjust NAV for Stale Prices?” Available
at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1928321.


Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman. 1992. “The Persistence of Mutual Fund
Performance.” Journal of Finance 47(5): 1977–84.




                                               25
Hendershott, Terrence, and Ananth Madhavan. 2015. “Click or Call? Auction versus Search
in the Over-the-Counter Market.” Journal of Finance 70(1): 419–47.


Hill, Joanne M., Dave Nadig, and Matt Hougan. 2015. "A Comprehensive Guide to
Exchange-Traded Funds." CFA Institute Research Foundation.


Investment Company Institute. 2016. 2015 Investment Company Fact Book.
https://www.ici.org/pdf/2015_factbook.pdf.


Kyle, Albert S. 1985. “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading.” Econometrica 53(6): 1315–
36.


Lee, Charles M. C., Andrei Shleifer, and Richard H. Thaler. 1990. “Anomalies: Closed-End
Mutual Funds.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 4(4): 153–64.

Lee, Charles M. C., Andrei Shleifer, and Richard H. Thaler. 1991. "Investor Sentiment and
the Closed-End Fund Puzzle." Journal of Finance 46(1): 75–109.

Madhavan, Ananth. 2012 "Exchange-Traded Funds, Market Structure, and the Flash Crash."
Financial Analysts Journal 68(3): 20–35.


Madhavan, Ananth. 2016. Exchange-Traded Funds and the New Dynamics of Investing.
Oxford University Press: New York, NY.


Madhavan, Ananth, and Aleksander Sobcyzk. 2016. “Price Dynamics and Liquidity of
Exchange-Traded Funds.” Journal of Investment Management, forthcoming.


McDonald, Sarah. 2016. “Pound Is the Latest Flash Crash That Traders Won’t Easily Forget.”
Bloomberg, October 7. http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-07/pound-is-the-
latest-flash-crash-that-traders-won-t-easily-forget.




                                                 26
Pástor, Ĺuboš, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor. 2015. “Scale and Skill in Active
Management.” Journal of Financial Economics 116(1): 23–45.


Poterba, James M. and John B. Shoven. 2015. “Exchange-Traded Funds: A New Investment
Option for Taxable Investors.” The American Economic Review, 92(2): 422–427.


Ramaswamy, Srichander. 2011. “Market Structures and Systemic Risks of Exchange-Traded
Funds.” BIS Working Paper 343, Bank of International Settlements. April.


US Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, US Securities and Exchange Commission, and US
Commodity Futures Trading Commission. 2015. Joint Staff Report: The US Treasury Market
on October 15, 2014. (Joint Staff Report 2015 (July 13).) https://www.treasury.gov/press-
center/press-releases/Documents/Joint_Staff_Report_Treasury_10-15-2015.pdf.


Wurgler, Jeffrey. 2011. “On the Economic Consequences of Index-Linked Investing.” Chap. 3
in Challenges to Business in the Twenty-First Century, edited by Gerald Rosenfeld, Jay W.
Lorsch, and Rakesh Khurana. American Academy of Arts and Sciences.




                                               27
APPENDIX


Factor Exposure of Active Mutual Funds


        In what ways do exchange-traded funds, which are passive by nature, compete with active
mutual funds? Active mutual funds typically have higher fees than factor ETFs, but of course, the
higher fees might be justified if active mutual funds can outperform passive ETFs after fees are
taken into account. Moreover, active mutual funds might offer investment strategies that are not
spanned by combinations of passive factor ETFs.
        A passive mutual fund that tracks a broad market index will move with the market very
nearly on a one-to-one basis. An actively managed mutual fund must, by its nature, not invest in
the market portfolio. An active mutual fund that has a very high R2 correlation with the overall
market is sometimes called a “closet indexer” since most of its return can be closely replicated by
investing in the market; such a fund can also be identified because its holdings rarely depart from
market weights, implying a very low active share as defined by Cremers and Petajisto (2008). The
top left panel of Figure A1 shows the histogram of the R2 for the 2,407 funds and the left column
of Table A1 reports percentiles. The median active mutual fund has an R2 of 84 percent and 90
percent of all active mutual funds have an R2 of at least 72 percent. Thus, the total returns of most
active mutual funds can be mimicked to a significant degree by investing only in the market
portfolio.
        Consistent with a large body of academic literature (for example, Ang 2014), we use
Fama-French factors as a proxy for passive long/short portfolios that are constructed to yield
exposure to well-known factors, such as value/growth, size, and momentum. It is important to
understand that the Fama-French factors – like indexes – are not directly investable (and ignore
transaction costs and shorting costs) but there are long-only ETFs and passive mutual funds that
attempt to provide exposure to similar factors. The mutual fund data is from the Center for
Research in Security Prices. After applying some standard screens, we have data for 2,407 active
mutual funds domiciled in the United States. The sample is from January 1980 to December 2014.
        Let Ri, Rm and Rf be the returns of mutual fund i, the CRSP value-weighted index (a proxy
for the broad market portfolio) and the 30-day Treasury rate, respectively. For each active mutual
fund i on CRSP, we run the CAPM regression



                                                 28
                                                                     .


The R2 of this regression is the part of the variance of the excess return of the mutual fund that is
due to exposure to the market return.
          Next, we add Fama-French factors to the regression. HML (high minus low) is a long-
short portfolio that invests in high book-to-market value stocks and shorts high book-to-market
growth stocks. SMB (small minus big) is long in small stocks and short in large stocks and UMD
(up minus down) is a momentum factor that is long in stocks that have had high return over the
previous year and short in stocks that had low returns. This model is known as the four-factor
model and the corresponding regression is


                                                                                              .


The histogram of the R2 is in the top right panel of Figure A1 and percentiles are reported in the
second column of Table A1. The median R2 is 90 percent and 90 percent of active mutual funds
have an R2 of at least 83 percent. We can add other passive factor portfolios to further increase
the R2.
          Fama and French (2015) construct two additional long-short portfolios: RMW (robust
minus weak) is the difference between returns of profitable firms and unprofitable firms and CMA
(conservative minus aggressive) is the difference between returns of firms that invest a lot and
firms with low investment rates. This six-factor is estimated using the regression




                                                                                     .


Finally, we add 12 industry factors to the six-factor model. The corresponding histograms of the
R2s are in the bottom panels of Figure A1. Adding in passive factors further increases the R2s of
most active funds.
          In fact, the 94 percent of the return of the median fund can be replicated by exposure to
passive factors. These results are very similar to those reported by Kahn and Lemmon (2014)


                                                 29
based on their analysis of fund performance data. Given these findings, it is not surprising that
passive factor ETFs have become more popular while active mutual funds have experienced
significant asset outflows.
        How about the performance of active funds? Figure A2 shows the histogram of mean
excess returns across all mutual funds. The average equity mutual fund earned an average
annualized return of 5.70 percent over the sample period. For comparison, the mean return of the
CRSP-value weighted index was 7.79 percent, although we repeat our caveat that one cannot
directly invest in an index. Thus, the average fund underperformed the market by 2.09 percent net
of fees and 85 percent of all mutual funds had a lower net return than the market index.
        Figure A3 shows the histogram of 𝛼" ’s for the four-factor model that includes the market
excess return, HML, SMB and UMD as regressors. Following Jensen’s seminal work, a mutual
fund 𝛼" measures the return of the fund after subtracting the part that is due to the exposure to the
(passive) market, value/growth (HML) and size (SMB) factors. The mean alpha of active mutual
funds is -0.66 percent per year and in the sample about two-thirds of all mutual funds produced a
negative alpha.
        These results do not necessarily imply that mutual fund managers have no skill (Berk and
van Binsbergen 2015). For example, Cremers and Petajisto (2009) show that mutual funds that
deviate more from their benchmark have on average better performance than funds that mimic
their benchmark more closely. One simple measure of factor mimicking is the 𝑅$ in the factor
regressions above (Kahn and Lemmon 2014). Funds with higher 𝑅$ s are following static factors
more closely than funds with lower 𝑅$ s. To see whether mutual funds alphas are related to factor
𝑅$ s of the four-factor model, we run the regression


                                        𝛼" = 𝛾( + 𝛾* 𝑅"$ + 𝑒"


Figure A4 shows the corresponding scatter plot. The estimated coefficient 𝛾* is equal to -1.1 with
a t-statistic of -2.53. While the coefficient is statistically significant the effect of the 𝑅$ s on fund
𝛼" s is economically small. A mutual fund with an 𝑅$ of 0.95 has an estimated 𝛼" of -0.75%
compared to an 𝛼" of 0.47% of a mutual fund with an 𝑅$ of 0.7.




                                                   30
       To summarize, returns of active mutual funds can, to a significant degree, parallel the
returns to theoretical long/short passive factors, but without transaction costs. Further, the majority
of mutual funds have not outperformed the overall market or passive index benchmarks.
Factor ETFs might be useful low cost investment vehicles for equity investors who seek long only
exposure to well-known factor risks with lower fees than active mutual fund and hedge fund
managers.


References

Ang, Andrew, 2014, Asset Management: A Systematic Approach to Factor Investing. Oxford
University Press

Cremers, Martijn, and Antti Petajisto, 2009. “How Active Is Your Fund Manager? A New
Measure That Predicts Performance.” Review of Financial Studies 22(9):3329-3365

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2015. “Dissecting Anomalies with a Five-Factor
Model,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 2, 69-103.

Kahn, Ronald N. and Michael Lemmon, 2014. “The Asset Manager’s Dilemma: How Strategic
Beta is Disrupting the Investment Management Industry,” Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. 72,
15-20.

Berk, Jonathan B, and Jules van Binsbergen, 2015, “Measuring skill in the mutual fund
industry,” Journal of Financial Economic, Vol. 118, 1-20.




                                                  31
                                    Table 1: ETF Overview

                                                   # of Distinct     AUM
                                                   Benchmarks        ($M)

                   Equity
                      Global Equity                          92     35,750
                      US Large Cap/Total Cap                130    383,987
                      US Mid Cap                             46     59,715
                      US Small Cap                           56     61,751
                      US Sector                             204    158,923
                      US Dividend Preferred                  23     68,358
                      US Alpha Strategy                      14      2,109
                      Developed Europe                       36     18,000
                      Developed Asia Pacific                 28     32,202
                      Emerging/Frontier                     158    155,249
                      International/Other                   115    105,418

                   Fixed Income
                      Broad Market                           16     63,687
                      Emerging Markets                       11     13,417
                      High Yield                             16     32,835
                      Investment Grade                       32     60,037
                      Securitized                             4      7,029
                      Municipals                             29     13,690
                      Sovereign                              17      4,867
                      US Government                          55     58,595
                   Commodities                              126     91,865
                   Currency                                  22      4,488
                   Alternatives/Asset Allocation             87      8,311


Source: Investment Company Institute (2016).
                                 Table 2: Equity ETF Types

                                                      2015 AUM ($m)

                    Market cap based                         1,007,059
                      Total market                            446,615
                      Large cap                               414,979
                      Mid cap                                  70,935
                      Small cap                                74,529

                    Sector                                    273,753

                    Factor/Smart beta                         435,701
                      Growth/Value                            230,529
                      Dividend                                 92,367
                      Equal weight                             28,918
                      Low volatility                           23,810
                      Multi factor                             42,246
                      Single factor                            17,830
                         Momentum                               3,840
                         Quality                                2,474
                         Value                                  2,068
                         Size                                   4,463
                         Other                                  4,985

                    Other                                      11,527
                    Total                                    1,728,040


Source: Investment Company Institute (2016).
             Figure 1: The ETF Architecture
                 Figure 1: ETF Architecture


             Cash                            Cash

Investor                  Authorized                    Capital
(Buyer)                   Participants                  Markets
           ETF Shares                      Securities




             Basket of                   ETF Creation
             Securities                  Units




                          ETF Asset
                           Manager
               Table A1: R2 ’s of Active Mutual Funds Factor Regressions

                               CAPM            4 Factors         6 Factors         6 Factors
                                                                               + 12 Industry

              Mean                0.83               0.89              0.89              0.92

              Quantiles
                 10%              0.70               0.81              0.82              0.85
                 25%              0.78               0.86              0.87              0.89
                 50%              0.85               0.90              0.91              0.93
                 75%              0.91               0.94              0.94              0.96
                 90%              0.95               0.96              0.96              0.97



Notes: This table reports Ri2 ’s of time series regressions of returns of mutual fund i, Rit on factors Ft :

                                         Rit − R f t = αi + βi0 Ft + t,

where R f t is the 3-month T-bill rate. For the CAPM Ft = (R Mt −R f t ), for the 4-factor model Ft = (R Mt −
R f t, HMLt, SMBt, UMDt )0, for the 6-factor model Ft = (R Mt −R f t, HMLt, SMBt, UMDt, RMW t, CMAt )0.
The 6 Factor + 12 Industry model adds 12 industry portfolio returns to the 6 factor model. The factor
and industry returns are from Kenneth French’s website. Mutual fund returns are from CRSP. The
sample is monthly from January 1980 to December 2014.
                    Figure A1: Ri2 ’s of Active Mutual Fund Factor Regressions

                      R2 of 1 Factor CAPM                                                R2 of 4 Factor Model
10                                                             10


 8                                                              8


 6                                                              6


 4                                                              4


 2                                                              2


 0                                                              0
     0.5      0.6       0.7         0.8      0.9       1.0          0.5         0.6         0.7         0.8          0.9   1.0


                      R2 of 6 Factor Model                                       R2 of 6 Factor Model plus ind. factors
10                                                             10


 8                                                              8


 6                                                              6


 4                                                              4


 2                                                              2


 0                                                              0
     0.5      0.6       0.7         0.8      0.9       1.0          0.5         0.6         0.7         0.8          0.9   1.0



     Notes: This figure shows histograms of Ri2 ’s’ of time series regressions of returns of mutual fund i,
     Rit on factors Ft :

                                              Rit − R f t = αi + βi0 Ft + t,

     where R f t is the 3-month T-bill rate. For the CAPM Ft = (R Mt −R f t ), for the 4-factor model Ft = (R Mt −
     R f t, HMLt, SMBt, UMDt )0, for the 6-factor model Ft = (R Mt −R f t, HMLt, SMBt, UMDt, RMW t, CMAt )0.
     The 6 Factor plus industry model adds 12 industry portfolio returns to the 6 factor model. The factor
     and industry returns are from Kenneth French’s website. Mutual fund returns are from CRSP. The
     sample is monthly from January 1980 to December 2014.
                Figure A2: Histogram of Mutual Fund Mean Excess Return


                        Histogram of Mutal Fund Mean Excess Return (p.a.)


    0.200
                                                                              mean = 5.70%

    0.175                                                                     10% quantile = 2.98%

                                                                              90% quantile = 8.39%
    0.150                                                                     CRSP mean = 7.79%


    0.125


    0.100


    0.075


    0.050


    0.025


    0.000
            -2.0%   0.0%      2.0%      4.0%       6.0%        8.0%   10.0%         12.0%        14.0%
                                         mean excess returns (p.a.)




Notes: This figure shows the histogram of average mutual returns in excess of the 3 month T-bill rate.
Returns are net of fees. Mutual fund returns are from CRSP. The sample is monthly from January
1980 to December 2014.
                        Figure A3: Histogram of αi for 4 Factor Model

                                     Histogram of α (p.a.) for 4 Factor Model


0.30

                                                                             mean = -0.66%

0.25                                                                         10% quantile = -2.60%

                                                                             90% quantile = 1.47%

0.20                                                                         % neg = 68%




0.15




0.10




0.05




0.00
       -8.0%    -6.0%        -4.0%         -2.0%         0.0%         2.0%      4.0%          6.0%    8.0%
                                                        α (p.a.)



  Notes: This figure shows the histogram of αi ’s of time series regressions of returns of mutual fund i,
  Rit on factors Ft :

                                          Rit − R f t = αi + β0 Ft + t,

  for the 4-factor model with Ft = (R Mt −R f t, HMLt, SMBt, UMDt )0. The factor returns are from Kenneth
  French’s website. Mutual fund returns are from CRSP. The sample is monthly from January 1980 to
  December 2014.
                        Figure A4: Mutual Fund αi and Ri2 in 4 Factor Model



     8%

            OLS: αi = 0.3% − 1.1Ri2
     6%



     4%



     2%
αi




     0%



 -2%



 -4%



 -6%



 -8%

      0.4               0.5               0.6                   0.7               0.8          0.9               1.0
                                                                Ri2


     Notes: This figure shows a scatter plot of Ri2 ’s on the x-axis and αi ’s on the y-axis. Ri2 ’s and αi ’s are
     from time series regressions of returns of mutual fund i, Rit on factors Ft :

                                                Rit − R f t = αi + βi0 Ft + t,

     for the 4-factor model with Ft = (R Mt − R f t, HMLt, SMBt, UMDt )0. The figure also shows the fitted
     line from a linear regression with 95% confidence intervals (shaded). The factor returns are from
     Kenneth French’s website. Mutual fund returns are from CRSP. The sample is monthly from January
     1980 to December 2014.
