                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                MORAL VALUES AND VOTING

                                           Benjamin Enke

                                        Working Paper 24268
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w24268


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2018




I am grateful to Jesse Graham and Jonathan Haidt for generous data sharing. For helpful comments
I thank very constructive referees, Alberto Alesina, Leo Bursztyn, Matt Gentzkow, Ed Glaeser, Nathan
Hendren, Emir Kamenica, Max Kasy, Gianmarco León-Ciliotta, Shengwu Li, Nathan Nunn, Andrei
Shleifer, David Yang, and in particular Jesse Shapiro. I also received helpful comments from seminar
audiences at Berkeley, CMU, Harvard, MPI Bonn, Stanford, the 2018 NBER Political Economy Summer
Institute, BEAM 2018, ECBE 2018 Bergen, and the 2019 UPF Conference on the Political Economy
of Development and Conflict. Joe Kidson, William Murdock, and Patricia Sun provided outstanding
research assistance. Financial support from Harvard LEAP is gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Benjamin Enke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Moral Values and Voting
Benjamin Enke
NBER Working Paper No. 24268
January 2018, Revised October 2019
JEL No. D03,D72


                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies the supply of and demand for moral values in recent U.S. presidential elections.
Using a combination of large-scale survey data and text analyses, I find support for the hypothesis
that both voters and politicians exhibit heterogeneity in their emphasis on universalist relative to communal
moral values, and that politicians’ vote shares partly reflect the extent to which their moral appeal
matches the values of the electorate. Over the last decade, Americans’ values have become increasingly
communal – especially in rural areas – which generated increased moral polarization and is associated
with changes in voting patterns across space.


Benjamin Enke
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer M008
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
enke@fas.harvard.edu
                A few moments later, the President said, “I need loyalty, I expect loyalty.”
                         James B. Comey, Testimony on conversations with Donald J. Trump
                                                                                June 7, 2017

                         This cultural tradition comes with . . . an intense sense of loyalty,
                                              a fierce dedication to family and country . . .
                                                             J.D. Vance, Hillbilly Elegy, 2016



1    Introduction
In an effort to better understand voting behavior, this paper introduces a core aspect
of modern moral psychology into the study of political economy. Recently, the psychol-
ogist Haidt (2007, 2012) and his collaborators popularized a very influential positive
framework of morality, i.e., of people’s beliefs about what is “right” and “wrong.” This
framework, known as Moral Foundations Theory (MFT), is centered on the basic em-
pirical fact that individuals exhibit strong heterogeneity in the types of values they
emphasize. On the one hand, people assign moral relevance to concepts that pervade
normative analyses of morality, including individual rights, justice, impartial fairness,
and avoidance of externalities. Such “universalist” values have the key characteristic
that they apply irrespective of the context or identity of the people involved. On the
other hand, people also assign moral meaning to “communal” or “particularist” con-
cepts, such as community, loyalty, betrayal, respect, and tradition. These values differ
from universalist ones in that they are tied to certain relationships or groups. For exam-
ple, one core tradeoff that characterizes these different values is that between an ethic
of universal human concern versus loyalty to the local community. The basic distinction
between a universalist and particularist morality has been at the center of philosoph-
ical debates for decades (e.g., Rawls, 1971, 2005; Sandel, 1998), and is the subject
of much psychological and evolutionary research (Haidt, 2007; Graham et al., 2017;
Greene, 2014; Hofmann et al., 2014; Henrich et al., 2010; Norenzayan, 2013).
    There are strong reasons to hypothesize that heterogeneity in moral values may
help understand the outcomes of elections. Political theorists have long argued that
past U.S. presidential nominees have lost elections because they failed to appeal to
voters’ communal moral values (Sandel, 2005). In addition, a rich body of sociological
work forcefully argues that many, particularly those forming the white rural working
class, are deeply concerned about a “moral decline,” in particular as it relates to the
loyalties and interpersonal obligations that characterize the social fabric of many local
communities (e.g., Etzioni, 1994; Wuthnow, 2018). Yet even though psychologists have
documented that communal values are more prevalent among conservatives (Graham

                                             1
et al., 2009) and that differences in deep beliefs about “right” and “wrong” induce
strong emotional reactions, heterogeneity in the internal structure of moral values has
received scant attention in political economy and economics more generally.
   This paper formally studies the hypothesis that voting decisions partly reflect the
match between voters’ and politicians’ moral values. To this effect, the paper proposes
a methodology for jointly studying the supply and demand sides of morality in voting
contexts. Here, “supply side” means the idea that politicians might supply different
degrees of universalism. “Demand side,” on the other hand, refers to the notion that
people may vote for candidates or political parties that appeal to their own moral values.
   The analysis is structured by a simple formal framework of voting that rests on
the assumption that voters aim to minimize the distance between their own moral
type and the weighted average type of the candidate and their party. This is similar in
spirit to other political economy models (Persson and Tabellini, 2016), except that it
substitutes moral values for policy platforms. The formal framework makes both cross-
sectional and time-series predictions about how the relationship between moral values
and voting should vary as a function of the moral types of political candidates and their
parties. To test the resulting predictions, the paper estimates the moral types of political
actors and then analyzes whether voters indeed vote for those candidates and parties
that are close to them in moral terms. In doing so, the entire paper is descriptive in
nature and presents various different types of (conditional) correlations.
   Because both politicians’ and voters’ moral types are latent, I estimate them using
the analytical tools behind MFT: the Moral Foundations Questionnaire (MFQ) and the
Moral Foundations Dictionary (MFD). The MFQ is a psychological questionnaire that
comprises various Likert scale questions. Here, the subjective importance of universalist
moral concepts is elicited through questions that assess the extent to which “treating
people equally,” “caring for the weak,” or “denying rights,” among others, are morally
relevant. Communal concepts, on the other hand, are measured through the moral rele-
vance of concepts such as “a lack of loyalty,” “betraying the group,” or “a lack of respect
for authority.” The MFD, developed by psychologists in 2009, consists of a set of cor-
responding keywords that can be associated with a communal or universalist morality
and hence allows to estimate politicians’ moral types using simple text analyses.
   On both the demand- and supply-side, the key measure I develop is a one-dimensional
summary statistic of morality, the relative importance of universalist versus communal
moral values. This index does not capture variation in who is “more moral,” but rather
heterogeneity in the types of values that people emphasize. To derive this measure, I im-
plement a tailored nationally representative survey that includes the MFQ. In line with
how psychologists think about the structure of morality, the difference between univer-



                                             2
salist and communal values endogenously emerges in a principal component analysis of
the moral dimensions in the MFQ. This simple difference has two intuitively appealing
properties: (i) it is strongly predictive of easily interpretable economic behaviors, such
as the extent to which people donate money or volunteer time to nationwide charities
relative to their local communities; and (ii) it is weakly – if at all – correlated with
traditional variables such as income, education, or altruism.
   To determine politicians’ moral types, I conduct text analyses. First, to classify the
“average” Republican and Democrat, I study moral rhetoric in speeches given in the U.S.
Congress between WWII and 2016. Based on the MFD, I conduct a transparent exercise
of counting relative word frequencies to generate a summary statistic of the relative
frequency of universalist over communal moral rhetoric. The results document that,
starting in the 1960s, Republicans and Democrats polarized in their moral appeal: for
more than 30 years, Democrats increasingly placed a stronger emphasis on universalist
moral concepts, a trend that was considerably weaker among Republicans. Thus, today,
the Democratic party has a substantially more universalist profile than the Republican
party.
   These cross-party differences set the stage for an analysis of individual candidates.
Donald Trump provides a particularly attractive first step for this investigation both
because he turns out to be an outlier in his moral rhetoric relative to past nominees
and because several features of the demand-side data – explained in greater detail
below – enable more sophisticated analyses for 2016 than for prior elections.
   The supply-side analysis compares the moral content of Trump’s speeches and texts
with that of all other contenders for the presidency since 2008. For this purpose, I
make use of a dataset of almost 17, 000 campaign documents that was gathered by the
American Presidency Project. The results document that Trump’s moral language is less
universalist (or, equivalently, more communal) than that of any other presidential nom-
inee in recent history. Trump is also more communal than his 2016 primary contenders.
Moreover, the difference in moral appeal between Trump and Hillary Clinton is partic-
ularly pronounced, also relative to earlier candidate pairs. Viewed through the lens of
the simple formal framework, these results from the text analysis deliver the prediction
that the relative importance that voters place on universalist values should be nega-
tively correlated with voting for Trump in three different comparison sets: (i) relative
to Clinton in the 2016 general election; (ii) relative to Romney and McCain in earlier
general elections; and (iii) relative to other competitors in the GOP primaries.
   I implement a pre-registered nationally representative survey (N ≈ 4, 000) to test
these predictions. In the survey data, the relative importance of universalist moral val-
ues is strongly negatively correlated with (i) the probability of voting for Trump in the



                                            3
general election; (ii) the difference between the propensity to vote for Trump in 2016
and Romney or McCain in 2012 and 2008, respectively; and (iii) voting for Trump in
the Republican primaries. For example, a one standard deviation increase in moral uni-
versalism is associated with a decrease in the probability of voting for Trump in the
primaries of ten percentage points. When I separately consider the level of universalist
and communal values as explanatory variables (rather than their difference as summary
statistic), the results show that voting for Trump is always negatively correlated with
universalist and positively correlated with communal moral values.
   I benchmark these results against more traditional variables that are correlated with
voting for Republicans vs. Democrats, such as income, religiosity, population density, ed-
ucation, or attitudes about the size of government, pro-environmentalism, crime poli-
cies, and gun control. In these analyses, moral values explain a larger fraction of the
variation in voting than any of the other variables, in particular in within-party analyses.
In addition, all individual-level results also hold when I restrict attention to within-state
or even within-county variation, and when I condition on a rich set of observables.
   While the individual-level analysis has the benefit of featuring a representative sam-
ple and a rich set of covariates, it is ill-suited to investigating the joint relationship
between the supply of and demand for morality in the full sample of candidates that
have competed in the primaries since 2008. This is because many candidates receive
such small vote shares that gathering a sufficiently powered survey dataset on voters for
each candidate is highly impractical. To circumvent this problem, the analysis exploits
variation in politicians’ vote shares across counties in combination with a county-level
index of moral values. Constructing such an index requires a large number of under-
lying individual-level observations on moral values. Since 2008, almost 280, 000 U.S.
residents have completed the MFQ on the website www.yourmorals.org. While this
self-selected set of respondents is not representative of a county’s population, the large
number of respondents allows me to compute a meaningful county-level index of moral
values that is constructed in the same manner as in the individual-level analysis.
   Across counties, the relative importance of universalist versus communal values is
again strongly negatively correlated with Trump’s vote shares (i) in the primaries, (ii) in
the presidential election, and (iii) in terms of the difference relative to past Republi-
can candidates in the general election. These results all hold when I exploit variation
across counties within commuting zones. In addition, the correlations hold up when
controlling for county-level observables, including local income, unemployment, pop-
ulation density, religiosity, or an index of racism. Finally, the analysis documents that
the relationship between moral values and voting for Trump is not driven by priming
effects from Trump’s language: when contemporary county-level moral values are in-



                                             4
strumented with moral values from a period when Trump was not even politically active,
moral values are still strongly related to Trump’s vote share.
   In summary, both individual-level and county-level analyses confirm the predictions
of the text analysis regarding Trump. The final part of the paper generalizes the analysis
to all candidates in the primaries and general elections since 2008. By estimating a
simple discrete choice model of voting, these analyses link the results of supply- and
demand-side regressions in a way that has a structural interpretation. Loosely speaking,
the logic is that, if a candidate in a given race is relatively more universalist in their
moral language than their direct competitors, then that candidate’s county-level vote
share should be more positively correlated with the county-level moral values index.
   In the data, supply- and demand-side results match up reasonably well. To pick a
few illustrative examples, in the general elections, the difference in universalist moral
appeal is larger between Obama and Romney in 2012 than between Obama and Mc-
Cain in 2008, and county-level vote shares are indeed more strongly related to moral
values in 2012 than in 2008. In the Republican primaries in 2016, Ted Cruz is less uni-
versalist than Marco Rubio and John Kasich, and his county-level vote share is indeed
more negatively correlated with moral universalism. In 2012, Rick Santorum is very
communal and his vote share is negatively correlated with universalist values; opposite
patterns hold for Newt Gingrich. In 2008, John McCain and Ron Paul are both more
universalist in their moral rhetoric than their Republican competitors, and their county-
level vote shares are positively correlated with moral universalism. These results show
that the methodology of connecting supply- and demand-side analyses of morality de-
veloped in this paper may generalize to contexts other than Trump. At the same time,
other patterns in the data do not conform to the predictions of the text analysis. For ex-
ample, the text analysis shows that Obama was more communal than Clinton in 2008,
yet Obama’s vote share is positively correlated with universalism.
   Up to this point, all analyses treat moral values as fixed. However, county-level moral
values may vary over time, potentially in different ways across space, either because
values genuinely change or because of selective in- and out-migration. To study this
issue and its link to voting patterns, I again make use of the large-scale longitudinal
survey dataset from www.yourmorals.org. In these data, Americans have become
considerably less universalist in their moral values between 2008 and 2018, akin to
the patterns in Congressional speeches. This medium-run hike in communal values is
visible for respondents across diverse regions, but is especially pronounced in relatively
rural areas, hence generating “moral polarization” across space.
   To gauge the relationship between changes in values and changes in voting patterns,
I employ difference-in-difference analyses that correlate differential changes in moral



                                            5
values across counties over time with corresponding changes in local vote shares. In
these analyses, counties that became more universalist between 2008 and 2016 also
experience significantly larger increases in Democratic vote shares. Thus, not only does
the level of moral values correlate with the level of vote shares, but changes in values
also correlate with changes in vote shares.
    This paper ties into the empirical literature on the behavioral or social determi-
nants of voting patterns or preferences for redistribution (Alesina and Giuliano, 2011;
Ortoleva and Snowberg, 2015; Fisman et al., 2015; Kuziemko and Washington, 2018).
Related is also a stream of recent papers on social identity (Shayo, 2009; Grossman
and Helpman, 2018; Gennaioli and Tabellini, 2019), the rise of populism (Bursztyn et
al., 2017; Guiso et al., 2016, 2017), and polarization (Gentzkow et al., 2019; Desmet
and Wacziarg, 2018; Bertrand and Kamenica, 2018), although this literature has not
focused on moral values. Morality has attracted recent interest in the literature on be-
havioral economics (e.g., Bursztyn et al., forthcoming) and cultural economics (Greif
and Tabellini, 2017; Enke, 2019), yet this work is not concerned with voting. Relative
to all these papers, the key contribution here is to introduce a core concept of modern
moral psychology into political economy.
    Finally, this paper also contributes to the psychological and political science litera-
tures by formally investigating the link between moral values and voting decisions, the
manner in which politicians cater to the moral needs of their constituents, and how
these two forces interact in generating election outcomes.¹
    The paper proceeds as follows. Sections 2 and 3 discuss conceptual background and
measurement. Section 4 studies the supply of morality. Sections 5 and 6 investigate the
demand side of the 2016 election. Sections 7 and 8 look at the primaries and general
elections 2008–2016. Section 9 concludes.



2     Conceptual Framework
There is a finite set of voters index by i ∈ I. In each of two parties p ∈ {D, R}, there is a
finite set of politicians indexed by j ∈ J p . Denote by θi the moral type of the voter, by
θ j the type of the politician, and by θ̄ j the average type of politicians in j’s party. Below,
we will interpret higher values of θ as a stronger emphasis on universalist relative to
communal moral values.




    ¹In political science, researchers have linked the 2016 election to concepts including status loss
(Gidron and Hall, 2017) and authoritarianism (MacWilliams, 2016).


                                                  6
   Voter i’s utility from politician j getting elected is

                                      ui, j = −λ(θi − θ j,p j )2 + x i η j + εi, j             (1)
                            where θ j,p j = γθ j + (1 − γ)θ̄ j                                 (2)

The voter derives disutility from having a leader (or a leading party) whose moral
framework differs from their own. Here, (1 − γ) measures the extent to which the voter
cares not only about the moral type of the candidate but also about the average moral
framework of the candidate’s political party. The average moral type of a party can be
thought of as average type of all politicians in a party in recent history, including those
that do not run in the races that I consider below.
   The reduced-form assumption that voters care about a convex combination of the
politician’s and the party’s type has two possible interpretations. First, this assumption
could reflect the idea that voters are aware that candidates – once elected – are still
influenced by demands from within their party, so that voters care about the “package”
of moral frameworks of both party and candidate. Second, the moral type of a politician
may not be perfectly observable, so that – in the spirit of Bayesian updating – observing
the average type of the politician’s party is informative about the type of the candidate.
   The parameter λ > 0 measures the importance of morality in voting, and x i are
additional individual characteristics that may affect the utility i derives from j, such
as their economic incentives. I assume that εi, j is continuously distributed according to
the density function f (εi, j ) with support S and E[εi, j ] = 0, and that εi, j is orthogonal
to (θi , θ j,p , η j , x i ). I also assume that a voter’s moral type θi and their concerns about
other issues x i are uncorrelated. Likewise, θ j and θ̄ j are orthogonal to η j . The vote vi
is given by vi = arg max ui, j .
                      j
   Expanding the expression above delivers

                          ui, j = − λθ j,p
                                       2
                                           j
                                             − λθi2 + 2λθ j,p j θi + x i η j + εi, j           (3)

where −λθi2 can be omitted because it is a voter-specific constant that does not affect i’s
choice among different candidates. In what follows, I derive three types of predictions
about the relationship between moral values and voting as a function of the moral types
of politicians.


Cross-sectional variation I: General elections.                 One politician from each party com-
petes in the general election. Voter i’s net utility of voting for candidate k as opposed




                                                      7
to l is given by

       ui,k − ui,l = −λ(θk,p
                         2
                             k
                               − θl,p
                                  2
                                      l
                                        ) + 2λ(θk,pk − θl,pl ) θi + (ηk − ηl ) x i + εi,k − εi,l   (4)
                     |     {z           } |       {z        }       | {z }           | {z }
                            ≡αk,l                 ≡βk,l                 ≡δk,l           ≡εi,k,l


That is, the moral part of the net utility of candidate k getting elected can be represented
as (i) a constant αk,l that depends on the candidates’ types but not on θi and (ii) the
interaction of the voter’s moral type and the difference in types of the two candidates
βk,l . Thus, the probability that i votes for k is given by:

                      P r(ui,k > ui,l ) = P r(αk,l + βk,l θi + δk,l x i > εi,k,l )                 (5)

Throughout, I assume that the distribution of the noise term is such that the choice
probabilities are strictly interior for all voters and candidates.
    Now consider two voters, a and b, who are identical in terms of their non-moral
characteristics (x a = x b ≡ x), yet differ in their moral types θa > θ b . Further sup-
pose that θk > θl ∧ θ̄k > θ̄l , meaning that both candidate k and their party are more
universalist than their counterparts. This implies that βk,l > 0. It then follows that

            P r(ua,k > ua,l ) =P r(αk,l + βk,l θa + δk,l x > εa,k,l )                              (6)
                             >P r(αk,l + βk,l θ b + δk,l x > ε b,k,l ) = P r(u b,k > u b,l )       (7)

because f (ε) is continuously distributed and the choice probabilities are strictly interior.
Thus, the more universalist voter a is more likely to vote for candidate k than voter b.

Observation 1. If θk > θl and θ̄k > θ̄l , then the probability of voting for candidate k is
increasing in the relative importance of universalist values of a voter θi .

    Note that this prediction does not imply that, in general elections, the probability
of voting for a universalist candidate is always increasing in the voter’s universalism θi ,
even holding constant the voter’s other attributes x i . The reason is that what matters
for the voting decision is a convex combination of the politician’s and their party’s type.
Below, we will see an example of this: Democrats are on average more universalist than
Republicans, yet McCain was more universalist than Obama. Thus, in the absence of
specific assumptions on the magnitude of γ, the framework does not generate an unam-
biguous prediction about how people’s moral values should be correlated with voting
for McCain or Obama. At the same time, the model makes the falsifiable prediction that
the probability of voting for a candidate cannot be increasing in a voter’s type if both
θk < θl and θ̄k < θ̄l .



                                                   8
Cross-sectional variation II: Primaries. A finite set of politicians j ∈ J compete in the
primaries. Evidently, in within-party competition, a party’s average moral type drops
out of the analysis. For simplicity, this section focuses on the most and least universalist
candidates in a given race. An analysis of the more general case is relegated to Section 7.
    Consider candidates k and l such that θk > θ j ∀ j 6= k and θl < θ j ∀ j 6= l. The
probability that i votes for k is given by the probability that the utility of voting for k
is higher than the utility of voting for any other candidate. Denote ui,k̄ = ar gmax ui, j .
                                                                                                              j6=k
We then have:

    P r(ui,k > ui, j ) ∀ j 6= k      = P r(ui,k > ui,k̄ ) = P r(αk,k̄ + βk,k̄ θi + δk,k̄ x i > εi,k,k̄ )              (8)

In words, for each realization of the noise terms, there is a candidate k̄ who for voter
i delivers the highest utility in the set of candidates J \ k. However, regardless of the
identity of k̄, by assumption we have βk,k̄ > 0 because k is the most universalist can-
didate. Thus, as exposited in Appendix A, we can apply an analogous argument as in
equations (6) and (7): for two voters who differ in their moral types θa > θ b but are
otherwise identical, it follows that a is more likely to vote for k than b (again assuming
that the choice probabilities are strictly interior and f (ε) is continuously distributed).
By an analogous argument, we get for the least universalist type θl that a is less likely
to vote for l than b.

Observation 2. If θk > θ j ∀ j 6= k and θl < θ j ∀ j 6= k, the probability of voting for
candidate k (l) is increasing (decreasing) in the relative importance of universalist values
of a voter θi .


Time variation in types of nominees. I now consider within-party variation in the
moral types of the presidential nominees over time. Consider two general elections in
t = 1 and t = 2 with candidates k and k0 for party D and candidates l and l 0 for party
R. I will assume that a party’s average type remains constant over time.
    We are interested in the extent to which voter i is more likely to vote for the candi-
date of party D in t = 1 than in t = 2. Using obvious time subscripts:

                              P r(ui,k,1 > ui,l,1 ) − P r(ui,k0 ,2 > ui,l 0 ,2 )                                      (9)
      = P r(αk,l + βk,l θi + δk,l x i > εi,k,l ) − P r(αk0 ,l 0 + βk0 ,l 0 θi + δk0 ,l 0 x i > εi,k0 ,l 0 )          (10)

Now suppose that θk − θl > θk0 − θl 0 , so that βk,l > βk0 ,l 0 . In words, the difference in
universalism between candidates k and l in t = 1 is larger than between candidates
k0 and l 0 in t = 2, such that party D appears unusually universalist in t = 1. We now
evaluate whether for two voters a and b with θa > θ b and x a = x b ≡ x, the more

                                                          9
universalist voter a is differentially more likely to vote for D in t = 1 than in t = 2,
relative to voter b. This would be the case if the following holds:

                                                         ?
            P r(ua,k > ua,l ) − P r(ua,k0 > ua,l 0 ) > P r(u b,k > u b,l ) − P r(u b,k0 > u b,l 0 )        (11)

Define the intervals I1 = [αk,l + βk,l θ b + δk,l x, αk,l + βk,l θa + δk,l x] and I2 = [αk0 ,l 0 +
βk0 ,l 0 θ b + δk0 ,l 0 x, αk0 ,l 0 + βk0 ,l 0 θa + δk0 ,l 0 x] as well as their union I = I1 ∪ I2 . In order for
the inequality to hold, f (ε) needs to be distributed such that there is more probability
mass in I1 than in I2 . Note that I1 is wider because βk,l > βk0 ,l 0 and θa > θ b .

Observation 3. Suppose that, at least on I, the distribution of the noise term satisfies

                                      sup f (ε)
                                       ε∈I             βk,l           θk − θl
                                                   <              =                                        (12)
                                      in f f (ε)       βk0 ,l 0       θk0 − θl 0
                                       ε∈I


Then, if θk − θl > θk0 − θl 0 , the difference in the probability to vote for candidate k in t = 1
compared to candidate k0 in t = 2 is increasing in the relative importance of universalist
values of a voter θi .

    A formal derivation can be found in Appendix A. Intuitively, this prediction says
that – under suitable assumptions – if in t = 1 the candidate from party D is more
universalist than the candidate from party R relative to the difference in moral types
between candidates in the other election, then universalist values should be positively
predictive of the difference between the probability of voting D in t = 1 and t = 2.
    The sufficient condition on the distribution of the noise term in Prediction 3 says that
f (ε) is locally not “too different” from a uniform distribution, relative to the magnitude
of the cross-candidate differences in moral types (note that the uniform distribution
always satisfies equation (12)). Three remarks are in order. First, this condition is only
sufficient. Second, we do not need this condition to hold globally but only locally on
an interval that is implicitly defined by the relevant choice probabilities. Third, the
condition is weaker the larger the difference in moral types in t = 1 relative to t = 2.
In my application, Clinton and Trump will be more than an order of magnitude more
different from each other in terms of their moral types than, for example, Obama and
Romney.
    In summary, while stylized, this simple framework highlights the need to study
the supply and demand side of morality in combination. In the following, I test these
predictions by first focusing on the special case of Donald Trump in the 2016 election.
The analysis will proceed in two steps. First, I estimate politicians’ and parties’ types θ j
and θ̄ j to derive predictions about how voters’ moral values should be related to voting


                                                        10
behavior (“supply-side analysis”). Second, I test these predictions by measuring voters’
moral values and relating them to their voting behavior (“demand-side analysis”). In
Section 7, I return to estimating the model more explicitly by considering all candidates
and elections between 2008–2016.



3       Moral Values and Their Measurement

3.1      Moral Foundations Theory
Moral values correspond to people’s deep beliefs about what is “right” and “wrong.” Psy-
chologists think of moral values as being different from preferences in that preferences
over, say, bananas versus apples do not trigger the types of strong emotional responses
that are associated with morally relevant concepts (“But this is wrong!”).
    To measure the importance of a broad spectrum of values, Haidt and Joseph (2004)
and Graham et al. (2013) developed a new positive framework of morality: MFT. MFT
rests on the idea that people’s moral concerns can be partitioned into five “foundations:”

    1. Care / harm: Measures the extent to which people care for the weak and attempt
        to keep others from harm.

    2. Fairness / reciprocity: Measures the importance of ideas relating to equality, jus-
        tice, rights, and autonomy.

    3. In-group / loyalty: Measures people’s emphasis on being loyal to the “in-group”
        (family, country) and the moral relevance of betrayal.

    4. Authority / respect: Measures the importance of respect for authority, tradition,
        and societal order.

    5. Purity / sanctity: Measures the importance of ideas related to purity, disgust, and
        traditional religious attitudes.

    Crucially, the harm / care and fairness / reciprocity dimensions correspond to uni-
versalist moral values. For example, the fairness principle requires that people be fair,
not that they only be fair to their neighbors. On the other hand, in-group / loyalty and
authority / respect are tied to certain groups or relationships. In what follows (as spec-
ified in a pre-registration; see below), the fifth foundation is ignored because “divine”
values are not directly related to the distinction between universalist and communal
ones.



                                            11
                               Table 1: Overview of MFQ survey items


                 Moral relevance of:               Agreement with:

                 Emotional suffering               Compassion with suffering crucial virtue
  Harm /
                 Care for weak and vulnerable      Hurt defenseless animal is worst thing
  Care
                 Cruelty                           Never right to kill human being

                 Treat people differently          Laws should treat everyone fairly
  Fairness /
                 Act unfairly                      Justice most important requirement for society
  Reciprocity
                 Deny rights                       Morally wrong that rich children inherit a lot

                 Show love for country             Proud of country’s history
  In-group /
                 Betray group                      Be loyal to family even if done sth. wrong
  Loyalty
                 Lack of loyalty                   Be team player, rather than express oneself

                 Lack of respect for authority     Children need to learn respect for authority
  Authority /
                 Conform to societal traditions    Men and women have different roles in society
  Respect
                 Cause disorder                    Soldiers must obey even if disagree with order

  Notes. Each moral foundation is measured using six survey items. The items in the second column
 ask respondents to state to what extent the respective category is of moral relevance for them
 (on a scale of 0–5), while the items in the third column ask them to indicate their agreement
 with a given statement (also 0–5). For each dimension, the final score is computed by summing
 responses across items; see Appendix F for details.


    While there is an active debate in the psychological literature about the assumption
that morality can be partitioned into exactly five foundations, the broad distinction be-
tween universalist and communal values is widely accepted nowadays (see, e.g., Napier
and Luguri, 2013; Hofmann et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2014; Hannikainen et al., 2017,
for recent applications).²


Moral Foundations Questionnaire. Table 1 presents a stylized version of the 24 sur-
vey items underlying the universalist and communal MFQ foundations. Appendix F
contains the questionnaire in its entirety. Each moral foundation is measured through
six survey items. Of these, three ask people to assess the moral relevance of certain phe-
nomena and behaviors, while the other three elicit respondents’ agreement with moral
value statements. All questions are to be answered on a Likert scale ranging from 0 to
5. For each foundation, the score consists of the sum of responses across questions.


Moral Foundations Dictionary.            The Moral Foundations Dictionary (MFD) is a set of
moral keywords created by Graham and Haidt in 2009.³ The MFD is partly based on the

    ²MFT builds on and is related to other work in psychology, sociology, and philosophy, such as rela-
tional models theory of Fiske (1991) and the qualitative writings of Sandel (1998) and Etzioni (1994)
on communitarianism.
    ³See http://www.moralfoundations.org/othermaterials.


                                                  12
terminology in the MFQ and additionally includes words that the psychologists intuited
would belong to a particular moral category. For each of the four dimensions harm /
care, fairness / reciprocity, in-group / loyalty, and authority / respect, the MFD contains
a list of words (often word stems), for a total of 215 words. The 12 most frequent moral
keywords of the 2008–2016 presidential candidates are: nation*, leader*, care, unite*,
secur*, families, fight*, war, communit*, together, family, and law; see Appendix H.
Appendix G contains the entire MFD. While some of these most common words appear
to be related to specific policies, including war and national security, other common
words such as care, families, communit*, together, family, and law appear less directly
linked to specific policies or national security.


3.2     Construction and Validation of Moral Values Index
3.2.1    Derivation of Index

I derived and validated a summary statistic of moral values through a tailored, nation-
ally representative pre-registered internet survey of N = 4, 011 Americans through
Research Now.⁴ This survey also forms the basis of the individual-level demand-side
analysis below. The data collection procedure and sample characteristics are described
in detail in Section 5. The survey contained all MFQ survey items.
   I construct a summary statistic of the relative importance of universalist versus com-
munal moral values as the simple difference between universalist and communal values:

        Rel. imp. universalist values = Universalist values − Communal values         (13)
                                     = Care + Fairness − In-group − Authority

By construction of the MFQ foundations, this summary statistic amounts to summing
responses to all universalist questions and then subtracting responses to all communal
questions (all questions are coded such that higher values indicate stronger agreement).
   The summary statistic is validated in two ways. First, I document that a principal
component analysis of the four MFQ foundations gives rise to a first eigenvector that
very closely resembles the simple summary statistic. Specifically, harm / care and fair-
ness / reciprocity enter with positive weights (0.50 and 0.53, respectively), while in-
group / loyalty and authority / respect enter with negative weights (−0.53 and −0.44,




   ⁴See http://egap.org/registration/2849 for the pre-registration.


                                             13
respectively).⁵ ⁶
    Second, the summary statistic of morality is validated by correlating it with mea-
sures that are more closely related to how economists might think about trading off the
welfare of all individuals in society and exhibiting loyalty to the local community. The
survey contained a set of four pre-registered measures. Appendix I describes the under-
lying survey items in detail: (i) the decision in a money allocation task in which respon-
dents were asked to split the hypothetical sum of $99 between United Way Worldwide
and local firefighters; (ii) the difference between self-reported monetary donations to
more “global” entities (non-profit organizations such as Feeding America or United Way
Worldwide) and to local entities (churches, firefighters, local libraries, etc.) over the
past 12 months; (iii) the difference between hours volunteered to global entities and
local entities over the last month; and (iv) the extent to which people prefer that taxes
for schools be collected and redistributed at the federal level as opposed to taxes being
collected locally and redistributed only among local schools.
    Table 12 in Appendix D documents that all of these measures are strongly and sig-
nificantly correlated with the relative importance of universalist moral values, also con-
ditional on a rich set of covariates. That is, people with stronger universalist versus
communal values allocate more money to United Way Worldwide, donate and volun-
teer more to global charities, and favor taxation and redistribution at the federal level.
Indeed, the structure of moral values is much more predictive of these attitudes and
behaviors than either income or education.


3.2.2    County-Level Variation

In 2008, Haidt and his collaborators uploaded the MFQ on www.yourmorals.org for
all visitors to complete. Presumably due to extensive media coverage and because the
online tool provides individualized feedback on how respondents’ moral values compare
to those of others, traffic has remained high ever since. I received access to individual-
level responses from August 2008 through April 2018.

     ⁵To conduct the principal component analysis, the data were first normalized across respondents
by dividing each of the four MFQ foundations by the sum of all four foundations since the research
hypothesis is not about heterogeneity in the level of morality, but instead concerns the relative nature of
those values. The first eigenvector explains 55% of the variance in the original MFQ foundations, and it
is the only component with an eigenvalue that is larger than one (2.19).
     ⁶ The pre-registration specified that the moral values index would be constructed by applying the
weights that emerge from the same principal component analysis as described in the text, yet applied
to (an outdated version of) the MFQ dataset from www.yourmorals.org that forms the basis of the
county-level analysis. However, for the sake of simplicity, I settled for a summary statistic with uniform
weights, which was specified in the pre-registration as a robustness check. In practical terms, this makes
virtually no difference because the pre-specified weights, in order of appearance in the text, are 0.58,
0.35, −0.52, and −0.52, respectively, and hence very similar to uniform weights. All results from the
survey are robust to using the pre-registered index of moral values; see Table 13 in Appendix D.


                                                   14
    I construct the same individual-level index of the relative importance of universal-
ist moral values as above. To generate a county-level variable, I aggregate the data
by matching respondents’ ZIP codes to counties using the HUD USPS ZIP Code Cross-
walk Files.⁷ In total, I was able to match 277, 060 respondents to 2, 933 counties. The
sample is neither random nor representative of the US population. The average age of
respondents is 34.0, 46.2% are female, and only 9.5% have not entered college.
    The number of observations within a given county exhibits significant variation: the
median number of respondents is 17, with an average of 95, and a maximum of 6, 531.
Given that the moral values of a small number of people are only a very noisy proxy
for a county’s true average moral values, I undertake two steps to reduce measurement
error and resulting attenuation bias. First, I exclude all counties with less than five
respondents, which leaves me with 2, 263 counties. Second, I apply techniques from
the recent social mobility literature (Chetty and Hendren, 2016) and shrink county-
level moral values to the sample mean by its signal-to-noise ratio. Specifically, I first
standardize county-level moral values into a z-score. Then, the shrunk moral values of
county c, θcs , are computed as a convex combination of observed average moral values
in county c, θc , and the mean θ̄ of the county sample averages:

                                      θcs = w c θc + (1 − w c )θ̄                                 (14)

where the county-specific weights are given by

                                             Var(θc ) − E[sec2 ]
                                  wc =                                                            (15)
                                         Var(θc ) − E[sec2 ] + sec2

    Here, Var(θc ) is the variance of the county means and sec the standard error of θ in
county c. This shrinkage procedure has a Bayesian interpretation according to which
observations with high noise (e.g., due to small N) are shrunk further towards the
sample average. Figure 1 shows that moral values (standardized into a z-score) exhibit
considerable heterogeneity across space, including within relatively narrow geographic
regions.


3.2.3    Stability and Correlates of Moral Values

Psychologists argue that moral values are deeply ingrained and relatively stable beliefs
about what is “right” and “wrong.” Of course, this does not preclude that values change
over time to some extent. There are two types of evidence to support the assumption

    ⁷Some ZIP codes intersect with multiple counties. In such cases, I duplicate respondents q times,
where q is the number of counties that respondents could potentially live in. When I aggregate the data,
each respondent is weighted by 1/q, so that in total each respondent receives a weight of one.


                                                  15
                                                                                    0.6 − 4.1
                                                                                    0.2 − 0.6
                                                                                    -0.2 − 0.2
                                                                                    -0.6 − -0.2
                                                                                    -4.6 − -0.6
                                                                                    No data

   Figure 1: Relative importance of universalist versus communal moral values at the county level




that moral values as measured by the MFQ contain a temporally stable signal. First,
Graham et al. (2011) report that the average test-retest correlation of the MFQ foun-
dations over the course of a month is ρ = 0.73. A test-retest correlation of ρ = 0.73
compares favorably to test-retest correlations for risk aversion measures in economics
lab experiments reported by Cesarini et al. (2009), which range between 0.48 − 0.67.
   A second piece of evidence for stability of moral values stems from noting that the
county-level variation depicted in Figure 1 appears to be temporally relatively stable:
as I document in Figure 9 in Appendix B, county-level values computed separately from
respondents in 2008–2012 and in 2013–2018 are strongly correlated with one another
once counties with few respondents are ignored (ρ = 0.84).
   Table 2 reports the Pearson correlations between moral values and various individ-
ual characteristics in the nationally representative Research Now survey. The relative
importance of universalist values is essentially uncorrelated with an experimentally
validated survey measure of altruism (Falk et al., 2018) and educational attainment
(measured in six categories), though the latter correlation becomes positive once in-
come is controlled for. In addition, universalist values are negatively correlated with
income (11 brackets), age, being male, religiosity (eleven-point scale), and low popu-
lation density. In total, the variables listed in Table 2 explain about 11% of the variation
in the moral values index.
   Investigating correlations at the county level allows for the linkage of moral val-
ues to variables for which individual-level data are difficult to obtain (such as racism),
and to variables that capture the broader local economic environment. Table 32 in Ap-

                                                16
 Table 2: Individual-level correlates of relative importance of universalist vs. communal moral values


                                     Correlation between relative importance of universal moral values and:
                                   Age         Female    Income        Educ.    Religiosity   Pop. density   Altruism

          Raw corr.              −0.10∗∗∗      0.14∗∗∗   −0.07∗∗∗       0.01    −0.23∗∗∗        0.15∗∗∗       −0.02
                                         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
 Partial corr. (all variables)   −0.05         0.14      −0.08         0.08     −0.23           0.14          −0.00
                                         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗                    ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
  Partial corr. (County FE)      −0.10         0.13      −0.07          0.01    −0.23           0.06          −0.02

 Notes. The first row reports the Pearson raw correlation between individual characteristics and the relative
importance of universalist versus communal moral values in the nationally representative Research Now survey
(N = 4, 011). The second row reports partial correlations conditional on the entire set of variables in the table.
The third row reports partial correlations conditional on county fixed effects. Income = income brackets (11
steps). Education = six steps. Religiosity = eleven-point scale. Population density is in logs and constructed
from ZIP code level data, see Appendix I. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


pendix E shows the correlations between the county-level relative importance of univer-
salist moral values and (i) the unemployment rate, (ii) median income, (iii) local pop-
ulation density, (iv) the fraction of the population that is religious, and (v) the racism
index of Stephens-Davidowitz (2014). Again, the strongest correlate of the structure of
moral values conditional on state fixed effects is local population density (ρ = 0.11).
The correlations with income and unemployment rates are tiny in magnitude, and I
can rule out correlations larger than ρ = 0.06.
    The usually weak correlations between the index of moral values and other vari-
ables are not meant to imply that moral values do not matter for anything other than
voting, or to make causal claims about how moral values are formed. Instead, I take the
lack of strong correlations as encouraging evidence that (i) moral values pick up new
and hitherto potentially unexplained variation and (ii) that a number of important eco-
nomic variables are unlikely to induce severe endogeneity concerns because they are
uncorrelated with the structure of moral values.


3.3     Supply-Side Text Analyses: Methodology and Data
Methodology.          Politicians’ moral types are latent. I estimate these types using data
on political rhetoric by implementing a simple word count exercise that is based on
the keywords in the MFD. I construct a continuous summary statistic of the relative
frequency of universalist versus communal moral terminology that closely corresponds
to the measure of the relative importance of universalist values developed above. The
construction of this summary statistic needs to account for two types of imbalances
within the MFD. First, the dictionary contains more words for some MFQ foundations
than for others. Second, morality can be referred to in terminology that focuses on
either virtue (“A is loyal”) or vice (“B betrays”), and the fraction of MFD words within a



                                                         17
given foundation that refers to virtues or vices is not constant across values. This issue
is potentially problematic because politicians might speak about morality in different
ways.
   To account for these imbalances, the index of the relative frequency of universalist
moral terminology is computed using the following procedure:

   1. Count the frequency of each moral keyword.

   2. Compute the average frequency across keywords for each moral foundation, sep-
        arately for vice terms and virtue terms.

   3. Compute the average frequency across vices and virtues for each foundation.

   Denote by N fv the number of vice words for foundation f in the MFD and by N fm the
number of virtue words for foundation f . Further denote by nz the frequency of word
z in a text. The summary statistic is then given by

                                 # Care + # Fairness − # In-group − # Authority
  Rel. freq. univ. terminol. =                                                       (16)
                                        Total number of non-stop words

where
                                            PN fv              PN fm
                                   1/N fv     z=1 nz + 1/N f
                                                           m
                                                                 z=1   nz
                           # f =                                                     (17)
                                                         2

   In words, the value for foundation f is computed by computing separately the av-
erage frequency of vice words of foundation f in the MFD and the average frequency
of virtue words of foundation f in the MFD, and then averaging these two average
frequencies. This summary statistic is a direct analog of the index of the relative impor-
tance of universalist values on the demand side in equation (13), normalized by text
length.
   Below, I will occasionally also make use of measures of the absolute frequency of uni-
versalist and communal moral terminology, respectively. To construct these measures,
I follow the same procedure as outlined above, except that the numerator in equa-
tion (16) is not given by the difference between universalist and communal rhetoric,
but rather by the sum of the MFQ foundations “Care” and “Fairness” or by the sum of
“In-group” and “Authority.”


Data.     To analyze variation in political language across parties, the methodology de-
scribed above was applied to speeches delivered in the U.S. Congress. For this analysis,
I work with data from the text of the United States Congressional Record that was made


                                                    18
publicly available in a cleaned form by Gentzkow et al. (2019), see Appendix I. I restruc-
tured these data such that an observation corresponds to all words publicly uttered by
a politician on a given date.
    To classify individual candidates in presidential elections, the analysis makes use of
data on political rhetoric during presidential campaigns from the American Presidency
Project (APP) at UC Santa Barbara (Peters and Woolley, 2017). The data contain cam-
paign speeches, official statements, press releases, debates, and speeches at fundraisers
by Republican and Democratic contenders for the presidency since 2008.⁸ APP draws
primarily on materials posted on candidate websites. In total, the data cover 45 candi-
dates and 16,698 campaign documents with an average length of 671 words.⁹ In the
analysis, each observation is a campaign document.¹⁰ Because the documents exhibit
significant variation in length, the moral content of these documents is measured with
differential precision. Following Dickens (1990) and Solon et al. (2015), I perform het-
eroscedasticity diagnostics that strongly reject homoscedasticity as a function of text
length.¹¹ The analysis hence weights each document by the square root of the total
number of non-stop words.



4     Supply Side: Moral Values in Political Rhetoric
This section derives the predictions for the demand-side analysis by estimating the
moral types of both individual politicians and party averages (θ j and θ̄ j in the frame-
work in Section 2).




     ⁸Coverage is sparse for 2004 and non-existent for 2000.
     ⁹To prepare the data for text analysis, the following steps are applied: (i) manually check the debate
documents for any errors or inconsistencies; (ii) delete words between parentheses as they typically pro-
vide information that was not delivered during the speech; (iii) strip out all punctuation; and (iv) delete
all stop words – i.e., frequent words that convey very little content.
    ¹⁰To verify the validity of the summary statistic of moral language in the APP data, I conduct two tests.
First, for each politician, I compute the relative frequency of universalist language, averaged separately
across all documents (i) in the year of the election and (ii) in the previous year. When I restrict attention to
politicians with at least 100 documents in either year, the correlation between first and second campaign
year is ρ = 0.88. Second, I split each campaign document at the midpoint and correlate the resulting
indices of the relative frequency of universalist moral language. When we restrict attention to those
document halves that have at least 100 non-stop words each, the correlation is ρ = 0.52.
    ¹¹Specifically, as recommended by Solon et al. (2015), I assess the necessity of implementing weighted
least squares as follows. First, compute residuals from an OLS regression of the relative frequency of
universalist rhetoric on a Trump indicator. Second, regress the squared residuals on the inverse of the
number of words in a document. The significance of the t-ratio for the coefficient indicates whether
weighting is called for. In my application, the t-statistic is 12.


                                                      19
4.1     Cross-Party Variation in Morality
To estimate the moral types of political parties, I make use of rich text data on political
speeches from the U.S. Congress. Figure 2 illustrates the results from computing the
relative frequency of universalist versus communal moral terminology in speeches in
five-year intervals in the post-WWII period. Three trends stand out. First, across both
parties, the relative frequency of universalist moral rhetoric experienced a long and
steady increase between the mid-1960’s and 2000. The starting point of this trend
is intuitively plausible (for example, recall that the U.S. Civil Rights Act was passed
in 1964). In quantitative terms, political language became about 40% of a standard
deviation more universalist in this period. Figure 10 in Appendix B shows that this
increase in the relative frequency of universalist over communal language is largely
driven by an increase in the absolute frequency of universalist words.¹² Second, over
roughly the same period, Democrats and Republicans polarized in their moral appeal.
While politicians from both parties became increasingly universalist in their expressed
values, this trend was substantially more pronounced among Democrats.¹³ Third, the
relative frequency of communal language experienced a substantial rebound starting
in the early 2000s, a trend that is visible for both parties and continues to this date.
We will return to the observation of decreases in universalist morality (and increasing
differences between Republicans and Democrats) in Section 8. Still, the key insight for
the demand-side analysis is that, on average, Republican politicians tend to be more
communal than Democratic ones.


4.2     Classifying Individual Presidential Candidates
Next, I turn to classifying individual candidates to estimate θ j . Figure 3 illustrates the
moral appeal of the 2008–2016 presidential candidates by plotting the average relative
frequency of universalist terminology by (sets of) candidate(s) in the APP project data.
In this figure, the document-level summary statistic of universalist versus communal
language is standardized into a z-score and multiplied by 100, so that the x-axis can
be interpreted as a percentage of a standard deviation. For reasons that will become
clear below, this figure is constructed only from campaign documents that stem from
the time periods of the primaries.
    Two aspects stand out. First, the figure confirms the cross-party differences estab-

   ¹²Tables 39–42 in Appendix H.1 provide the 15 most common words in the U.S. Congress speeches
dataset, separately for (i) all years; (ii) 1955–1965; (iii) 1995–2005; and (iv) since 2010. Appendix H.3
presents the set of MFD words whose usage has changed by the largest margin between 1950 and 2010.
   ¹³The Civil Rights Act and the associated Democratic “loss of the South” (Kuziemko and Washington,
2018) may be one expression of this more general shift in the relative emphasis on different types of
morality.


                                                  20
                                                            Universalist vs. communal language in U.S. Congress


                                                       30
            Rel. frequency universalist moral terminology
               -15           0            15




                                                             1950    1960   1970      1980   1990    2000   2010

                                                                            Republicans         Democrats


Figure 2: Relative frequency of universalist versus communal moral rhetoric in the U.S. Congress, 1945–
2016. The straight red line plots the average relative frequency of universalist rhetoric across all speeches
by Republicans, along with standard error bars (clustered at the candidate level). The dashed blue line
represents the relative frequency of universalist terminology among Democrats. The year of observation
of each speech is rounded to the nearest multiple of five. The relative frequency of universalist moral
rhetoric is a z-score multiplied by 100, where the z-score is computed at the level of separate speeches.


lished above: on average, Republican politicians are less universalist (more communal)
than Democrats. Second, there is significant heterogeneity also across politicians from
the same party. In particular, Trump has a strong communal moral appeal relative to
three comparison sets that are relevant in light of the framework in Section 2. (i) Trump
is less universalist relative to Clinton in 2016; (ii) he is less universalist than the aver-
age competitor in the 2016 GOP primaries (and in fact the least universalist candidate
in the set of serious competitors Cruz, Kasich, and Rubio); and (iii) the difference in
moral appeal between Trump and Clinton is substantially larger than that between
Romney and Obama or between McCain and Obama, respectively. Slightly more for-
mally, θC lint on − θ Trump > (θObama12 − θRomne y + θO bama08 − θ M cC ain )/2.¹⁴
    Looking at other election years, we see that, in 2012, Obama was slightly more
universalist than Romney. Given that the Democratic party is also more universalist than
the Republican party, on average, this predicts that voting for Obama versus Romney
should be positively correlated with the relative importance of universalist values. On
the other hand, in 2008, Obama is less universalist than McCain. Thus, in the absence
of specific assumptions on the magnitude of α in the framework in Section 2, we cannot

  ¹⁴Figures 13 and 14 break these patterns down into the absolute frequency of universalist and com-
munal moral terminology.


                                                                                   21
                                            Rel. freq. of universalist moral terminology

             Donald Trump (2016)

              Other Reps. (2016)

             Hillary Clinton (2016)

              Other Dems. (2016)

              Mitt Romney (2012)

              Other Reps. (2012)

            Barack Obama (2012)

             John McCain (2008)

              Other Reps. (2008)

            Barack Obama (2008)

              Other Dems. (2008)


                                      -40           -20            0               20          40
                                            Rel. frequency of universalist moral terminology


Figure 3: Relative frequency of universalist versus communal moral terminology in the primaries. The
bars depict the estimates (+/- 1 SE) for the candidate fixed effects in an OLS regression of the relative
frequency of universalist terminology in a campaign document on candidate (or candidate group) fixed
effects, controlling for document type FE and campaign day FE (where the first campaign day is defined
as January 1st of the year prior to the respective election). The omitted category is Obama in 2012. As in
the regressions in Table 3, each document is weighted by the square root of the total number of non-stop
words. The index of the relative frequency of universalist moral rhetoric is standardized into a z-score
and multiplied by 100. The sample is restricted to campaign documents from during the primaries, where
for Obama in 2012 this is defined as during the Republican primaries.




generate a prediction about how moral values should be related to voting for Obama
vs. McCain.
    Restricting Figure 3 to the primaries has the appealing feature that it makes all
candidates comparable. Including data from the period of the general election has the
potential drawback that some candidates only competed in the primaries and hence
perhaps responded to their intra-party competition to a greater degree than those politi-
cians who turned out to be presidential nominees. While not part of the framework laid
out in Section 2, it may be of interest to investigate how moral rhetoric evolves in the
course of the 2016 election season. This is done in Figure 4.¹⁵ The relative frequency of
universalist moral rhetoric at a given point in time is computed using a k = 120 nearest
neighbor algorithm, i.e., based on the 120 campaign documents closest to a given date.
    Confirming the results from above, the figure shows that Trump’s moral language
is initially very communal. However, this changes substantially around when he wins


   ¹⁵Figure 15 in Appendix B shows the trends for candidates other than Trump and Clinton.


                                                        22
                                                        Moral language over the 2016 election season


                                                   60
            Rel. freq. universalist moral terminology
           -20         0        20        40




                                                        07/01/2015                   Cruz out          Election
                                                                        01/01/2016      Sanders out

                                                                        Clinton        Trump


Figure 4: Relative frequency of universalist versus communal moral terminology over the course of the
2016 election season. The relative frequency of universalist moral rhetoric at any given point in time
is computed as weighted average using a k = 120 nearest neighbor algorithm, i.e., the 120 campaign
documents closest to a given date. As in the regressions, each document is weighted by the square root
of the total number of non-stop words. The first and second vertical dashed lines denote the dates on
which Cruz and Sanders dropped out of the primaries as the last remaining competitors of Trump and
Clinton, respectively. The index of the relative frequency of universalist moral rhetoric is standardized
into a z-score and multiplied by 100.




the Republican primaries, i.e., his language becomes much more universalist when Ted
Cruz drops out. Similarly, Clinton’s language exhibits a jump in communal appeal when
she wins the Democratic nomination. While these patterns are neither predicted nor
ruled out by the model, they may still be of interest. For example, a potential (post-
hoc) explanation of these trends is that they may reflect politicians’ understanding
that their marginal voter is more centrist in the general election than in the primaries.
If true, such a perspective would suggest that at least part of the variation in moral
appeal across politicians is strategic.
    Despite the fact that Trump becomes more universalist in his rhetoric after the pri-
maries, he is also very communal on average, i.e., in the full set of campaign documents.
To show this, Figure 11 in Appendix B replicates Figure 3 based on all campaign docu-
ments.
    Table 3 formally summarizes the results. Here, the analysis includes all campaign
documents from both the primaries and the general elections. In the table, all variables
except for binary ones are transformed into z-scores.


                                                                           23
                                     Table 3: Politicians’ moral rhetoric

                                                                      Dependent variable:
                                         Rel. frequency of universalist vs. communal moral terminology


                                                                           Sample:
                                         All candidates                Trump & Clinton      Pres. nominees   GOP 2016
                                  (1)         (2)          (3)               (4)                 (5)            (6)
                                     ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗             ∗∗             ∗∗∗                 ∗∗∗
 1 if Trump                     -17.3       -18.0      -11.4               -34.6               -46.7          -29.7∗∗∗
                                 (4.0)       (4.2)      (4.5)               (10.0)              (6.8)          (6.5)
 Log [# of non-stop words]                  10.0∗∗∗       9.0∗∗∗             -0.6               5.3∗∗∗         6.5∗∗∗
                                             (1.1)        (1.1)             (8.6)               (1.8)          (2.3)
 Overall degree of morality                   3.4          3.3                1.8                9.2∗          -5.6∗
                                             (2.3)        (2.3)             (17.7)              (4.9)          (2.9)
 Flesch reading ease score                   6.7∗∗∗       6.7∗∗∗            18.0∗∗              3.9∗∗∗        10.1∗∗∗
                                             (0.9)        (0.9)             (7.7)               (1.2)          (1.7)
 1 if Republican                                       -17.0∗∗∗                                13.8∗∗∗
                                                        (2.0)                                   (3.3)
 1 if presidential nominee                                9.1∗∗∗
                                                          (2.2)
 Document type FE                 Yes         Yes          Yes               Yes                 Yes            Yes
 Year FE                          No          Yes          Yes                No                 Yes            No
 Campaign day FE                  No          Yes          Yes               Yes                 Yes            Yes
 Observations                   16698       16698      16698                1043                5372           3455
 R2                              0.02        0.12       0.13                0.44                0.20           0.27
 Notes. WLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variable is the relative frequency
of universalist versus communal moral terminology, expressed as z-score multiplied by 100. Each document is
weighted by the square root of the total number of non-stop words. In columns (1)–(3), the sample includes all
candidates in 2008–2016. Columns (4)–(6) restrict the sample to Trump and Clinton, presidential nominees
(2008–2016), and 2016 Republicans, respectively. Campaign day FE are constructed by defining January 1st of
the year prior to the election as first campaign day. Overall morality is constructed like the relative frequency of
communal terminology in eq. (16), except that the numerator is given by the sum of the four MFT foundations.
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


    Columns (1)–(3) of Table 3 confirm that Trump’s language exhibits a low relative
frequency of universalist moral terminology, relative to the full set of candidates. The
binary Trump indicator suggests that Trump’s moral rhetoric is about 17% of a standard
deviation less universalist than that of the average candidate. Among others, these anal-
yses also control for the overall emphasis on morality, measured by the frequency of all
MFD words combined.
    Columns (4)–(6) directly develop the supply-side predictions for the demand-side
analyses below, as discussed in the framework in Section 2. For this purpose, the anal-
ysis is restricted to various sub-samples of interest. First, column (4) confirms that
Trump’s language is significantly less universalist than that of Clinton. Second, column
(5) shows that the difference in moral appeal between Trump and Clinton is larger than


                                                          24
that between other pairs of presidential candidates. This is because the regression is re-
stricted to presidential nominees and includes both a Republican and year fixed effects.
Thus, the binary Trump indicator effectively corresponds to a difference-in-difference-
style interaction term between “Republican” and “2016 election.” The coefficient hence
shows that the difference in moral appeal between Trump and Clinton is unusually large
relative to differences between Republicans and Democrats in earlier years. Finally, col-
umn (6) documents that Trump’s language is also significantly less universalist than
that of the average Republican contender in the 2016 primaries. Indeed, Figure 12 in
Appendix B documents that Trump is the least universalist contender in the GOP pri-
maries if one focuses on candidates that eventually garnered at least 5% of the popular
vote (Cruz, Kasich, and Rubio).
    Tables 9 and 10 in Appendix C break these patterns down into the absolute fre-
quency of universalist and communal language, respectively. The results show that,
across most of the specifications shown in Table 3, Trump exhibits both (i) a lower
absolute frequency of using universalist moral language and (ii) a higher absolute fre-
quency of employing communal moral language than the respective comparison sets.
Thus, the patterns that are presented in the main text do not rely on the procedure of
differencing universalist and communal terminology.
    Combining the abstract predictions in Section 2 with the results of the text analysis,
we are now in a position to state the following predictions for the demand-side analysis
of the 2016 election:

Observation 4. The importance that a voter assigns to universalist relative to communal
moral values is negatively correlated with:

    1. Voting for Trump in the general election.

    2. The difference between the propensity to vote for Trump and earlier Republican pres-
       idential nominees in the general election.

    3. Voting for Trump in the GOP primaries.

    Of course, analogs of these predictions can also be investigated for politicians other
than Trump. This is done in Section 7.


5     Demand-Side I: Individual-Level Evidence

5.1     Survey Design
I conducted a pre-registered survey of N = 4, 011 Americans through Research Now,
a commercial market research internet panel. The pre-registration contains all depen-

                                              25
dent variables and the sample size.¹⁶ Research Now recruited a stratified sample of
respondents who are registered voters and born in or before 1989. The sample closely
matches the US general population along the following dimensions: age, gender, edu-
cational attainment, income, race, employment status, and state of residence. Table 11
in Appendix D describes the sample characteristics in detail.
    To avoid priming effects, the survey was not described as a study about voting or
elections. Rather, respondents were only asked to complete questionnaires. The survey
contained (i) the full set of MFQ items; (ii) questions to elicit who respondents voted for
in the 2008, 2012, and 2016 presidential elections as well as the 2016 primaries; (iii) an
additional pre-registered outcome variable specified below; and (iv) a wide range of co-
variates. The survey was structured such that respondents first completed the MFQ and
then provided answers to additional questions, including about their past voting behav-
ior. Respondents received email invitations to participate in the survey. After clicking
on a link, respondents were routed through a set of screening questions to stratify the
sample. Responses were collected between September 20, 2017 and October 17, 2017.
    As detailed in the hypotheses in Sections 2 and 4, the dependent variables of inter-
est are (i) whether the respondent voted for Trump in the 2016 presidential election;
(ii) the difference in the propensity to vote for Trump and prior Republican presidential
candidates (Romney and McCain); and (iii) voting for Trump in the 2016 Republican
primaries. All of these variables were pre-registered.¹⁷ The analysis links these outcome
variables to the relative importance of universalist values, which is constructed as de-
scribed in Section 3.2.


5.2     Covariates
Prior work in political economy has established the importance of a variety of economic
and social factors for voting behavior and attitudes towards redistribution. Thus, many
specifications will control for a host of covariates. Naturally, due to logistical constraints,
it was not feasible for me to include in the survey the entire set of variables that has
been deemed relevant in the literature. In addition, “controlling” for individual-level
characteristics potentially entails the risk of misspecification because those very charac-
teristics may ultimately generate the variation in morality that is the object of interest
in this paper. For example, it is conceivable that age or religiosity matter for voting at
least partly because they generate a particular type of morality. Thus, analyses involving

    ¹⁶See http://egap.org/registration/2849. The pre-registration specified a sample size of N =
4, 000. The surplus reflects respondents who started the survey before number 4000 finished.
    ¹⁷Table 16 in Appendix D presents an analysis of the relationship between moral values and changes
in turnout in the presidential election between 2016 and prior elections. This analysis was not pre-
registered and is not part of the conceptual framework laid out in Section 2.


                                                 26
covariates are best viewed as sensitivity checks.
    The analysis of covariates proceeds in two steps. In a first step, I pick covariates by
largely following a recent survey paper on the correlates of attitudes towards redistri-
bution (Alesina and Giuliano, 2011). This set includes the following variables: age; gen-
der; race (six categories); employment status; educational attainment (six categories);
religious denomination (10 categories); and income bracket (ten categories).¹⁸ On top
of these variables from Alesina and Giuliano’s overview paper, I also elicited occupation
(11 categories), local population density (computed from respondents’ ZIP codes), es-
tablished survey measures of altruism and generalized trust as more traditional social
variables, as well as state and county of residence.¹⁹ Finally, I also control for the abso-
lute value of the relative importance of universalist versus communal values. It is worth
pointing out that this vector of controls is at least as, if not more, comprehensive than
in related recent contributions to the literature (e.g., Fisman et al., 2015; Ortoleva and
Snowberg, 2015).
    In a second step of the analysis, I benchmark the results on moral values explicitly
against variables that have previously been identified as important drivers of voting
decisions: political conservatism, income, education, religiosity, and population density.


5.3     Results
Table 4 summarizes the results of various OLS regressions. For each dependent variable,
I present three specifications: (i) an analysis that introduces universalist and communal
values separately; (ii) a regression that uses the main measure of the relative impor-
tance of universalist versus communal values; and (iii) a specification with the baseline
set of controls discussed above: year of birth fixed effects; gender; race fixed effects;
employment status; educational attainment fixed effects; religious denomination fixed
effects; income bracket fixed effects; occupation fixed effects; local population density;
altruism; generalized trust; and the absolute value of the moral values index. Each spec-
ification includes state fixed effects for comparability because in the primaries the set
of candidates differs across states.²⁰
    Column (1) documents that universalist and communal values are correlated with
voting for Trump in the 2016 presidential election in opposite directions. A higher ab-
solute emphasis placed on universalist values is negative related to voting for Trump,


    ¹⁸Unlike Alesina and Giuliano (2011), I do not have access to data on marital status, respondents’
own experienced social mobility relative to their parents, the respondent’s perception of whether effort
or luck matters for success in life, and the presence of macroeconomic shocks in their region of residence
during age 18–25.
    ¹⁹See Appendix I for a description of the covariates.
    ²⁰Still, the results are almost identical without state fixed effects, see Table 14 in Appendix D.


                                                   27
while a higher emphasis placed on communal values is positively correlated with voting
for him (both measures are standardized into z-scores for ease of interpretation). Note
that there is nothing mechanical about the construction of the universalist and com-
munal values measures that would generate this pattern as they are constructed from
separate survey questions. Column (2) combines the separate moral values measures
into the main explanatory variable in this paper, the relative importance of universalist
versus communal values, which is also standardized into a z-score. The quantitative
magnitude of the regression coefficient suggests that an increase in the relative impor-
tance placed on universalist values by one standard deviation is related to an increase
in the probability of voting for Trump of 21 percentage points. Here, the moral values
measure alone explains 20% of the variation in voting behavior. Column (3) adds con-
trols and shows that the relative importance of universalist values is strongly negatively
related to voting for Trump conditional on this large vector of controls.
    Just like columns (1)–(3) show that voting for Trump vs. Clinton is negatively re-
lated to the relative importance of universalist values – as predicted by the text analysis –
Table 17 in Appendix D shows that voting for Romney versus Obama in the general elec-
tion 2012 is likewise negatively correlated with the relative importance of universalist
values. Again, this pattern is predicted by the text analysis. The relative importance
of universalist values is also strongly negatively correlated with a respondent’s propen-
sity to vote for McCain rather than Obama in the general election 2008. This pattern
is neither predicted nor ruled out by the conceptual framework and the text analysis.
As discussed above, the reason is that McCain is classified as more universalist than
Obama, but the Republican average is more communal than the Democratic average.
Hence, in the absence of specific assumptions on γ, the framework does not generate
an unambiguous prediction. Section 7 returns to a detailed study of candidates other
than Trump.
    While columns (1)–(3) of Table 4 study voting Republican vs. Democratic, columns (4)–
(9) explicitly turn to studying within-party variation, both over time in the general elec-
tion and in the primaries. Columns (4)–(6) document that universalist moral values are
also significantly negatively related to the difference between voting for Trump and past
Republican presidential candidates (Romney and McCain) in the general election.²¹ As
discussed in Section 2, the intuitive logic behind this regression is that it takes out the


    ²¹This variable is constructed by generating binary variables for Trump, Romney, and McCain, each of
which assumes a value of 100 if the respondent voted for the respective candidate in the corresponding
presidential election and 0 if they voted for a different candidate. The dependent variable of interest is
then computed as the difference between the binary Trump variable and the average of the corresponding
Romney and McCain variables. In Table 15 in Appendix D, I verify that very similar results hold if I instead
code a three-step variable for each candidate that assumes a value of 50 if the respondent did not vote
in the relevant election. Similar results hold if I code “I don’t remember” as 50.


                                                    28
level effect of being Republican in the first place, just like the text analysis showed that
Trump is more communal in his moral appeal than past Republican presidential can-
didates. In these regressions, we observe a similar pattern as in columns (1)–(3): the
absolute importance that respondents place on universalist values is negatively and the
importance placed on communal values positively correlated with voting for Trump,
relative to past Republican nominees. Moreover, the statistically significant coefficient
of the combined measure of the relative importance of universalist values is robust to
including the vector of controls discussed above, see column (6).
    In an identical fashion, columns (7)–(9) show that moral values are likewise related
to voting for Trump in the GOP primaries. Quantitatively, an increase in the relative
importance of universalist moral values by one standard deviation is associated with a
decrease in voting for Trump in the primaries of about ten percentage points.²² , ²³
    As noted above, discussing coefficient stability across regression specifications is not
necessarily meaningful because some of the controls (such as age, population density,
or religious denomination) could matter for voting precisely because they shape moral
values, which in turn drive voting decisions. For instance, sociologists and anthropolo-
gists have long written about the idea that living in small-scale communities induces a
communal morality (Henrich et al., 2010; Norenzayan et al., 2016; Wuthnow, 2018).
Thus, the thought experiment of “changing moral values while holding observables con-
stant” may not be a sensible one, which is why I view regressions with an extensive set
of controls more as sensitivity checks than as representations of the likely true causal
model that generates the data. Nonetheless, for completeness, I report Oster’s (2019)
δ as a measure of how much unobservables would have to bias the coefficient of moral
values, relative to the “bias” that is introduced by ignoring the large set of observables
in Table 4. Going from column (1) to (3), we get δ = 0.4. Going from column (4) to
(6), we get δ = 0.1 and going from (7) to (9) we get δ = 0.6. Thus, for example,
in order for the true coefficient in column (1) to be zero, unobservables would have
to bias the coefficient estimate 40% as much as the vector of observables. While these
numbers are low, I emphasize that the full specifications in columns (3), (6) and (9)
include variables that plausibly cause some of the variation in moral values themselves.
    To visualize the relationship between moral values and voting behavior, I compute
average moral values across groups of respondents that exhibit a certain voting pattern.


    ²²In the survey, “too many” respondents report to have voted for a third candidate (8.6% vis a vis
5.7% in the election). Such a pattern would be expected if some respondents clicked randomly.
    ²³Appendix D replicates the analysis in Table 4, separately for each of the 24 survey items from which
the MFQ foundations are derived. The results document that 63 out of 72 regression coefficients have the
expected sign, i.e., negative for items that underlie care / harm and fairness / reciprocity and positive
for items that underlie in-group / loyalty and authority / respect. Of these 63 items, 53 are statistically
significant at least at the 10% level.


                                                   29
                                                    Table 4: Moral values and voting: Individual-level evidence

                                                                                                              Dependent variable:
                                                                                        Votes in presidential election                       Votes in GOP primaries
                                                                            1 if voted for Trump            ∆ [Trump – Ave. GOP]              1 if voted for Trump
                                                                           (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)
                                                                              ∗∗∗                              ∗∗∗                              ∗∗∗
      Absolute importance of universalist moral values                  -19.8                             -2.27                            -6.21
                                                                         (0.83)                            (0.69)                           (1.36)
      Absolute importance of communal moral values                       23.6∗∗∗                          4.23∗∗∗                          15.7∗∗∗
                                                                         (0.76)                           (0.63)                           (1.42)
      Relative importance of universalist vs. communal moral values                 -21.1∗∗∗   -17.2∗∗∗              -3.24∗∗∗   -2.47∗∗∗              -10.1∗∗∗   -8.20∗∗∗
                                                                                     (0.62)     (0.86)                (0.50)     (0.76)                (1.23)     (1.34)
      State FE                                                             Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
      Year of birth FE                                                     No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
      Race FE                                                              No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes




30
      Income bracket and education FE                                      No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
      Religious denomination FE                                            No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
      Occupation FE                                                        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
      Gender and employment status                                         No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
      Local population density                                             No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
      Altruism and generalized trust                                       No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
      Abs. value of moral values index                                     No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
      Observations                                                        3471       3471       3342       2973       2973       2860       1888       1888       1817
      R2                                                                  0.22       0.22       0.38       0.03       0.03       0.08       0.10       0.07       0.20
      Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(3), the dependent variable is a binary indicator that equals 100 if the respondent
     voted for Trump in the general election and zero if the respondent voted for Clinton. In columns (4)–(6), the dependent variable is the difference in the
     propensity to vote for Trump and the average propensity to vote for Romney and McCain, where the propensity to vote for a given candidate is a binary
     indicator that equals 0 if the respondent voted for a different candidate and 100 if they voted for the respective candidate. The difference in sample size
     between columns (1)–(3) and (4)–(6) is that a respondent had to vote in all elections 2008–2016 to be included in columns (4)–(6). In columns (7)–(9),
     the dependent variable is a binary indicator that equals 100 if the respondent voted for Trump in the 2016 GOP primaries and 0 if they voted for another
     candidate. See Appendix I for a description of the covariates. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                                 Moral values by voter type: General election                                                                 Moral values by voter type: GOP primaries




                                                                                                                                                 .4
Rel. importance universalist moral values




                                                                                                         Rel. importance universalist moral values
                                       .4




                                                                                                                                         .2
                               .2




                                                                                                                                0
                       0




                                                                                                                        -.2
       -.4     -.2




                                                                                                                -.4
-.6




                                                                                                        -.6
                                            Clinton/ Trump/     Clinton/ Trump/      Clinton/ Trump/                                                  Other Rep./ Trump/   Other Rep./ Trump/   Other Rep./ Trump/
                                            Obama Obama          Other    Other     Romney Romney                                                       Obama Obama           Other     Other    Romney Romney
                                            N=1,466 N=261        N=99 N=288           N=75 N=983                                                         N=389 N=231          N=115 N=167          N=422 N=564




        Figure 5: Moral values by type of voter. The bar graph depicts the average relative importance of univer-
        salist moral values of all respondents that report a given voting pattern (+/- 1 SE). The left panel focuses
        on voting behavior in the 2016 presidential election, conditioned by voting in the 2012 presidential elec-
        tion. Here, the first bar corresponds to voters who voted Democratic in both presidential elections. The
        second one corresponds to voting for Obama and voting for Trump, and so forth. The group “Other”
        includes respondents who voted for a third candidate, did not vote, or do not remember who they voted
        for (in 2012). The right panel follows an analogous logic, except that here groups are partitioned by
        their voting pattern in the 2016 GOP primaries, conditioned by voting in the 2012 presidential election.
        For example, the first bar corresponds to voters who voted for Obama in 2012 and for a candidate other
        than Trump in the 2016 GOP primaries. The difference in overall sample size between the left panel and
        column (1) of Table 4 reflects respondents who voted for a third candidate in 2016.


       This is done in Figure 5. The left panel focuses on voting in the 2016 presidential
        election, conditioned by voting in the 2012 election. For instance, the first bar shows
        the average relative importance of universalist moral values of respondents who voted
        for Obama in 2012 and for Clinton in 2016. Likewise, the third bar shows the average
       values of respondents who voted for Clinton in 2016 and voted for neither Obama nor
        Romney in 2012. The figure documents a clear pattern: conditional on voting behavior
        in 2012, Trump voters consistently place a lower emphasis on universalist relative to
        communal concepts in their morality than Clinton voters.
                                            The right panel of Figure 5 follows the same logic, but focuses on variation within
        the 2016 Republican primaries, conditional on a given voting pattern in the 2012 pres-
        idential election. Again, Trump voters consistently exhibit a weaker emphasis on uni-
       versalist moral values than those who voted for other GOP candidates.²⁴




         ²⁴To provide direct evidence for the extent to which concepts such as in-group loyalty are of im-
      portance to voters relative to abstract economic and social policies, the survey contained an additional
      pre-registered outcome variable. This survey item asks respondents which of two aspects is more impor-
      tant for their evaluation of Trump: (i) the extent to which Trump shows loyalty to his supporters and
      does not betray the respondent’s community or (ii) Trump’s economic and social policies, such as his im-
      pact on the unemployment rate. universalist moral values exhibit a correlation of ρ = −0.13 (p < 0.01)
      with the extent to which voters evaluate Trump based on loyalty as opposed to his economic policies.


                                                                                                       31
5.4     Benchmarking Against Traditional Variables
To provide a benchmark for the relationship between moral values and voting behavior,
I now introduce a set of covariates that has previously been shown to be predictive of
voting behavior. This set includes both social and economic variables. I work with (i) a
summary statistic of political liberalism versus conservatism that aggregates political
views towards the size of government, gun control, crime policies, and environmen-
talism using 13 questions from the Cooperative Congressional Election Study; (ii) reli-
giosity (measured on an 11-point scale); (iii) local population density as constructed
from respondents’ ZIP codes; (iv) a self-reported measure of annual pre-tax household
income;²⁵ and (v) educational attainment.
    The objective of this section is to document that moral values have explanatory
power for voting behavior (in a statistical sense) above and beyond the aforementioned
“benchmarking” variables as well as the vector of controls that I used in the preceed-
ing section. In these types of analyses, there exists a tradeoff between controlling for
too few variables (omitted variable bias) and too many covariates (because a potential
causal effect of e.g. population density could operate through moral values). Thus, for
each dependent variable, I present three specifications. First, a specification that con-
trols for all benchmarking variables as well as state fixed effects. Second, a large kitchen
sink regression in which I control for all benchmarking variables, all covariates from Sec-
tion 5.3, and county fixed effects. The third specification follows a post-double-selection
(PDS, also known as “double lasso”) methodology (Belloni et al., 2014) to select the
“right” set of controls from the high-dimensional control vector.²⁶
    Table 5 presents the regression results. For ease of interpretation, all explanatory
variables are standardized into z-scores. Column (1) confirms that all “benchmarking”
variables are significantly related to voting for Trump vs. Clinton with well-known signs:
the religious, people with more conservative policy views, those with higher income,
and people from rural areas are more likely to vote Republican. At the same time, the
coefficient of the relative importance of universalist moral values remains large and
statistically highly significant in this specification. As shown in columns (2) and (3),
similar results hold when I additionally control for 1,079 county fixed effects and the
full vector of additional controls that I introduced in Section 5.3. These results hold

   ²⁵Appendix D.8 discusses a robustness check, in which I instead work with an estimate of lifetime
income.
   ²⁶This procedure proceeds in three steps: First, implement two separate lasso regressions: the out-
come variable on the vector of controls; and the moral values index on the vector of controls. In these
regressions, the lasso estimator achieves a sparse solution, i.e., most coefficients are set to zero. Second,
define the appropriate set of controls as the union of the controls with non-zero coefficients in the two
regressions. Third, regress the outcome variable on the moral values index, controlling for this selected
vector of controls.


                                                    32
in both OLS and PDS regressions. In these analyses, the moral values index alone “ex-
plains” about 26% of the variation in voting behavior, while the full set of benchmarking
variables jointly explains 24% of the variation.
    Columns (4)–(6) and (7)–(9) follow an analogous logic, except that these regres-
sions again leverage within-party variation, either over time or in the primaries. In
columns (4)–(6), the dependent variable is the difference between the propensity to
vote for Trump in 2016 and the average propensity to vote for Romney and McCain in
the general elections. In these regressions, the relative importance of universalist moral
values is consistently strongly negatively related to the propensity to vote for Trump,
relative to earlier Republican presidential nominees. Interestingly, the standard vari-
ables that are typically associated with voting Republican vs. Democratic (conservative
policy views, income, population density, and religiosity) are individually only weakly,
if at all, predictive of the extent to which voters switch towards or away from voting
Republican in 2016. Here, the R2 of the moral values index alone is 1%, while that of
the full set of benchmarking variables is 2%.
    Very similar results hold in the analysis of the GOP primaries, see columns (7)–(9).
Again, the coefficient of the relative importance of universalist moral values remains
statistically highly significant and comparable in size to the earlier analyses, even when
all benchmarking variables and the vector of controls are included. Here, the R2 of the
moral values index alone is 3%, while that of the full set of benchmarking variables is
5%.²⁷
    In summary, the structure of moral values is consistently related to voting for Trump,
both in cross-party and in within-party comparisons. Other variables that have previ-
ously been identified to be predictive of voting Republican vs. Democratic, on the other
hand, are correlated with voting for Trump relative to Clinton, but not in within-party
analyses. This suggests that traditional variables largely capture across-party variation
in political leanings, whereas moral values also capture more nuanced within-party
variation in ways that are predicted by supply-side text analyses.




    ²⁷A potential concern is that these variables are measured with more error than moral values. Ap-
pendix D.6 investigates this issue. Following Gillen et al. (2015), I make use of multiple measurements
for each variable and instrument the measures with each other to eliminate attenuation bias. The results
of these IV regressions are very similar to those reported in Table 5.


                                                  33
                                          Table 5: Moral values and voting: Benchmarking and additional controls

                                                                                                                Dependent variable:
                                                                                        Votes in presidential election                          Votes in GOP primaries
                                                                            1 if voted for Trump              ∆ [Trump – Ave. GOP]               1 if voted for Trump
                                                                          OLS        OLS        PDS          OLS        OLS        PDS         OLS        OLS          PDS
                                                                           (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)
                                                                              ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗          ∗∗        ∗∗∗           ∗∗
      Relative importance of universalist vs. communal moral values     -14.0       -12.4      -12.3        -2.55      -3.68      -1.96       -9.49      -5.32        -7.78∗∗∗
                                                                         (0.81)      (1.36)     (1.04)       (0.70)     (1.42)    (0.93)       (1.49)    (2.66)        (1.54)
      Political liberalism                                              -12.7∗∗∗    -11.1∗∗∗      x          -1.19      -0.45       x          -0.19      -0.75          x
                                                                         (0.89)      (1.19)                 (0.82)     (1.18)                 (1.30)     (2.33)
      Log [Household income]                                             3.07∗∗∗     0.70                    -1.36      -0.90                  -0.61      -1.11
                                                                         (0.97)     (1.24)                  (0.92)     (1.32)                 (1.23)     (1.79)
      Education                                                          0.059       -0.88                  -3.19∗∗∗   -2.39∗       x         -9.16∗∗∗   -8.30∗∗∗        x
                                                                         (0.86)     (1.31)                   (0.83)    (1.42)                  (1.32)     (2.53)
      Log [Population density]                                          -7.57∗∗∗    -5.43∗∗∗      x          -0.99      -2.46                 -4.35∗∗∗    -4.66
                                                                         (0.89)      (1.88)                 (0.93)     (2.18)                  (1.45)    (3.76)




34
      Religiosity                                                        2.67∗∗∗    3.40∗∗∗       x         0.072       0.85        x         -0.027      -0.88
                                                                         (0.82)     (1.29)                  (0.79)     (1.25)                 (1.36)     (2.67)
      State FE                                                             Yes        No                      Yes        No                     Yes        No
      County FE                                                            No         Yes         x           No         Yes        x           No         Yes           x
      Additional controls                                                  No         Yes         x           No         Yes        x           No         Yes           x
      Observations                                                        2852       2852       2852         2452       2452      2452         1544       1544         1544
      R2                                                                  0.32       0.64                    0.05       0.47                   0.11       0.60
      Notes. Regression estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. Columns (3), (6), and (9) present PDS and all other columns OLS regressions. In columns
     (1)–(3), the dependent variable is a binary indicator that equals 100 if the respondent voted for Trump in the general election and zero if the respondent
     voted for Clinton. In columns (4)–(6), the dependent variable is the difference between the propensity to vote for Trump and the average propensity to
     vote for Romney and McCain. In columns (7)–(9), the dependent variable is a binary indicator that equals 100 if the respondent voted for Trump in the
     GOP primaries. Additional controls include year of birth fixed effects, gender, employment status, race fixed effects, religious denomination fixed effects,
     occupation fixed effects, altruism, generalized trust, and the absolute value of the moral values index. See Appendix I for a description of all variables. The
     PDS procedure selects the following covariates (denoted by “x”): Column (3): political liberalism, log pop. density, religiosity, gender, white race dummy,
     Atheist dummy, and various county FE. Column (6): political liberalism, log pop. density, education, religiosity, gender, white race dummy, Atheist dummy,
     and various county FE. Column (9): political liberalism, education, white race dummy, and various county FE. For comparability, all explanatory variables
     are standardized into z-scores. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
6      Demand-Side II: County-Level Evidence

6.1      Baseline Results
The individual-level analysis is complemented by a county-level analysis. These modes
of analysis exhibit different strengths and weaknesses: the tailored internet survey fea-
tures rich individual-level data and a representative sample, but has to make do with
self-reported voting decisions. The county-level analysis, on the other hand, builds on a
different, non-representative, dataset on moral values, but makes use of official voting
records.²⁸ Perhaps most importantly, in the next section, the county-level analysis al-
lows for the scope of the analysis to be extended to all candidates who have competed
for the presidency since 2008.
    This section proceeds in the same fashion as the individual-level analysis by testing
the three predictions regarding Trump outlined in Section 4. Table 6 reports the results.
The county-level average relative importance of universalist versus communal moral val-
ues is strongly negatively correlated with Trump’s vote share in the presidential election
(the raw correlation is ρ = 0.31). As column (2) shows, this result holds conditional
on median household income, unemployment rates, local population density, the share
of religious people, the local racism index developed by Stephens-Davidowitz (2014),
the absolute value of the moral values index, and geographical controls.²⁹
    While columns (1)–(2) include state fixed effects, the regressions in columns (3)
and (4) exploit variation within more narrowly defined geographical units. In column
(3), the analysis includes 595 commuting zone (CZ) fixed effects. Column (4) provides
an even more conservative estimation that includes fixed effects for core-based statisti-
cal areas (CBSAs). A CBSA is a geographic area that consists of one or more counties
anchored by an urban center. Again, moral values remain a significant correlate of
Trump’s vote share.
    Columns (5)–(8) document that universalist moral values are also negatively cor-
related with the difference between the vote share for Trump and the average share
of votes garnered by GOP candidates in 2000–2012. Finally, columns (9)–(12) extend
the analysis to the GOP primaries. Again, Trump’s vote share is consistently related
to moral values, within states, commuting zones, and CBSAs. The partial correlation
– conditional on state fixed effects – between the relative importance of universalist
moral values and the dependent variables in columns (1), (5), and (9) is −0.22, −0.12




    ²⁸The county-level voting data stem from “Dave Leip’s Atlas of US Presidential Elections” (Leip, 2004).
    ²⁹Appendix I describes all covariates and their sources in detail.


                                                    35
                                                                Table 6: Moral values and county-level voting patterns

                                                                                                                             Dependent variable:
                                                                                                                                Vote shares
                                                                                                      Presidential election                                                 GOP primaries
                                                                                      Trump                               ∆ [Trump – Ave. GOP]                                 Trump
                                                                     (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)        (9)       (10)       (11)        (12)
                                                                        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗           ∗∗                   ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗           ∗
      Rel. importance of universalist vs. communal moral values    -2.27      -1.63      -1.36         -2.00      -0.58      -0.33      -0.26         -0.30     -0.58      -0.40      -0.35       -0.93∗
                                                                    (0.29)     (0.24)     (0.24)        (0.56)     (0.13)     (0.11)    (0.11)       (0.25)      (0.17)     (0.14)    (0.20)      (0.51)
      Log [Median HH income]                                                   1.68      10.9∗∗∗       12.3∗∗∗               -7.46∗∗∗   -6.78∗∗∗     -8.43∗∗∗              -5.97∗∗∗   -4.42∗∗∗    -5.81∗∗
                                                                              (1.59)     (1.92)        (3.23)                 (0.72)     (0.84)       (1.41)                (0.96)     (1.48)     (2.67)
      Unemployment rate                                                       -0.68∗∗∗   -0.41∗∗∗       -0.24                 0.057     0.16∗∗∗      0.30∗∗                0.56∗∗∗    0.71∗∗∗     0.56∗∗
                                                                               (0.14)     (0.15)       (0.29)                 (0.06)    (0.06)       (0.13)                (0.07)     (0.16)      (0.24)
      Racism index                                                            2.16∗∗∗    1.58∗∗∗       -0.059                 0.97∗∗∗    0.30        0.064                 0.84∗∗∗     0.56        -0.39
                                                                              (0.40)     (0.59)        (3.22)                 (0.18)    (0.27)       (0.78)                (0.20)     (0.45)      (1.18)
      Log [Population density]                                                -5.84∗∗∗   -6.80∗∗∗      -7.49∗∗∗              -2.25∗∗∗   -2.99∗∗∗     -3.32∗∗∗              -1.73∗∗∗   -2.36∗∗∗    -2.59∗∗∗
                                                                               (0.23)     (0.23)        (0.34)                (0.11)     (0.10)       (0.16)                (0.14)     (0.20)      (0.30)




36
      Fraction religious                                                      8.99∗∗∗    7.42∗∗∗        4.25                   0.23      -0.19        -0.43                -5.43∗∗∗   -3.92∗∗∗    -7.52∗∗∗
                                                                              (2.08)     (2.18)        (3.88)                 (0.83)    (0.76)       (1.17)                 (1.12)     (1.48)      (2.75)
      Abs. value of moral values index                                         -0.14      -0.38         -0.47                  0.29     0.049         0.20                 -0.040      -0.25       0.26
                                                                              (0.39)     (0.36)        (0.83)                 (0.18)    (0.16)       (0.35)                (0.21)     (0.28)      (0.71)
      Latitude                                                                 0.43∗      0.29          0.64                   0.16∗     -0.27        0.43                 -0.64∗∗∗   -1.06∗∗      -1.19
                                                                              (0.23)     (0.68)        (1.38)                 (0.10)    (0.29)       (0.61)                 (0.11)    (0.50)      (1.17)
      Longitude                                                               0.079       0.11          -0.64                 0.19∗∗     0.36         0.75                 0.22∗∗∗     0.24       2.09∗∗
                                                                              (0.16)     (0.50)        (1.06)                 (0.08)    (0.23)       (0.50)                (0.08)     (0.54)      (0.94)
      State FE                                                       Yes        Yes           No         No         Yes        Yes        No           No         Yes        Yes        No          No
      Commuting zone FE                                              No         No            Yes        No         No          No        Yes          No         No         No         Yes         No
      CBSA FE                                                        No         No            No         Yes        No          No        No           Yes        No         No         No          Yes
      Observations                                                  2255       2249       2249          1635       2255        2249      2249         1635       2116       2110       2110        1547
      R2                                                            0.36       0.59       0.81          0.88       0.38        0.64      0.85         0.89       0.81       0.87       0.89        0.92
      Notes. County-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variable in columns (1)–(4) is Trump’s vote share in the 2016 general election. The dependent
     variable in columns (5)–(8) is the difference between Trump’s vote share in the election and the average GOP vote share in presidential elections between 2000 and 2012. The dependent
     variable in (9)–(12) is Trump’s vote share in the GOP primaries.∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
and −0.09, respectively.³⁰ ³¹
    In summary, the county-level analysis delivers similar patterns as the individual-
level analysis. These patterns closely correspond to the predictions from the conceptual
framework in Section 2 and the text analysis in Section 4.³²


6.2     Priming?
It is conceivable that the correlation between Trump votes and moral values only reflects
a “priming effect,” according to which Trump primed voters with a particular type of
moral language (potentially differentially across counties), which then in turn affected
how voters responded to the MFQ. To investigate whether this is a plausible account
of the results, I make use of the time variation in the MFQ data: many respondents
on www.yourmorals.org completed the MFQ before Trump even became politically
active. Thus, I proceed by presenting instrumental variable estimates that relate the
2016 election outcomes to the moral values of MFQ respondents between 2013 and
2018, instrumented by the moral values of MFQ respondents between 2008 and 2012.
This addresses the issue of priming effects because the structure of moral values in the
past is unlikely to have been affected by Trump. At the same time, it is important to
point out that these IV regressions do not (and are not intended to) cleanly identify
causal effects: they only rule out reverse causality from Trump’s language to measured
moral values, but not other potential endogeneity concerns.
    Table 7 presents the results of the second stage regressions. Throughout, the IV
coefficients are sizable and statistically significant.³³ This shows that the cross-sectional
heterogeneity that is correlated with voting for Trump already existed before Trump
became politically active, so that, at least to some extent, Trump seems to have tapped
into pre-existing moral convictions.



    ³⁰Table 33 in Appendix E replicates Table 6 using the common sample for which the CBSA dummy is
not missing.
    ³¹Table 34 in Appendix E breaks these patterns down into the absolute importance placed on univer-
salist and communal values, respectively. The results show that county-level communal values are always
positively correlated with voting for Trump. The coefficient of the absolute importance of universalist
values is sometimes positive and sometimes negative, but it is always more negative than the coefficient
of communal values.
    ³²Table 36 in Appendix E studies the relationship between county-level values and increases in turnout
relative to previous election years, both in the general election and in the GOP primaries. The relative
importance of universalist moral values is consistently negatively related to increases in voter turnout.
Thus, as in the individual-level analysis, it appears as though moral values are linked to both turnout
and voting conditional on turnout.
    ³³The IV coefficients are substantially larger than their OLS counterparts. This is indicative of attenu-
ation bias in the moral values variable, perhaps because the shrinkage procedure does not fully account
for the sometimes small number of respondents in a county and resulting measurement error.


                                                    37
                   Table 7: Moral values and county-level voting patterns: IV estimates

                                                                                        Dependent variable:
                                                                                           Vote shares
                                                                                  Pres. election:             GOP primaries:
                                                                     Trump        ∆ (Trump – Ave. GOP)           Trump
                                                                       (1)                   (2)                   (3)
                                                                            ∗∗∗                    ∗∗
 Rel. imp. of universalist vs. communal moral values (2013-2018)     -15.0                 -3.03                 -3.83∗∗
                                                                      (4.13)               (1.35)                (1.83)
 State FE                                                              Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Controls                                                              Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Observations                                                         2017                  2017                  1892
 Notes. County-level IV estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The table reports the second stage of IV regres-
sions in which county-level moral values (measured between 2013 and 2018) are instrumented by county-level moral
values measured between 2008 and 2012. Both moral values variables are standardized into a z-score and then shrunk
towards the sample mean using the methodology outlined in Section 3.2.2. All dependent variables are computed as in
Table 6. See Table 6 for a list of the controls. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.



7 Estimating the Model: 2008 – 2016
If the methodology of connecting demand- and supply-side analyses of morality devel-
oped in this paper is meaningful more generally, then it should also be able to explain
voting patterns for candidates other than Trump. This section hence extends the analy-
sis to 2008–2016. The set of candidates includes those 16 politicians in the Republican
and Democratic primaries who received at least 5% of the popular vote. Given the small
number of candidates, this analysis should naturally be seen as tentative. The analysis
focuses on county-level variation because individual-level surveys of the relationship be-
tween moral values and voting would have to have a very large number of respondents
to be sufficiently powered to analyze candidates with relatively small vote shares.
    I begin by describing the analysis for the within-party competition in the primaries.
The analysis of the general elections will follow immediately from this discussion. To
structure the analysis, I return to the discrete choice model in Section 2. Recall from
equation (1) in Section 2 that, when all politicians are in the same party (and hence
effectively γ = 1), voter i’s utility from candidate j getting elected in race t is:

                            ui, j,t = − λ(θi − θ j,t )2 + x i η j,t + εi, j,t
                                  = −λθ j,t
                                        2
                                            −λθi2 + 2λθ j,t θi + x i η j,t + εi, j,t
                                    | {z }          | {z }
                                       ≡α j,t               ≡β j,t

                                  =α j,t + β j,t θi + x i η j,t + εi, j,t                                            (18)

As we will see below, the key observation here is that β j,t is linear and increasing in
the candidate’s type θ j,t . If we impose the assumption that εi, j,t ∼ T 1EV , this discrete
choice model can be directly translated into an estimating equation at the county level,

                                                         38
where the independent variable is a candidate’s (normalized) vote share. Specifically,
separately for each primary t, stack the data across candidates j and counties c. De-
note by w the candidate who won the popular vote in a given race. Then, I relate a
candidate’s county-level vote shares vc, j,t to the moral values in county c:

                ln(vc, j,t + x) − ln(vc,w,t + x) = α j,t + β j,t θc + x c η j,t + uc, j,w,t      (19)

where x = 0.00001 (the smallest non-zero vote share). vc,w,t is the vote share in county
c of the candidate who won the popular vote in t; this normalization is needed because
we usually have more than two candidates.³⁴ α j,t are fixed effects for candidate j in
election t; β j,t are candidate-election-specific coefficients on county-level universalist
moral values θc ; and x c are control variables (CBSA or commuting zone fixed effects),
interacted with candidate indicators. The regression residual uc, j,w,t is specific to an
observation, as defined by county c, candidate j, winner w and race t. It is instructive
to note the direct correspondence between regression equation (19) and the utility
function in equation (18).
    The outcome of interest is the vector of β j,t . Here, by construction, the coefficient
of the winner of the popular vote in the respective race is zero and the coefficients of
all other candidates are scaled relative to this value. As noted above, the key observa-
tion here is that β j,t should be increasing in θ j,t , the candidate’s moral type. Intuitively,
the more universalist a candidate, the larger (more positive) should be the relationship
between that candidate’s vote share and the county-level relative importance of univer-
salist moral values. In other words, this analysis is not about the overall vote share of a
politician, but about how vote shares vary across space as predicted by the text analysis.
    To test this model prediction, we need to identify a candidate’s type θ j,t as relevant
for the choice model, i.e., relative to their direct competitors in a given race. To do so,
I estimate analogous regressions to those for Trump in Section 4:

                       l j,d,t = η + θ j,t
                                       n
                                           1 j,t + γx d + ε j,d,t    s.t.   j ∈ St               (20)

where l j,d,t is the relative frequency of universalist versus communal moral rhetoric in
campaign document d of candidate j in election t,                   1 j,t a dummy for candidate j in
election t, x d document-level controls (document type fixed effects and campaign day
fixed effects), and S t the set of candidates that compete in race t. The object of interest
in the supply-side analysis is θ j,t
                                 n
                                     , which identifies how universalist j is relative to their
direct competitors in period t (i.e., a normalized version of θ j in the choice model).


   ³⁴This is always the resulting presidential nominee, except for the Democratic primaries 2008, where
Clinton won the popular vote, but not the nomination.


                                                     39
    Note that the entire preceding discussion is applicable not just to the primaries, but
– with a slight twist – also to the general elections. Here, we have only two candidates
per race and hence only cross-party variation (hence only one β and one θ n per race),
However, analogously to the analysis of Trump in Sections 5 and 6, we can compare
the coefficient magnitudes across elections and hence implicitly generate within-party
variation.³⁵
    Figure 6 plots the relationship between θ j,t
                                              n
                                                  and β j,t across candidates, separately
for each race. As discussed above, the choice model would predict that β j,t (on the y-
axis) is linear and increasing in θ j,t
                                    n
                                        (on the x-axis). The top left panel visualizes the
results for the general elections. The top right panel as well as the middle panels depict
Republican primaries, and the bottom panels Democratic ones. While the number of
candidates (or races) is too small to allow strong conclusions, the patterns suggest that
the model performs reasonably well in explaining general elections and Republican
primaries, but less well in the Democratic primaries.
    In the panel for the general elections, the x-axis denotes the universalist moral ap-
peal of the Democratic candidate relative to their direct Republican competitor. Here,
the difference in moral appeal is largest in 2016, followed by 2012 (Obama / Romney)
and 2008 (Obama / McCain). In line with this result on the supply-side, the demand-
side relationship between moral values and vote shares (y-axis) follows the same pat-
tern. As discussed above, in 2008 McCain was more universalist than Obama, as can be
inferred from the negative value on the x-axis. Still, universalist voters on average vote
for Obama, as we can see from the positive value on the y-axis. As noted in Section 2,
the conceptual framework does not make a prediction about the Obama-McCain com-
parison because while McCain is more universalist, Obama is a member of the more
universalist party. At the same time, the framework does generate a prediction about
how the 2008 Obama-McCain regression coefficients on the supply- and demand-side
compare to the corresponding coefficients in 2012 and 2016. This is indeed what is
plotted in the top left panel.
    In the 2016 Republican primaries, the text analysis successfully pedicts demand
side patterns not just for Trump, but also for Cruz, Rubio, and Kasich, although Kasich
is a mild outlier. Rubio and Kasich are both universalist in their moral rhetoric (relative
to Trump and Cruz), and their demand-side coefficients are indeed more positive than
those of Trump and Cruz.
    In 2008 and 2012, the overall patterns are also encouraging. For example, the text
analysis identifies Ron Paul and McCain as universalist candidates in 2008, Gingrich

   ³⁵The straightforward amendment of the estimating equation (19) is that the dependent variable is
the log difference of the candidates’ vote shares, and the candidate fixed effects α j,t get replaced by
election fixed effects α t .


                                                  40
                                                                                 General elections                                                                                                                   Republican primaries 2016
                                                 .26




                                                                                                                                                                                         .15
 Rel. appeal of candidate as fct. of voters' morality




                                                                                                                                         Rel. appeal of candidate as fct. of voters' morality
                                                                                                             Clinton vs. Trump                                                                                                         Kasich


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rubio
                                      .24




                                                                                                                                                                           .1
                        .22




                                                                                                                                                          .05
                                                                                  Obama vs. Romney
             .2




                                                              Obama vs. McCain                                                                                                                                             Cruz

                                                                                                                                                                                                           Trump




                                                                                                                                            0
.18




                                                        -20                0                  20                40             60                                                                -20               -10                  0                 10                  20
                                                                 Relative universalist moral appeal of Democratic candidate                                                                                      Relative universalist moral appeal of candidate



                                                                           Republican primaries 2008                                                                                                                 Republican primaries 2012
                                                .02




                                                                                                                                                                                          .04
Rel. appeal of candidate as fct. of voters' morality




                                                                                                                                          Rel. appeal of candidate as fct. of voters' morality
                                                                                                                         Ron Paul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gingrich



                                                                                                                                                                               .02
                                                                                                             McCain
                       -.02           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Romney
                                                                                                                                                                  0


                                                          Romney
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ron Paul
            -.04




                                                                                                                                                    -.02




                                                                                    Huckabee
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Santorum
-.06




                                                                                                                                         -.04




                                                                -20             0                20               40           60                                                                -10                -5                  0                  5                  10
                                                                      Relative universalist moral appeal of candidate                                                                                            Relative universalist moral appeal of candidate



                                                                           Democratic primaries 2008                                                                                                                 Democratic primaries 2016
 Rel. appeal of candidate as fct. of voters' morality




                                                                                                                                          Rel. appeal of candidate as fct. of voters' morality
                                                                                                                                                                                            .1




                                                                                       Obama
                                                 .1




                                                                                                                                                                                  .08
                                         .08




                                                                                                                                                                          .06
                                .06




                                                                                                                                                                 .04
                       .04




                                                                                                                                                          .02
                .02




                                                                                                      Clinton                                                                                                                                                         Clinton
                                                                                                                                                  0
         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sanders
-.02




                                                                                                                                         -.02




                                                        -20             -10                  0                 10              20                                                                -30              -15                0               15              30
                                                                      Relative universalist moral appeal of candidate                                                                                            Relative universalist moral appeal of candidate



        Figure 6: Estimating the model. Each panel focuses on a separate race. The x-axis (supply side) denotes
        the relative moral appeal of a candidate, where higher values mean that a candidate is more universalist,
        i.e., θ j,t
                n
                    in eq. (20). The y-axis (demand side) denotes the relative moral appeal of a candidate as a
        function of voters’ universalist morality, i.e., β j,t in eq. (19). Eq. (19) is estimated with CBSA fixed
        effects. See Figure 16 in Appendix B for the analogous figures estimated with commuting zone fixed
        effects. Intuitively, the higher the value on the y-axis, the higher the correlation between a candidate’s
        vote share and the relative importance of universalist moral values.


         as universalist candidate in 2012, Huckabee as communal candidate in 2008, and San-
         torum as communal candidate in 2012; and these text analysis predictions somewhat
         successfully map onto corresponding demand-side patterns.
                                                         In the Democratic primaries, the patterns are considerably less consistent with the


                                                                                                                                    41
model. In particular, the candidate for whom the supply- and demand-side analyses
do not nearly match up is Obama: his vote share is strongly positively correlated with
universalist values even though – conditional on being a Democrat – he is relatively
communal. The negative point estimate of β ≈ 0.1 is about five times as large as that of
any other candidate in Figure 6. In 2016, the demand-side coefficients for Clinton and
Sanders are very similar, despite a considerable difference in moral appeal. In summary,
the model presented in this paper does not perform well in explaining the results of the
Democratic primaries.³⁶



8     Moral Values and Voting Over Time

8.1     Demand Side: Changes in Moral Values over Time
Thus far, the empirical analysis has treated demand-side moral values as fixed over
time. Yet, as documented by the time trend of moral language in the Congress, the
relative importance of universalist vs. communal values does appear to fluctuate over
time. Most notably for our purposes, the text analysis suggests that communal moral
language experienced a significant increase since the early 2000s that also continued
throughout the 2010s, a trend that applies to both Republicans and Democrats.
    In fact, the MFQ data from www.yourmorals.org allow for an analysis of whether
the recent increase in communal language is mirrored on the demand side because
respondents completed the questionnaire starting in 2008. Figure 7 computes the av-
erage relative importance of universalist moral values separately for each year since
2008, partitioned by local population density (computed from respondents’ ZIP codes).
Since 2008, the relative importance of a universalist morality steadily decreased by
about 3.5% of a standard deviation per year, on average.³⁷ This pattern is most pro-
nounced in rural ZIP codes (defined as less than 250 inhabitants per square kilometer),
so that we observe “moral polarization” between urban and rural areas. However, even
areas with more than 2000 inhabitants per square kilometer (green line) become more
communal over time.
    These patterns are noteworthy in that they suggest that the recent increase in the
importance that people place on communal over universalist values is not a “Trump


   ³⁶A potential post-hoc explanation for these results is offered by Haidt (2012) who argues that con-
servatives and liberals not only care about which types of values they emphasize but also how much they
care about moral concepts. According to Haidt’s account, morality in general plays a more important
role in the decision-making of conservatives than in that of liberals.
   ³⁷These findings are conceptually distinct from but related to Gentzkow et al.’s (2019) finding that
partisan language started increasing in the early 1990s, and to recent studies of the cultural divide in
the United States (Bertrand and Kamenica, 2018; Desmet and Wacziarg, 2018).


                                                  42
                                                                 Universalist vs. communal moral values over time

           Rel. importance of universalist moral values
             -30       -15        0        15        30




                                                          2008    2009   2010   2011   2012    2013    2014   2015   2016   2017   2018

                                                                            Rural              Urban             Metropolitan


Figure 7: Relative importance of universalist vs. communal moral values among N = 198, 077 respon-
dents on www.yourmorals.org. The straight red line plots the average relative frequency of universalist
moral values across respondents who live in ZIP codes with population density below 250 inhabitants per
square mile. The dashed green line plots respondents in ZIP codes with more than 2,000 inhabitants per
square mile. The dashed blue line represents intermediate cases. The relative importance of universalist
moral values is a z-score multiplied by 100.


effect,” but instead a more long-lasting trend that started at least in 2008, and probably
earlier given the results from the text analysis of Congressional speeches (Figure 2).


8.2     Changes in Values and Changes in Voting Patterns
In a final step, I investigate the relationship between changes in moral values and
changes in vote shares in the general election over time. This analysis is not a clean
test of the model in Section 2 but may nonetheless be informative. The analysis ex-
ploits a difference-in-difference strategy that relates county-level changes in moral
values to changes in Republican vote shares in the general election. For each year
x ∈ {2008, 2012, 2016}, I compute the average relative importance of universalist val-
ues in [x −1, x +2] (recall that elections take place late in year x). I then regress county-
level Republican vote shares in x on corresponding values, controlling for county and
election fixed effects. Thus, the regressions pick up neither time-invariant cross-county
differences nor location-invariant time trends, but only differential changes in values
and vote shares across space and time. County-level changes in moral values may reflect
either individual-level changes in moral values, or changes in the composition of the
population due to selective migration, or both. These differences-in-differences analy-


                                                                                              43
       Table 8: Moral values and county-level voting patterns: Differences-in-differences estimates

                                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                                                 GOP vote share in year x
                                                                                   (1)           (2)
                                                                                         ∗∗
     Rel. imp. of universalist vs. communal moral values (in years [x-1, x+2])   -0.24         -0.25∗∗
                                                                                 (0.11)        (0.11)
     Log [Median HH income]                                                                    4.41∗∗
                                                                                               (2.07)
     Unemployment rate                                                                         -0.40∗∗∗
                                                                                                (0.07)
     County FE                                                                     Yes           Yes
     Election FE                                                                   Yes           Yes
     Observations                                                                 6200          6200
     R2                                                                           0.96          0.96
     Notes. County-level OLS panel estimates. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the county
    level. The dependent variable is the GOP vote share in a given election year, stacked across the general
    elections x ∈ {2008, 2012, 2016}. The independent variable is the relative importance of universalist
    versus communal moral values in [x − 1, x + 2]. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


ses are correlational in nature because changes in county-level values over time need
not be exogenous.
     Table 8 reports the results.³⁸ The results show that increases in the relative impor-
tance of universalist moral values are significantly related to decreases in Republican
vote shares. This result holds up when controlling for time-variant county characteris-
tics (household income and the unemployment rate).³⁹



9      Conclusion
Based on recent developments in moral psychology, this paper has developed a method-
ology for jointly studying the supply and demand sides of moral values in voting con-
texts. The results document a rich pattern that links heterogeneity in the structure of
morality of both voters and political candidates. To establish the importance of moral
values for voting, the paper has followed two complementary paths. First, by focusing
on the most recent election and rich corresponding data, the analysis shed light on the
role of a universalist versus communal morality in political rhetoric and voting behavior,
while controlling for a rich set of covariates and benchmarking the results against more
traditional variables. Second, by extending the analysis to other recent elections, I have

  ³⁸Table 35 in Appendix E reports the results for the separate components of universalist and communal
moral values.
  ³⁹Median household income and the local unemployment rate (both taken from the American Com-
munity Surveys) are not available for 2008. I hence work with data from 2009.


                                                      44
shown that the link between heterogeneity in morality and voting is not an artifact of
Trump alone, but rather generalizes to different ways of examing political data.
   This is a descriptive paper, and a perfect identification strategy is difficult to imagine
given the nature of the research question. At the same time, the breadth of the corre-
lational results may provide encouraging support for a causal interpretation: (i) moral
values are strongly correlated with voting for Trump in both the general election and
the primaries, at both the individual and the county level, conditional on a large set
of covariates; (ii) these patterns are predicted by a corresponding supply-side analy-
sis; (iii) the link between supply- and demand-side results extends to other candidates
and elections; and (iv) similar results hold in differences-in-differences analyses that
leverage changes in moral values over time.
   The paper opens up at least four avenues for future research: (i) the extent to which
the findings extend beyond presidential elections; (ii) their applicability beyond the U.S.
context; (iii) the roots of variation in moral values, both across space and over time;
and (iv) the development of formal models of communal and universalist moral values.
   Regarding (ii), this paper has an interesting relationship to the recent debate about
voting patterns both in the U.S. and in Europe. Researchers and commentators have
pointed to two interesting facts: a strong rural-urban divide in voting and particularly
pronounced support for right-wing parties not among the very poor, but among work-
ing class voters. A common narrative employed to rationalize these stylized facts has
been that working class voters in rural areas have suffered economically. However, while
some commentators have attributed the success of Trump and others to economic fac-
tors, other voices have pointed out that, in voting for Trump, voters might actually have
acted against their material self-interest, hence raising the question of which motives
had ultimately underlain their voting decisions. Sociologists, on the other hand, have
long argued that morality plays a key role in understanding these patterns, in particular
because the rural working class exhibits a high demand for a communal morality. Thus,
a potential reconciliation of these narratives is that voters did act in their self-interest,
albeit from a moral rather than economic perspective. Indeed, in Enke et al. (2019), we
work with a utilitarian definition and measurement of moral universalism to document
a tight connection between universalism and a broad spectrum of policy views, in both
the U.S. and Western Europe.




                                            45
References
Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano, “Preferences for Redistribution,” in “Handbook
  of Social Economics” Citeseer 2011.

Amer, Mildred L., “The Congressional Record: Content, History and Issues,” Washing-
  ton DC: Congressional Research Service, CRS Report No. 93-60 GOV, 1993.

Belloni, Alexandre, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen, “Inference on treat-
  ment effects after selection among high-dimensional controls,” The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 2014, 81 (2), 608–650.

Bertrand, Marianne and Emir Kamenica, “Coming apart? Cultural distances in the
  United States over time,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2018.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Georgy Egorov, and Stefano Fiorin, “From Extreme to Main-
  stream: How Social Norms Unravel,” Working Paper, 2017.

  , Stefano Fiorin, Daniel Gottlieb, and Martin Kanz, “Moral Incentives in Credit
  Card Debt Repayment: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, forthcoming.

Cesarini, David, Christopher T Dawes, Magnus Johannesson, Paul Lichtenstein,
  and Björn Wallace, “Genetic variation in preferences for giving and risk taking,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (2), 809–842.

Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren, “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenera-
  tional Mobility II: County-Level Estimates,” Working Paper, 2016.

  ,   , and Lawrence F Katz, “The effects of exposure to better neighborhoods on
  children: New evidence from the Moving to Opportunity experiment,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2016, 106 (4), 855–902.

Desmet, Klaus and Romain Wacziarg, “The Cultural Divide,” Working Paper, 2018.

Dickens, William T, “Error components in grouped data: is it ever worth weighting?,”
  Review of Economics and statistics, 1990, 72 (2), 328–33.

Enke, Benjamin, “Kinship, Cooperation, and the Evolution of Moral Systems,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (2), 953–1019.

  , Ricardo Rodríguez-Padilla, and Florian Zimmermann, “Moral Universalism and
  the Structure of Ideology,” Working Paper, 2019.

                                          46
Etzioni, Amitai, Spirit of Community, Simon and Schuster, 1994.

Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David Huffman, and
  Uwe Sunde, “Global Evidence on Economic Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2018.

Fiske, Alan Page, Structures of Social Life: The Four Elementary Forms of Human Rela-
  tions: Communal Sharing, Authority Ranking, Equality Matching, Market Pricing, Free
  Press, 1991.

Fisman, Raymond, Pamela Jakiela, and Shachar Kariv, “Distributional Preferences
  and Political Behavior,” Working Paper, 2015.

Flesch, Rudolph, “A New Readability Yardstick,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 1948,
  32 (2), 221–233.

Gennaioli, Nicola and Guido Tabellini, “Identity, Beliefs, and Political Conflict,” Work-
  ing Paper, 2019.

Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Matt Taddy, “Measuring Polarization in
  High-Dimensional Data: Method and Application to Congressional Speech,” Techni-
  cal Report 2019.

Gidron, Noam and Peter A. Hall, “The Politics of Social Status: Economic and Cultural
  Roots of the Populist Right,” The British Journal of Sociology, 2017, 68 (S1).

Gillen, Ben, Erik Snowberg, and Leeat Yariv, “Experimenting with Measurement Er-
  ror: Techniques with Applications to the Caltech Cohort Study,” Working Paper, 2015.

Graham, Jesse, Brian A Nosek, Jonathan Haidt, Ravi Iyer, Spassena Koleva, and
  Peter H Ditto, “Mapping the moral domain.,” Journal of personality and social psy-
  chology, 2011, 101 (2), 366.

  , Jonathan Haidt, and Brian A. Nosek, “Liberals and Conservatives Rely on Different
  Sets of Moral Foundations,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2009, 96 (5),
  1029.

  ,   , Matt Motyl, Peter Meindl, Carol Iskiwitch, and Marlon Mooijman, “Moral
  Foundations Theory: On the Advantages of Moral Pluralism Over Moral Monism,”
  Working Paper, 2017.

  ,   , Sena Koleva, Matt Motyl, Ravi Iyer, Sean P. Wojcik, and Peter H. Ditto,
  “Moral Foundations Theory: The Pragmatic Validity of Moral Pluralism,” Advances in
  Experimental Social Psychology, 2013, 47, 55.

                                           47
Greene, Joshua, Moral Tribes: Emotion, Reason and the Gap Between Us and Them, At-
  lantic Books Ltd, 2014.

Greif, Avner and Guido Tabellini, “The Clan and the Corporation: Sustaining Cooper-
  ation in China and Europe,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 2017, 45 (1), 1–35.

Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, “Identity Politics and Trade Policy,” Working
  Paper, 2018.

Guiso, Luigi, Helios Herrera, and Massimo Morelli, “Cultural Differences and Insti-
  tutional Integration,” Journal of International Economics, 2016, 99, S97–S113.

  ,     ,   , Tommaso Sonno et al., “Demand and Supply of Populism,” Working Paper,
  2017.

Haidt, Jonathan, “The New Synthesis in Moral Psychology,” Science, 2007, 316 (5827),
  998–1002.

  , The Righteous Mind: Why Good People are Divided by Politics and Religion, Vintage,
  2012.

      and Craig Joseph, “Intuitive Ethics: How Innately Prepared Intuitions Generate
  Culturally Variable Virtues,” Daedalus, 2004, 133 (4), 55–66.

Hannikainen, Ivar R, Ryan M Miller, and Fiery A Cushman, “Act versus impact: Con-
  servatives and liberals exhibit different structural emphases in moral judgment,” Ra-
  tio, 2017, 30 (4), 462–493.

Henrich, Joseph, Jean Ensminger, Richard McElreath, Abigail Barr, Clark Barrett,
  Alexander Bolyanatz, Juan Camilo Cardenas, Michael Gurven, Edwins Gwako,
  Natalie Henrich et al., “Markets, religion, community size, and the evolution of
  fairness and punishment,” science, 2010, 327 (5972), 1480–1484.

Hofmann, Wilhelm, Daniel C. Wisneski, Mark J. Brandt, and Linda J. Skitka, “Moral-
  ity in Everyday Life,” Science, 2014, 345 (6202), 1340–1343.

Kuziemko, Ilyana and Ebonya Washington, “Why Did the Democrats Lose the South?
  Bringing New Data to an Old Debate,” American Economic Review, 2018.

Leip, David, “Dave Leip’s Atlas of US Presidential Elections,” www.uselectionatlas.org,
  2004.




                                          48
MacWilliams, Matthew C., “Who Decides When The Party Doesn’t? Authoritarian Vot-
  ers and the Rise of Donald Trump,” PS: Political Science & Politics, 2016, 49 (4),
  716–721.

Napier, Jaime L. and Jamie B. Luguri, “Moral mind-sets: Abstract Thinking Increases
  a Preference for “Individualizing” over “Binding” Moral Foundations,” Social Psycho-
  logical and Personality Science, 2013, 4 (6), 754–759.

Norenzayan, Ara, Big gods: How religion transformed cooperation and conflict, Princeton
  University Press, 2013.

  , Azim F. Shariff, Will M. Gervais, Aiyana K. Willard, Rita A. McNamara, Edward
  Slingerland, and Joseph Henrich, “The Cultural Evolution of Prosocial Religions,”
  Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 2016, 39, e1.

Ortoleva, Pietro and Erik Snowberg, “Overconfidence in Political Behavior,” American
  Economic Review, 2015, 105 (2), 504–535.

Oster, Emily, “Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence,”
  Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2019, 37 (2), 187–204.

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, Political economics, MIT press, 2016.

Peters, Gerhard and John T. Woolley, “The American Presidency Project,” http://
  www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ 2017. Accessed: 2017-06-01.

Rawls, John, “A Theory of Justice,” 1971.

  , Political liberalism, Columbia University Press, 2005.

Sandel, Michael J, Liberalism and the Limits of Justice, Cambridge University Press,
  1998.

  , Public philosophy: Essays on morality in politics, Harvard University Press, 2005.

Shayo, Moses, “A model of social identity with an application to political economy:
  Nation, class, and redistribution,” American Political science review, 2009, 103 (2),
  147–174.

Smith, Isaac H., Karl Aquino, Spassena Koleva, and Jesse Graham, “The Moral Ties
  that Bind... Even to Out-Groups: The Interactive Effect of Moral Identity and the
  Binding Moral Foundations,” Psychological Science, 2014, 25 (8), 1554–1562.




                                           49
Solon, Gary, Steven J Haider, and Jeffrey M Wooldridge, “What are we weighting
  for?,” Journal of Human resources, 2015, 50 (2), 301–316.

Stephens-Davidowitz, Seth, “The Cost of Racial Animus on a Black Candidate: Evi-
  dence using Google Search Data,” Journal of Public Economics, 2014, 118, 26–40.

Wuthnow, Robert, The Left Behind: Decline and Rage in Rural America, Princeton Uni-
  versity Press, 2018.




                                        50
                               ONLINE APPENDIX
A     Model Derivations
Cross-sectional variation II: Primaries. Consider candidates k and l such that θk >
θ j ∀ j 6= k and θl < θ j ∀ j 6= l. The probability that i votes for k is given by the probability
that the utility of voting for k is higher than the utility of voting for any other candidate.
Denote ui,k̄ = ar gmax ui, j . We then have:
                        j6=k



    P r(ui,k > ui, j ) ∀ j 6= k    = P r(ui,k > ui,k̄ ) = P r(αk,k̄ + βk,k̄ θi + δk,k̄ x i > εi,k,k̄ )   (21)

In words, for each realization of the noise terms, there is a candidate k̄ who for voter
i delivers the highest utility in the set of candidates J \ k. However, regardless of the
identity of k̄, by assumption we have βk,k̄ > 0 because k is the most universalist candi-
date. I now seek to show that for two voters a and b with θa > θ b and x a = x b ≡ x, we
have that

                                    P r(αk,k̄ + βk,k̄ θa + δk,k̄ x > εa,k,k̄ )
                                  >P r(αk,k̄ + βk,k̄ θ b + δk,k̄ x > ε b,k,k̄ )

We will evaluate this expression separately for different types of realizations of the noise
terms. That is, fix a realization of εa,k,k̄ = ε b,k,k̄ ≡ εk,k̄ and evaluate whether a change
in voter type (θa > θ b ) affects choices.
    There are three cases of realizations of the noise terms to consider. First, there may
be realizations such that both θa and θ b imply a vote for candidate k:

                       αk,k̄ + βk,k̄ θa + δk,k̄ x > αk,k̄ + βk,k̄ θ b + δk,k̄ x > εk,k̄                  (22)

By the same logic, there may be realizations of the noise terms such that both θa and θ b
lead to a vote for candidate k̄. However, by continuity of f (ε) and the assumption that
the choice probabilities for all candidates and voters are strictly interior, there exists a
set of realizations of the noise terms such that

                  αk,k̄ + βk,k̄ θa + δk,k̄ x > εi,k,k̄ > αk,k̄ + βk,k̄ θ b + δk,k̄ x + εk,k̄             (23)

That is, there exist realizations of the noise terms such that the utility of voting for
candidate k and the utility of voting for candidate k̄ are sufficiently close to each other,
so that increasing θi from θ b to θa makes the voter switch from candidate k̄ to k.


                                                      51
    In summary, for two types of realizations of the noise terms, a and b exhibit the same
voting behavior, and in one type of realizations (which has strictly positive probability),
a votes for k while b does not. This establishes the desired inequality (21).


Time variation in types of nominees. Consider voters a and b with θa > θ b and
x a = x b ≡ x. As per the discussion in the main text, we are interested in establishing
when the following condition holds:

                                    P r(ua,k > ua,l ) − P r(ua,k0 > ua,l 0 )                                                     (24)
       = P r(αk,l + βk,l θa + δk,l x > εa,k,l ) − P r(αk0 ,l 0 + βk0 ,l 0 θa + δk0 ,l 0 x > εa,k0 ,l 0 )                         (25)
       ?
       > P r(αk,l + βk,l θ b + δk,l x > ε b,k,l ) − P r(αk0 ,l 0 + βk0 ,l 0 θ b + δk0 ,l 0 x > ε b,k0 ,l 0 )                     (26)
                                = P r(u b,k > u b,l ) − P r(u b,k0 > u b,l 0 )                                                   (27)

    Define the intervals

                         I1 = [αk,l + βk,l θ b + δk,l x, αk,l + βk,l θa + δk,l x]                                                (28)
                         I2 = [αk0 ,l 0 + βk0 ,l 0 θ b + δk0 ,l 0 x, αk0 ,l 0 + βk0 ,l 0 θa + δk0 ,l 0 x]                        (29)

In order for the inequality to hold, f (ε) needs to be distributed such that there is more
probability mass in I1 than in I2 . I1 has width βk,l (θa − θ b ), which is larger than the
width of I2 , given by βk0 ,l 0 (θa − θ b ). A sufficient condition is that

                                                                     sup f (ε)
                                            βk,l        θk − θl       ε∈I
                                                      =            >                                                             (30)
                                           βk0 ,l 0     θk0 − θl 0   in f f (ε)
                                                                         ε∈I


which says that f (ε) is locally not “too different” from a uniform distribution, relative
to the magnitude of the cross-candidate differences in moral types captured by βk,l and
βk0 ,l 0 . Formally, this condition is sufficient because
   Z   βk,l θa                                                                                         Z      βk0 ,l 0 θa

                 f (ε)dε ≥ βk,l (θa − θ b )in f f (ε) > βm,o (θa − θ b )sup f (ε) ≥                                         f (ε)dε
     βk,l θ b                                     ε∈I                                 ε∈I                   βk0 ,l 0 θ b

                                                                                                                                 (31)




                                                              52
B     Additional Figures

                                                                  Distribution of moral values index at county level
                         .03          .05
                                      .04
                  Fraction
               .02                    .01
                                      0




                                                                  -4                -2                 0              2            4
                                                                       Rel. importance of universalist vs. communal moral values


     Figure 8: Distribution of relative importance of universalist moral values at the county level.




                                                                            Stability of moral values over time
                                                          1
               Corr. b/w values in 2008-2012 and 2013-2018
               .2          .4         .6        .8




                                                              0            100            200            300           400         500
                                                                          Minimum number of observations in county


Figure 9: Stability of moral values at the county level. The figure depicts the correlation coefficient
between values in 2008-2012 and 2013-2017 at the county level. The x-axis denotes the cutoff in terms
of minimum number of respondents in a county used to compute the correlation coefficient.




                                                                                                53
                                                            Moral language in U.S. Congress
                                             .0008
           Frequency of words in MFQ foundation
           .0002      .0004       .0006




                                                     1950   1960      1970       1980   1990     2000       2010

                                                             Fairness / reciprocity        Harm / care
                                                             Ingroup / loyalty             Authority / respect


Figure 10: Frequency of words related to MFQ foundations in the U.S. Congress, 1945–2016. The year of
observation of each speech is rounded to the nearest multiple of five. The figure disaggregates Figure 2 in
the main text by showing the absolute frequency of word use within each of the four MFQ “foundations,”
across politicians from all parties. Recall that “fairness / reciprocity” and “harm / care” correspond to
universalist values, while “ingroup / loyalty” and “authority / respect” correspond to communal values.
The figure shows that the substantial increase in the relative frequency of universalist moral rhetoric is
largely driven by an increase in the absolute frequency of universalist words, rather than a decrease in
the frequency of communal words.




                                                                               54
                                           Rel. freq. of universalist moral terminology

            Donald Trump (2016)

             Other Reps. (2016)

            Hillary Clinton (2016)

             Other Dems. (2016)

             Mitt Romney (2012)

             Other Reps. (2012)

           Barack Obama (2012)

             John McCain (2008)

             Other Reps. (2008)

           Barack Obama (2008)

             Other Dems. (2008)


                                     -30        -15          0           15          30
                                           Rel. frequency of universalist moral terminology


Figure 11: Relative frequency of universalist moral terminology. The bars depict averages across docu-
ments, along with standard errors. As in the regressions in Table 3, each document is weighted by the
square root of the total number of non-stop words. The index of the relative frequency of universal-
ist moral rhetoric is standardized into a z-score and multiplied by 100. The data include all campaign
documents.




                                                       55
                                          Rel. freq. of universalist moral terminology


             Donald Trump (2016)




                 Ted Cruz (2016)




              Marco Rubio (2016)




               John kasich (2016)




                                    -20           -10            0               10          20
                                          Rel. frequency of universalist moral terminology


Figure 12: Relative frequency of universalist versus communal moral terminology in the primaries. The
bars depict the estimates (+/- 1 SE) for the candidate fixed effects in an OLS regression of the relative
frequency of universalist terminology in a campaign document on candidate (or candidate group) fixed
effects, controlling for document type FE and campaign day FE (where the first campaign day is defined
as January 1st of the year prior to the respective election). The omitted category is John Kasich. As in
the regressions in Table 3, each document is weighted by the square root of the total number of non-stop
words. The index of the relative frequency of universalist moral rhetoric is standardized into a z-score
and multiplied by 100. The sample is restricted to campaign documents from during the primaries.




                                                      56
                                        Abs. freq. of universalist moral terminology

            Donald Trump (2016)

              Other Reps. (2016)

             Hillary Clinton (2016)

              Other Dems. (2016)

              Mitt Romney (2012)

              Other Reps. (2012)

            Barack Obama (2012)

             John McCain (2008)

              Other Reps. (2008)

            Barack Obama (2008)

              Other Dems. (2008)


                                      -30      -15     0        15       30
                                        Abs. frequency of universalist moral terminology


Figure 13: Absolute frequency of universalist moral terminology in the primaries. universalist terminol-
ogy is computed as the sum of harm / care and fairness / reciprocity, in analogy to equations (16) and
(17). The bars depict averages across documents, along with standard errors. As in the regressions in
Table 3, each document is weighted by the square root of the total number of non-stop words. The index
of the absolute frequency of universalist moral rhetoric is standardized into a z-score and multiplied by
100. The sample is restricted to campaign documents from during the primaries, where for Obama in
2012 this is defined as during the Republican primaries.




                                                    57
                                           Abs. freq. of communal moral terminology

            Donald Trump (2016)

              Other Reps. (2016)

            Hillary Clinton (2016)

             Other Dems. (2016)

             Mitt Romney (2012)

              Other Reps. (2012)

           Barack Obama (2012)

             John McCain (2008)

              Other Reps. (2008)

           Barack Obama (2008)

             Other Dems. (2008)


                                     -30          -15           0             15          30
                                           Abs. frequency of communal moral terminology


Figure 14: Absolute frequency of communal moral terminology in the primaries. Communal terminology
is computed as the sum of ingroup / loyalty and authority / respect, in analogy to equations (16) and
(17). The bars depict averages across documents, along with standard errors. As in the regressions in
Table 3, each document is weighted by the square root of the total number of non-stop words. The index
of the absolute frequency of communal moral rhetoric is standardized into a z-score and multiplied by
100. The sample is restricted to campaign documents from during the primaries, where for Obama in
2012 this is defined as during the Republican primaries.




                                                      58
                                                          Moral language over the 2016 election season
           Rel. freq. of universalist moral terminology
           -40     -20       0       20      40      60




                                                           07/01/2015                          Cruz out             Election
                                                                               01/01/2016         Sanders out

                                                                        Cruz         Rubio                 Kasich
                                                                        Bush         Sanders


Figure 15: Relative frequency of universalist versus communal moral terminology over the course of the
2016 election season. The relative frequency of universalist moral rhetoric at any given point in time
is computed as weighted average using a k = 120 nearest neighbor algorithm, i.e., the 120 campaign
documents closest to a given date. As in the regressions, each document is weighted by the square root
of the total number of non-stop words. The first and second vertical dashed lines denote the dates on
which Cruz and Sanders dropped out of the primaries as the last remaining competitors of Trump and
Clinton, respectively. The index of the relative frequency of universalist moral rhetoric is standardized
into a z-score and multiplied by 100.




                                                                                59
                                                                                 General elections                                                                                                                   Republican primaries 2016
                                                .14




                                                                                                                                                                                         .15
Rel. appeal of candidate as fct. of voters' morality




                                                                                                                                         Rel. appeal of candidate as fct. of voters' morality
                                                                                                             Clinton vs. Trump
                                     .13




                                                                                                                                                                             .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Kasich
                       .12




                                                                                                                                                              .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rubio
            .11




                                                                                  Obama vs. Romney
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Trump




                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                              Obama vs. McCain
.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cruz
                                                        -20                0                  20                40             60                                                                -20               -10                  0                 10                  20
                                                                 Relative universalist moral appeal of Democratic candidate                                                                                      Relative universalist moral appeal of candidate



                                                                           Republican primaries 2008                                                                                                                 Republican primaries 2012
Rel. appeal of candidate as fct. of voters' morality




                                                                                                                                          Rel. appeal of candidate as fct. of voters' morality
                                                                                                                         Ron Paul                                                        .04                                                                       Gingrich
                                            .02




                                                          Romney                                                                                                                                                                                         Ron Paul
                                                                                                                                                                             .02




                                                                                                             McCain
                     -.02         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Romney
                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Santorum
                                                                                    Huckabee
          -.04




                                                                                                                                                    -.02
-.06




                                                                                                                                         -.04




                                                                -20             0                20               40           60                                                                -10                -5                  0                  5                  10
                                                                      Relative universalist moral appeal of candidate                                                                                            Relative universalist moral appeal of candidate



                                                                           Democratic primaries 2008                                                                                                                 Democratic primaries 2016
 Rel. appeal of candidate as fct. of voters' morality




                                                                                                                                          Rel. appeal of candidate as fct. of voters' morality
                                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                            .1
                                         .08




                                                                                                                                                                                  .08




                                                                                       Obama
                                 .06




                                                                                                                                                                          .06
                        .04




                                                                                                                                                                 .04
                 .02




                                                                                                                                                          .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sanders

                                                                                                      Clinton                                                                                                                                                         Clinton
         0




                                                                                                                                                  0
-.02




                                                                                                                                         -.02




                                                        -20             -10                  0                 10              20                                                                -30              -15                0               15              30
                                                                      Relative universalist moral appeal of candidate                                                                                            Relative universalist moral appeal of candidate




         Figure 16: Estimating the model. Each panel focuses on a separate race. The x-axis denotes the relative
         moral appeal of a candidate, where higher values mean that a candidate is moral universal, i.e., β j,t in
         eq. (20). The y-axis denotes the relative moral appeal of a candidate as a function of voters’ universalist
         morality, i.e., β j,t in eq. (19). Eq. (19) is estimated with CZ fixed effects. Intuitively, the higher the value
         on the y-axis, the higher the correlation between a candidate’s vote share and universalist moral values.




                                                                                                                                    60
C     Additional Tables for Text Analysis of Presidential Can-
      didates

Table 9: Politicians’ moral rhetoric: Absolute frequency of universalist moral language as dependent
variable

                                                             Dependent variable:
                                           Absolute frequency of universalist moral terminology


                                                                  Sample:
                                      All candidates         Trump & Clinton   Pres. nominees     GOP 2016
                                (1)       (2)          (3)         (4)               (5)             (6)
                                             ∗                        ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
  1 if Trump                    -6.3     -7.6       -4.2         -26.8             -27.4           -31.7∗∗∗
                               (4.3)     (4.5)     (4.9)          (8.6)             (6.7)           (5.6)
  Log [# of non-stop words]              9.1∗∗∗    8.4∗∗∗         -0.07              2.5             4.5∗
                                         (1.2)     (1.2)          (7.7)             (1.9)           (2.4)
  Flesch reading ease score              1.9∗∗      1.8∗           -6.2            -5.3∗∗            2.7
                                         (1.0)     (1.0)          (7.4)            (2.6)            (1.9)
  1 if Republican                                 -11.4∗∗∗                           2.6
                                                   (2.0)                            (3.6)
  1 if presidential nominee                        8.8∗∗∗
                                                   (2.2)
  Document type FE              Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes               Yes             Yes
  Year FE                       No        Yes          Yes         Yes               Yes             Yes
  Campaign day FE               No        Yes          Yes         Yes               Yes             Yes
  Observations                16698      16698    16698           1043              5372            3455
  R2                           0.05       0.17     0.18           0.49              0.29            0.32
 Notes. WLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variable is the absolute fre-
quency of universalist moral terminology (normalized by the number of non-stop words), expressed as
z-score multiplied by 100. Each document is weighted by the square root of the total number of non-stop
words. In columns (1)–(3), the sample includes all candidates in 2008–2016. Columns (4)–(6) restrict
the sample to presidential nominees (2008–2016), Republicans (2008–2016), and 2016 Republicans, re-
spectively. Campaign day FE are constructed by defining January 1st of the year prior to the election as
first campaign day. Overall morality is constructed like the relative frequency of universalist terminology
in eq. (16), except that the numerator is is given by the sum of the four MFT foundations. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗
p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                        61
Table 10: Politicians’ moral rhetoric: Absolute frequency of communal moral language as dependent
variable

                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                            Absolute frequency of communal moral terminology


                                                                       Sample:
                                       All candidates             Trump & Clinton   Pres. nominees   GOP 2016
                                 (1)        (2)         (3)             (4)               (5)           (6)
                                    ∗∗         ∗∗∗            ∗               ∗              ∗∗∗
  1 if Trump                   16.7       15.8       10.8              15.6             31.4            1.0
                               (6.6)       (5.5)     (5.7)             (9.3)             (6.8)         (9.1)
  Log [# of non-stop words]                -2.8∗∗    -2.3∗∗             0.7              -4.2∗∗         -3.6
                                           (1.2)     (1.1)             (8.5)             (1.8)         (2.5)
  Flesch reading ease score               -6.9∗∗∗    -7.0∗∗∗          -32.8∗∗           -10.9∗∗∗      -11.5∗∗∗
                                           (1.6)      (1.6)           (13.6)             (3.0)         (2.5)
  1 if Republican                                    9.9∗∗∗                             -15.2∗∗∗
                                                     (1.8)                               (2.8)
  1 if presidential nominee                           -2.2
                                                     (2.3)
  Document type FE               Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes               Yes           Yes
  Year FE                        No         Yes         Yes             Yes               Yes           Yes
  Campaign day FE                No         Yes         Yes             Yes               Yes           Yes
  Observations                 16698      16698      16698             1043              5372          3455
  R2                            0.02       0.13       0.13             0.55              0.25          0.30
  Notes. WLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variable is the absolute fre-
 quency of communal moral terminology (normalized by the number of non-stop words), expressed as
 z-score multiplied by 100. Each document is weighted by the square root of the total number of non-stop
 words. In columns (1)–(3), the sample includes all candidates in 2008–2016. Columns (4)–(6) restrict
 the sample to presidential nominees (2008–2016), Republicans (2008–2016), and 2016 Republicans, re-
 spectively. Campaign day FE are constructed by defining January 1st of the year prior to the election as
 first campaign day. Overall morality is constructed like the relative frequency of universalist terminology
 in eq. (16), except that the numerator is is given by the sum of the four MFT foundations. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗
 p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                        62
D     Background and Additional Tables for Research Now
      Survey

D.1       Sample Characteristics
The population characteristics (except for the election data) are taken from the Ameri-
can Community Survey 2015.

    Category                                   Study sample (%)     Population (%)

    2016 election
      Trump                                           38.1                n/a
      Clinton                                         40.8                n/a
      Other                                            7.5                n/a
      Didn’t vote                                     11.8                n/a
      Don’t remember                                   1.7                n/a

    2016 election if voted and remembers
      Trump                                           44.2               46.1
      Clinton                                         47.2               48.2
      Other                                            8.6                5.7

    Gender
      Male                                            48.4               48.2
      Female                                          51.6               51.8

    Age
      28–29                                            5.1                4.1
      30–34                                           12.3               10.7
      35–39                                           12.0               10.1
      40–49                                           23.2               21.5
      50–59                                           18.8               21.9
      ≥60                                             28.6               31.7

    Household income
      <10,000                                          6.5                7.2
      10,000–14,999                                    5.2                5.3
      15,000–24,999                                    9.9               10.6
      25,000–34,999                                   11.2               10.1
      35,000–49,999                                   13.1               13.4
      50,000–74,999                                   18.6               17.8


                                          63
  75,000–99,999                          12.7   12.1
  100,000–149,999                        13.3   13.1
  150,000–199,999                        5.4    5.1
  ≥200,000                               4.1    5.3

Educational attainment
  Incomplete high school                 11.6   13.3
  High school graduate                   27.4   27.8
  Some college, no degree                20.0   21.1
  Associate’s degree                     8.8    8.1
  Bachelor’s degree                      19.8   18.5
  Graduate or professional degree        12.5   11.2

Ethnicity
  White                                  66.7   62.3
  African-American                       15.8   17.1
  Hispanic                               10.8   12.3
  American Indian                        0.8    0.7
  Asian                                  4.2    5.1
  Other                                  1.8    2.5

Employment
  Full-time employed                     58.7   63.7
  Not employed full time                 41.3   36.3

State
  Alabama                                1.7    1.5
  Alaska                                 0.1    0.2
  Arizona                                2.4    2.1
  Arkansas                               0.8    0.9
  California                             10.8   12.0
  Colorado                               1.5    1.7
  Connecticut                            1.1    1.2
  Delaware                               0.3    0.3
  District of Columbia                   0.3    0.1
  Florida                                7.6    6.5
  Georgia                                2.9    3.8
  Hawaii                                 0.5    0.5
  Idaho                                  0.5    0.5
  Illinois                               4.7    4.1


                                    64
Indiana               2.3   2.0
Iowa                  1.1   1.0
Kansas                0.7   0.9
Kentucky              1.8   1.4
Louisiana             1.6   1.4
Maine                 0.5   0.5
Maryland              2.2   1.9
Massachusetts         1.8   2.2
Michigan              3.0   3.2
Minnesota             1.3   1.7
Mississippi           0.7   0.9
Missouri              2.3   1.9
Montana               0.1   0.3
Nebraska              0.7   0.6
Nevada                0.9   0.9
New Hampshire         0.4   0.4
New Jersey            3.0   2.9
New Mexico            0.4   0.7
New York              6.6   6.4
North Carolina        3.8   3.1
North Dakota          0.1   0.2
Ohio                  4.2   3.7
Oklahoma              1.2   1.2
Oregon                1.1   1.3
Pennsylvania          4.9   4.2
Rhode Island          0.4   0.3
South Carolina        1.5   1.5
South Dakota          0.1   0.3
Tennessee             1.8   2.1
Texas                 7.5   7.9
Utah                  0.5   0.8
Vermont               0.1   0.2
Virginia              2.5   2.6
Washington            2.0   2.2
West Virginia         0.6   0.6
Wisconsin             1.5   1.8
Wyoming               0.0   0.2



                 65
   City size
     >1 million                                        15.0                 n/a
     200,000–1 million                                 17.6                 n/a
     50,000–200,000                                    20.0                 n/a
     20,000–50,000, close to metro area                14.6                 n/a
     20,000–50,000, not close to metro area             5.8                 n/a
     3,000–20,000, close to metro area                  9.3                 n/a
     3,000–20,000, not close to metro area              8.6                 n/a
     500–3,000, close to metro area                     2.5                 n/a
     500–3,000, not close to metro area                 3.7                 n/a
     <500                                               3.1                 n/a


Regarding city size, the categories in the American Community Survey 2015 do not map
perfectly into my variable. In the ACS, 71.2% live in cities with population of 50,000 or
more, 9.5% in cities of size 2,500–50,000 and 19.3% in cities with population less than
2,500. The data above suggest that “too many” respondents live in medium-sized cities.
This, however, may well be an artifact given that respondents may not know their city
size (or be unsure about the definition of their city) and hence provide answers that
are “middle of the road”.




                                           66
     D.2 Validation of Moral Values Index

                                                                         Table 12: Moral values, attitudes and behaviors

                                                                                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                                                                                                       ∆ [Local – global]
                                                                          Support taxation/ redistr.                    Donations                               Volunteering                    Money allocation task
                                                                           (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)            (5)           (6)        (7)             (8)           (9)         (10)        (11)       (12)
                                                                              ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗           ∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
      Relative importance of universalist vs. communal moral values      -0.15      -0.11      -0.14      -0.092         -0.100        -0.13      -0.067          -0.078        -0.070       -0.29      -0.24       -0.24∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.04)     (0.02)          (0.02)        (0.03)       (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.03)
      Log [Pop. density]                                                            -0.020∗∗   -0.024                    -0.0091       -0.0014                    -0.023∗∗      -0.032                  -0.043∗∗∗   -0.032
                                                                                     (0.01)    (0.02)                     (0.01)        (0.02)                     (0.01)       (0.02)                   (0.01)     (0.02)
      State FE                                                             No         Yes        No         No             Yes           No         No              Yes           No           No         Yes         No
      County FE                                                            No         No         Yes        No             No            Yes        No               No           Yes          No          No         Yes
      Additional controls                                                  No         Yes        Yes        No             Yes           Yes        No              Yes           Yes          No         Yes         Yes




67
      Observations                                                        3926       3864       3864       3872           3810          3810       3830            3769          3769         3527       3395        3395
      R2                                                                  0.02       0.12       0.39       0.01           0.11          0.40       0.00            0.06          0.36         0.08       0.19        0.45
      Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(3), the dependent variable is the extent to which people prefer taxation and redistribution at the community level,
     relative to the federal level. In columns (4)–(6), the dependent variable is the difference in self-reported donations to local vs. more global entities over the past 12 months. Here, all observations
     with x > |10, 000| are excluded. In columns (7)–(9), the dependent variable is the difference in self-reported hours volunteered for local vs. more global entities over the past month. Here, all
     observations with x > |100| are excluded. In columns (10)–(12), the dependent variable is the dollar amount (out of $99) that respondents allocated to the local firefighters as opposed to United
     Way Worldwide in a hypothetical money allocation task. Here, the analysis excludes all observations where the allocation did not add up to x ∈ [98, 100]. See Appendix I for a detailed description
     of each dependent variable. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. Additional controls include year of birth fixed effects, gender, income bracket fixed effects, education fixed effects,
     employment status, race fixed effects, religious denomination fixed effects, occupation fixed effects, altruism, generalized trust, and the absolute value of the moral values index. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗
     p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
     D.3 Pre-Registered Index of Relative Importance of Universalist Moral Values

                                                      Table 13: Moral values and voting: Pre-registered index of moral values

                                                                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                                                                          Votes                                                     Evaluation of Trump
                                                                 Trump in election              ∆ [Trump – Ave. GOP]               Trump in primaries               Loyalty vs. economy
                                                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)        (11)          (12)
                                                                  ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
      Rel. imp. universalist values (pre-registered index)   -20.3      -15.3      -14.8      -3.05      -2.09      -3.12      -8.89      -7.05      -8.01      -0.13      -0.095        -0.087∗∗∗
                                                              (0.80)     (0.95)     (1.24)     (0.47)     (0.72)     (1.08)     (1.28)     (1.32)     (2.19)     (0.02)     (0.02)        (0.03)
      Log [Pop. density]                                                -2.91∗∗∗   -3.64∗∗∗               -0.71      -1.18                -1.84∗∗     -2.55                -0.018∗       -0.050∗∗
                                                                         (0.47)     (0.92)               (0.49)     (1.02)                (0.76)     (1.69)                 (0.01)        (0.02)
      State FE                                                 No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes            No
      County FE                                                No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No            Yes




68
      Additional controls                                      No         Yes        Yes        No         Yes        Yes        No         Yes        Yes        No         Yes           Yes
      Observations                                            3471       3342       3342       2973       2860       2860       1888       1817       1817       4011       3864          3864
      R2                                                      0.17       0.36       0.58       0.01       0.08       0.44       0.02       0.20       0.57       0.02       0.09          0.37
      Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. Additional controls include year of birth fixed effects, gender, income bracket fixed effects, education fixed effects,
     employment status, race fixed effects, religious denomination fixed effects, occupation fixed effects, altruism, generalized trust, and the absolute value of the moral values index.
     ∗
       p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
     D.4 No State Fixed Effects

                                                 Table 14: Moral values and voting: Individual-level evidence (no state FE)

                                                                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                                                                 Votes in presidential election                       Votes in GOP primaries
                                                                                      1 if voted for Trump           ∆ [Trump – Ave. GOP]              1 if voted for Trump
                                                                                     (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)
                Absolute importance of universalist moral values                  -20.3∗∗∗                         -2.23∗∗∗                         -6.01∗∗∗
                                                                                   (0.83)                           (0.67)                           (1.36)
                Absolute importance of communal moral values                       24.1∗∗∗                         4.31∗∗∗                          15.9∗∗∗
                                                                                   (0.74)                          (0.60)                           (1.41)
                Relative importance of universalist vs. communal moral values                -21.6∗∗∗   -17.4∗∗∗              -3.27∗∗∗   -2.57∗∗∗              -10.1∗∗∗   -8.21∗∗∗
                                                                                              (0.61)     (0.87)                (0.48)     (0.75)                (1.23)     (1.35)
                Year of birth FE                                                     No        No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
                Race FE                                                              No        No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes




69
                Income bracket and education FE                                      No        No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
                Religious denomination FE                                            No        No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
                Occupation FE                                                        No        No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
                Gender and employment status                                         No        No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
                Local population density                                             No        No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
                Altruism and generalized trust                                       No        No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
                Abs. value of moral values index                                     No        No         Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No         Yes
                Observations                                                        3471      3471       3342       2973       2973       2860       1888       1888       1817
                R2                                                                  0.20      0.20       0.36       0.01       0.01       0.06       0.06       0.03       0.18
                Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(3), the dependent variable is a binary indicator that equals 100 if the respondent
               voted for Trump in the general election and zero if the respondent voted for Clinton. In columns (4)–(6), the dependent variable is the difference in the
               propensity to vote for Trump and the average propensity to vote for Romney and McCain, where the propensity to vote for a given candidate is a binary
               indicator that equals 0 if the respondent voted for a different candidate and 100 if they voted for the respective candidate. The difference in sample size
               between columns (1)–(3) and (4)–(6) is that a respondent had to vote in all elections 2008–2016 to be included in columns (4)–(6). In columns (7)–(9),
               the dependent variable is a binary indicator that equals 100 if the respondent voted for Trump in the 2016 GOP primaries. See Appendix I for a description
               of the covariates. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
     D.5 Alternative Dependent Variables

                                                  Table 15: Moral values and voting: Individual-level evidence (robustness)

                                                                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                                                                                             Votes
                                                                              ∆ Vote [Trump – Ave. GOP (NV)]         ∆ [Trump – Romney]                    ∆ [Trump – McCain]
                                                                                (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)        (9)
                                                                                   ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗            ∗∗          ∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
            Relative importance of universalist vs. communal moral values     -3.56      -2.66        -2.74        -2.76       -1.81        -2.62       -3.88      -3.08      -3.78∗∗∗
                                                                               (0.47)     (0.72)       (0.95)       (0.50)     (0.79)       (1.10)       (0.57)     (0.91)     (1.29)
            Log [Pop. density]                                                            -0.30        -0.74                    -0.68        -1.15                  -0.73      -1.01
                                                                                         (0.42)       (0.88)                   (0.48)       (1.02)                 (0.54)     (1.12)
            State FE                                                             No        Yes          No            No         Yes         No           No         Yes        No
            County FE                                                            No        No           Yes           No         No          Yes          No         No         Yes
            Additional controls                                                  No        Yes          Yes           No         Yes         Yes          No         Yes        Yes




70
            Observations                                                       3775       3637         3637         3150        3032        3032         3049       2930       2930
            R2                                                                 0.01       0.07         0.39         0.01        0.08        0.43         0.01       0.07       0.43
            Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(3), the dependent variable is the difference in the propensity to vote for Trump and
           past Republicans. The difference to the main measure described in the main text is that here non-voters are coded as 50, rather than being excluded. In columns
           (4)–(9), the dependent variable is the difference between Trump and Romney or McCain, respectively, constructed as described in the main text (i.e., excluding
           people who did not vote). Additional controls include year of birth fixed effects, gender, income bracket fixed effects, education fixed effects, employment status,
           race fixed effects, religious denomination fixed effects, occupation fixed effects, altruism, generalized trust, and the absolute value of the moral values index.
           ∗
             p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                Table 16: Moral values and voting: Turnout as dependent variable

                                                                                Dependent variable:
                                                                           Turnout in pres. election
                                                                              ∆ [2016 – Ave.]
                                                                     (1)           (2)       (3)       (4)
                                                                           ∗∗
 Absolute importance of universalist moral values                  -1.48
                                                                   (0.59)
 Absolute importance of communal moral values                      1.65∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.57)
 Relative importance of universalist vs. communal moral values                   -1.52∗∗∗   -1.11∗∗   -1.63∗∗
                                                                                  (0.48)    (0.57)    (0.76)
 State FE                                                            Yes           Yes       Yes        No
 County FE                                                           No            No         No       Yes
 Year of birth FE                                                    No            No        Yes       Yes
 Race FE                                                             No            No        Yes       Yes
 Income bracket and education FE                                     No            No        Yes       Yes
 Religious denomination FE                                           No            No        Yes       Yes
 Occupation FE                                                       No            No        Yes       Yes
 Gender and employment status                                        No            No        Yes       Yes
 Local population density                                            No            No        Yes       Yes
 Altruism and generalized trust                                      No            No        Yes       Yes
 Abs. value of moral values index                                    No            No        Yes       Yes
 Observations                                                       4011          4011      3864      3864
 R2                                                                 0.01          0.01      0.06      0.39
Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variable is the difference
between the propensity to vote in the 2016 presidential election and the average propensity to vote in
2012 and 2008. See Appendix I for a description of the covariates. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                  71
                                   Table 17: Moral values and voting: 2012

                                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                                    1 if voted for Romney in presidential election 2012
                                                                      OLS       OLS         OLS        OLS        OLS
                                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)
                                                                         ∗∗∗
 Absolute importance of universalist moral values                   -18.2
                                                                     (0.84)
 Absolute importance of communal moral values                       19.4∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.77)
 Relative importance of universalist vs. communal moral values                 -18.2∗∗∗    -16.4∗∗∗   -9.51∗∗∗   -9.45∗∗∗
                                                                                (0.64)      (0.90)     (1.11)     (1.47)
 Political liberalism                                                                                 -12.2∗∗∗   -11.6∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.87)     (1.21)
 Log [Household income]                                                                               1.96∗∗      1.66
                                                                                                      (0.89)     (1.09)
 Education                                                                                            3.28∗∗∗    2.93∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.92)     (1.25)
 Log [Population density]                                                                             -2.89∗∗∗    -1.83
                                                                                                       (0.92)    (2.01)
 Religiosity                                                                                          3.74∗∗∗    2.79∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.98)     (1.25)
 State FE                                                             Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        No
 County FE                                                            No         No          No         No         Yes
 Additional controls                                                  No         No          Yes        Yes        Yes
 Observations                                                        3366       3366        3293       2745       2745
 R2                                                                  0.19       0.19        0.34       0.40       0.63
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variable is a binary indicator that equals
100 if the respondent voted for Romney in the general election 2012 and zero if the respondent voted for Obama.
Additional controls include year of birth fixed effects, gender, income bracket fixed effects, education fixed effects, em-
ployment status, race fixed effects, religious denomination fixed effects, occupation fixed effects, altruism, generalized
trust, and the absolute value of the moral values index. See Appendix I for a description of all variables. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗
p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                         72
D.6    Benchmarking: IV estimates
This Appendix reports a set of robustness checks for the benchmarking analyses in Sec-
tion 5.4. To address concerns about measurement error in the bechmarking variables, I
proceed by making use of repeated measurements and instrumental variable estimates
(Gillen et al., 2015). Specifically, for the following variables I have access to at least two
measurements: political liberalism, household income, and population density:

   • Political liberalism: As detailed in Appendix I, the survey contained 13 survey
      questions that are taken from the 2016 pre-election survey wave of the Cooper-
      ative Congressional Election Study. These questions elicit respondents’ attitudes
      on four categories: gun control, environment policies, crime policies, and budget
      priorities. To arrive at two separate measurements, I proceed as follows. First, I
      compute the first principal component for the first two (last two) questions for
      each of the categories gun control, environment policies, and crime policies. Then,
      I compute a first liberalism score as first principal component of the principal
      components of the first two questions of each category plus the budget priorities
      variable. Likewise, I compute a second liberalism score as first principal compo-
      nent of the principal components of the last two questions from each category.
      These two liberalism scores exhibit a correlation of ρ = 0.53.

   • Household income: The first measure is household income bracket in 10 steps.
      The second measure is a self-reported measure of (log) household income. The
      variables exhibit a correlation of ρ = 0.59.

   • Population density: First measure is log population density as computed from a
      respondent’s ZIP code. The second measure is given by a self-reported categorical
      variable of city size (ten steps). The variables exhibit a correlation of ρ = 0.69.

   Table 18 reports the results of the IV regressions. In columns (1), (4) and (7), the
first political liberalism component described above is instrumented with the second
one. In columns (2), (5) and (8), log household income is instrumented by income
bracket. In columns (3), (6) and (9), log population density is instrumented with self-
reported neighborhood size.




                                             73
                                                         Table 18: Moral values and voting: Benchmarking with IV

                                                                                                                   Dependent variable:
                                                                                                                             Votes
                                                                      1 if Trump in pres. election     ∆ [Trump – Ave. GOP] in general election   1 if Trump in GOP primaries
                                                                        (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)                (6)          (7)        (8)        (9)
      Relative importance of universalist vs. communal moral values   -8.02∗∗∗   -14.0∗∗∗   -14.0∗∗∗   -2.12∗∗    -2.56∗∗∗           -2.67∗∗∗     -7.62∗∗∗   -9.49∗∗∗   -9.54∗∗∗
                                                                       (1.19)     (0.82)     (0.82)    (1.00)      (0.70)             (0.71)       (1.85)     (1.49)     (1.49)
      Political liberalism component 1                                -30.7∗∗∗                          -2.44                                      -4.95
                                                                       (2.42)                          (2.01)                                     (3.19)
      Log [Household income]                                           3.25∗∗∗   5.53∗∗∗    3.03∗∗∗     -1.37     -2.95∗              -1.29        -0.66      -0.70      -0.58
                                                                       (1.16)    (1.69)     (0.98)     (0.92)     (1.65)             (0.92)       (1.28)     (2.49)     (1.23)
      Education                                                         -0.34     -0.66      0.15      -3.23∗∗∗   -2.74∗∗∗           -3.28∗∗∗     -9.38∗∗∗   -9.13∗∗∗   -9.23∗∗∗
                                                                       (0.98)    (0.95)     (0.86)      (0.84)     (0.94)             (0.83)       (1.33)     (1.46)     (1.32)




74
      Log [Population density]                                        -6.87∗∗∗   -7.46∗∗∗   -8.64∗∗∗    -0.93      -1.08              0.39        -4.14∗∗∗   -4.35∗∗∗    -3.53
                                                                       (1.03)     (0.89)     (1.29)    (0.95)     (0.93)             (1.32)        (1.46)     (1.45)    (2.21)
      Religiosity                                                       0.75     2.81∗∗∗    2.65∗∗∗    -0.036     -0.036              0.11         -0.25     -0.032     0.0027
                                                                       (0.97)    (0.83)     (0.82)     (0.81)     (0.80)             (0.79)       (1.37)     (1.36)     (1.36)
      Political liberalism                                                       -12.8∗∗∗   -12.6∗∗∗               -1.18              -1.31                   -0.19      -0.23
                                                                                  (0.89)     (0.89)               (0.82)             (0.83)                  (1.30)     (1.30)
      State FE                                                          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes                Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
      Observations                                                     2852       2852       2852       2452       2452               2452         1544       1544       1544
      R2                                                               0.13       0.32       0.32       0.04       0.05               0.05         0.10       0.11       0.11
      Notes. IV estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(3), the dependent variable is 1 if the respondent voted for Trump in the 2016 election and 0
     if they voted for Clinton. In columns (4)–(6), the dependent variable is the difference between the propensity to vote for Trump and the average propensity to vote for
     Romney and McCain. In columns (7)–(9), the dependent variable is a binary indicator for whether the respondent voted for Trump in the GOP primaries. Political liberalism,
     income, and population density are instrumented for as described in the text. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
D.7   Separate MFQ Survey Items

              Table 19: Relationship between voting and separate MFQ items (1/12)

                                                                Dependent variable:
                                                      1 if voted for Trump in pres. election
                                    (1)              (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                          ∗∗∗
         Harm / care: q. 1        -554.7
                                   (62.73)
         Harm / care: q. 7                         -312.4∗∗∗
                                                    (58.35)
         Harm / care: q. 12                                     -305.9∗∗∗
                                                                 (57.12)
         Harm / care: q. 17                                                    -553.9∗∗∗
                                                                                (59.91)
         Harm / care: q. 23                                                                 -303.7∗∗∗
                                                                                             (47.36)
         Harm / care: q. 28                                                                              -321.8∗∗∗
                                                                                                          (39.86)
         Observations              3471             3471            3471        3471         3471         3471
         R2                        0.02             0.01            0.01        0.02         0.01         0.02
        Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
       p < 0.01. See Appendix F for the survey questions. The response to each survey question
       is normalized by the sum of responses to all MFQ questions.



              Table 20: Relationship between voting and separate MFQ items (2/12)

                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                        1 if voted for Trump in pres. election
                                      (1)              (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                             ∗∗∗
       Fairness / recip.: q. 2     -892.4
                                    (60.56)
       Fairness / recip.: q. 8                      -434.1∗∗∗
                                                     (62.63)
       Fairness / recip.: q. 13                                     -353.4∗∗
                                                                    (167.83)
       Fairness / recip.: q. 18                                                 -649.9∗∗∗
                                                                                 (54.48)
       Fairness / recip.: q. 24                                                              -176.1∗∗∗
                                                                                              (51.35)
       Fairness / recip.: q. 29                                                                           -497.3∗∗∗
                                                                                                           (55.05)
       Observations                  3471             3471           3471         3471         3471         3471
       R2                            0.06             0.01           0.02         0.04         0.00         0.04
      Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
      p < 0.01. See Appendix F for the survey questions. The response to each survey question is
      normalized by the sum of responses to all MFQ questions.




                                                               75
       Table 21: Relationship between voting and separate MFQ items (3/12)

                                                        Dependent variable:
                                             1 if voted for Trump in pres. election
                                (1)            (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
                                      ∗∗∗
 In-group / loyalty: q. 3     1037.3
                               (53.80)
 In-group / loyalty: q. 9                      45.2
                                             (58.99)
 In-group / loyalty: q. 14                              216.3∗∗∗
                                                        (60.04)
 In-group / loyalty: q. 19                                         409.4∗∗∗
                                                                   (151.75)
 In-group / loyalty: q. 25                                                    203.9∗∗∗
                                                                              (47.58)
 In-group / loyalty: q. 30                                                               264.7∗∗∗
                                                                                         (49.29)
 Observations                   3471          3471       3471       3471       3471       3471
 R2                             0.10          0.00       0.00       0.06       0.01       0.01
Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
p < 0.01. See Appendix F for the survey questions. The response to each survey question is
normalized by the sum of responses to all MFQ questions.




       Table 22: Relationship between voting and separate MFQ items (4/12)

                                                        Dependent variable:
                                              1 if voted for Trump in pres. election
                                 (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)
                                       ∗∗∗
 Authority / respect: q. 4     553.5
                               (62.25)
 Authority / respect: q. 10                  443.4∗∗∗
                                             (53.94)
 Authority / respect: q. 15                                2.12
                                                         (60.65)
 Authority / respect: q. 20                                        365.7∗∗∗
                                                                   (66.56)
 Authority / respect: q. 26                                                   453.3∗∗∗
                                                                              (44.05)
 Authority / respect: q. 31                                                              506.6∗∗∗
                                                                                         (50.77)
 Observations                   3471          3471        3471      3471       3471       3471
 R2                             0.02          0.02        0.00      0.01       0.03       0.03
Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
p < 0.01. See Appendix F for the survey questions. The response to each survey question is
normalized by the sum of responses to all MFQ questions.




                                                76
       Table 23: Relationship between voting and separate MFQ items (5/12)

                                                        Dependent variable:
                                             Pres. election: ∆ [Trump – Ave. GOP]
                              (1)              (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)
                                    ∗∗∗
  Harm / care: q. 1         -141.2
                             (48.04)
  Harm / care: q. 7                          -113.2∗∗
                                             (45.90)
  Harm / care: q. 12                                      -161.2∗∗∗
                                                           (44.91)
  Harm / care: q. 17                                                  -96.2∗∗
                                                                      (47.13)
  Harm / care: q. 23                                                              -40.4
                                                                                 (33.88)
  Harm / care: q. 28                                                                         55.4∗
                                                                                            (31.73)
  Observations               2973             2973          2973       2973       2973       2973
  R2                         0.00             0.00          0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,
 ∗∗∗
    p < 0.01. See Appendix F for the survey questions. The response to each survey
 question is normalized by the sum of responses to all MFQ questions.




       Table 24: Relationship between voting and separate MFQ items (6/12)

                                                           Dependent variable:
                                               Pres. election: ∆ [Trump – Ave. GOP]
                                (1)              (2)           (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)
                                       ∗∗∗
 Fairness / recip.: q. 2     -151.9
                              (45.95)
 Fairness / recip.: q. 8                       -220.1∗∗∗
                                                (49.45)
 Fairness / recip.: q. 13                                    -97.5∗
                                                            (55.97)
 Fairness / recip.: q. 18                                               -80.6∗
                                                                       (41.79)
 Fairness / recip.: q. 24                                                          -39.2
                                                                                  (36.13)
 Fairness / recip.: q. 29                                                                      42.1
                                                                                             (29.79)
 Observations                  2973             2973          2973      2973       2973       2973
 R2                            0.00             0.01          0.00      0.00       0.00       0.00
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
p < 0.01. See Appendix F for the survey questions. The response to each survey question
is normalized by the sum of responses to all MFQ questions.




                                                     77
       Table 25: Relationship between voting and separate MFQ items (7/12)

                                                       Dependent variable:
                                            Pres. election: ∆ [Trump – Ave. GOP]
                                (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
                                      ∗∗∗
  In-group / loyalty: q. 3    207.9
                              (39.39)
  In-group / loyalty: q. 9                   -14.1
                                            (44.66)
  In-group / loyalty: q. 14                             80.1∗
                                                       (45.13)
  In-group / loyalty: q. 19                                         26.5
                                                                   (21.79)
  In-group / loyalty: q. 25                                                    65.4∗
                                                                              (35.75)
  In-group / loyalty: q. 30                                                               106.2∗∗∗
                                                                                          (33.65)
  Observations                 2973          2973       2973        2973       2973        2973
  R2                           0.01          0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00        0.00
  Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
 p < 0.01. See Appendix F for the survey questions. The response to each survey question
 is normalized by the sum of responses to all MFQ questions.




       Table 26: Relationship between voting and separate MFQ items (8/12)

                                                       Dependent variable:
                                             Pres. election: ∆ [Trump – Ave. GOP]
                                (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
 Authority / respect: q. 4      64.4
                              (47.92)
 Authority / respect: q. 10                 184.6∗∗∗
                                            (43.74)
 Authority / respect: q. 15                            -152.8∗∗∗
                                                        (50.03)
 Authority / respect: q. 20                                         -92.1∗∗
                                                                    (42.70)
 Authority / respect: q. 26                                                    134.4∗∗∗
                                                                               (31.08)
 Authority / respect: q. 31                                                                 76.7∗∗
                                                                                           (37.84)
 Observations                  2973          2973        2973        2973       2973        2973
 R2                            0.00          0.01        0.00        0.00       0.01        0.00
Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
p < 0.01. See Appendix F for the survey questions. The response to each survey question is
normalized by the sum of responses to all MFQ questions.




                                                78
       Table 27: Relationship between voting and separate MFQ items (9/12)

                                                         Dependent variable:
                                             1 if voted for Trump in GOP primaries
                              (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
                                    ∗∗∗
   Harm / care: q. 1        -234.0
                             (87.50)
   Harm / care: q. 7                        -331.5∗∗∗
                                             (87.49)
   Harm / care: q. 12                                      -407.0∗∗∗
                                                            (83.46)
   Harm / care: q. 17                                                  -300.2∗∗∗
                                                                        (77.60)
   Harm / care: q. 23                                                               163.9∗∗
                                                                                    (68.41)
   Harm / care: q. 28                                                                             62.6
                                                                                                (55.25)
   Observations              1888            1888           1888        1888         1888        1888
   R2                        0.00            0.01           0.01        0.01         0.00        0.00
   Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
  p < 0.01. See Appendix F for the survey questions. The response to each survey question
  is normalized by the sum of responses to all MFQ questions.




      Table 28: Relationship between voting and separate MFQ items (10/12)

                                                            Dependent variable:
                                               1 if voted for Trump in GOP primaries
                                (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                      ∗∗∗
 Fairness / recip.: q. 2     -489.6
                              (84.12)
 Fairness / recip.: q. 8                     -232.7∗∗∗
                                              (88.85)
 Fairness / recip.: q. 13                                    -101.2
                                                            (109.03)
 Fairness / recip.: q. 18                                               -187.9∗∗∗
                                                                         (68.68)
 Fairness / recip.: q. 24                                                            -139.9∗∗
                                                                                     (69.91)
 Fairness / recip.: q. 29                                                                         -32.7
                                                                                                 (49.08)
 Observations                  1888            1888           1888        1888        1888         1888
 R2                            0.02            0.00           0.00        0.00        0.00         0.00
Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
p < 0.01. See Appendix F for the survey questions. The response to each survey question is
normalized by the sum of responses to all MFQ questions.




                                                      79
     Table 29: Relationship between voting and separate MFQ items (11/12)

                                                      Dependent variable:
                                            1 if voted for Trump in GOP primaries
                                (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)
                                      ∗∗∗
 In-group / loyalty: q. 3     620.8
                              (80.20)
 In-group / loyalty: q. 9                    138.9∗
                                            (82.97)
 In-group / loyalty: q. 14                            182.0∗∗
                                                      (85.34)
 In-group / loyalty: q. 19                                        125.9∗∗∗
                                                                  (43.69)
 In-group / loyalty: q. 25                                                    119.7∗
                                                                             (66.58)
 In-group / loyalty: q. 30                                                               99.7
                                                                                       (68.53)
 Observations                  1888          1888      1888        1888       1888      1888
 R2                            0.03          0.00      0.00        0.01       0.00      0.00
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
p < 0.01. See Appendix F for the survey questions. The response to each survey question
is normalized by the sum of responses to all MFQ questions.




     Table 30: Relationship between voting and separate MFQ items (12/12)

                                                      Dependent variable:
                                            1 if voted for Trump in GOP primaries
                                (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)
                                       ∗
 Authority / respect: q. 4     153.7
                              (87.29)
 Authority / respect: q. 10                 190.6∗∗
                                            (76.39)
 Authority / respect: q. 15                           -352.9∗∗∗
                                                       (81.49)
 Authority / respect: q. 20                                        -144.8∗
                                                                   (77.23)
 Authority / respect: q. 26                                                    74.2
                                                                             (62.09)
 Authority / respect: q. 31                                                            169.9∗∗
                                                                                       (71.30)
 Observations                  1888          1888       1888        1888      1888      1888
 R2                            0.00          0.00       0.01        0.00      0.00      0.00
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
p < 0.01. See Appendix F for the survey questions. The response to each survey question
is normalized by the sum of responses to all MFQ questions.




                                               80
D.8    Controlling for Lifetime Income
The main text controlled for estimates of current income. I now report a robustness
check in which I work with an estimate of lifetime income. My survey asked respon-
dents to provide a continuous estimate of annual pre-tax household income. 3,249
participants provided an estimate of at least $1000; this is the sample I work with. To
transform annual income into an estimate of lifetime income, I follow the strategy of
Chetty et al. (2016) and assume that cross-sectional variation in income across gener-
ations reflects life-cycle patterns. Accordingly, I apply the following steps: (i) assume a
uniform 30% income tax rate; (ii) normalize the income of each household relative to
that of the average 26-years old American (i.e., assume that variation across cohorts
reflects life-cycle patterns); and (iii) compute estimated lifetime income by assuming
a 0.5% wage growth and a discount factor of 3% (Chetty et al., 2016).




                                            81
                                               Table 31: Moral values and voting: Controlling for lifetime income

                                                                                                                Dependent variable:
                                                                                          Votes in presidential election                          Votes in GOP primaries
                                                                              1 if voted for Trump            ∆ [Trump – Ave. GOP]                 1 if voted for Trump
                                                                            OLS        OLS        PDS        OLS        OLS         PDS          OLS        OLS         PDS
                                                                            (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)          (6)          (7)        (8)         (9)
                                                                                ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗          ∗∗           ∗∗        ∗∗∗           ∗
      Relative importance of universalist vs. communal moral values       -14.0       -12.5      -12.4      -2.55      -3.65       -1.92        -9.09      -4.76       -7.53∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.81)      (1.38)     (1.05)     (0.71)    (1.42)      (0.94)        (1.51)    (2.74)       (1.56)
      Political liberalism                                                -12.7∗∗∗    -10.9∗∗∗   -12.3∗∗∗    -1.36      -0.57      -1.76∗∗       -0.40      -1.26       -1.18
                                                                           (0.89)      (1.22)     (0.89)    (0.83)     (1.21)      (0.87)       (1.33)     (2.42)      (1.32)
      Standardized values of (ln_life_inc)                                3.99∗∗∗      1.04                  -1.53      0.18                     0.54       -1.03
                                                                          (0.96)      (1.38)                (1.00)     (1.41)                   (1.44)     (2.67)
      Education                                                             -0.90      -0.89                -3.22∗∗∗   -3.23∗∗     -3.49∗∗∗     -9.43∗∗∗   -7.50∗∗∗    -8.77∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.91)     (1.35)                 (0.90)    (1.45)       (0.85)       (1.42)     (2.78)      (1.27)




82
      Log [Population density]                                            -7.61∗∗∗    -6.01∗∗∗   -3.74∗∗∗    -0.86      -2.51                   -4.82∗∗∗    -4.25
                                                                           (0.90)      (1.92)     (0.82)    (0.93)     (2.21)                    (1.47)    (3.89)
      Religiosity                                                         2.90∗∗∗     3.74∗∗∗    4.40∗∗∗    -0.0036     1.27        0.15         -0.17      -0.10
                                                                          (0.83)      (1.31)     (0.86)      (0.80)    (1.26)      (0.83)       (1.39)     (2.82)
      State FE                                                              Yes         No         No         Yes        No          No           Yes        No          No
      County FE                                                              No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes          Yes          No         Yes         Yes
      Additional controls                                                    No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes          No           No         Yes         No
      Observations                                                         2780        2780       2780       2392      2392         2392         1494       1494        1494
      R2                                                                   0.33        0.65                  0.05      0.48                      0.12       0.61
      Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(4), the dependent variable is the average propensity to vote for Romney and
     McCain, where the propensity to vote for a given candidate is a binary indicator that equals 0 if the respondent voted for a different candidate and 100
     if they voted for the respective candidate. In columns (5)–(8), the dependent variable is the difference between the propensity to vote for Trump and the
     average propensity to vote for Romney and McCain. In columns (9)–(12), the dependent variable is a binary indicator for whether the respondent voted for
     Trump in the GOP primaries. See Appendix I for a description of all variables. Additional controls include year of birth fixed effects, gender, employment
     status, race fixed effects, religious denomination fixed effects, occupation fixed effects, altruism, generalized trust, and the absolute value of the moral values
     index. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
E      Additional Tables for County-Level Analysis

E.1       Correlates of County-Level Values

                               Table 32: Correlates of county-level moral values

                                     Corr. b/w rel. imp. of universalist versus communal moral values and:
                                 Unemp.        Log [HH inc.]   Log [Pop. dens.]      Racism       Frac. religious

    Partial corr. (State FE)      −0.02           −0.01            0.11∗∗∗            0.00           −0.08∗∗∗
           95% CI              [−0.06, 0.02]   [−0.05, 0.03]     [0.07, 0.15]     [−0.04, 0.04]   [−0.12, −.04]

     Partial corr. (CZ FE)         0.01          −0.05∗∗           0.12∗∗∗             n/a            −0.03

  Notes. The first row reports the partial correlations between county characteristics and the relative importance
 of universalist moral values (conditional on state fixed effects), and the second row corresponding confidence
 intervals. The third row reports partial correlations conditional on commuting zone effects. The racism index
 measures the relative search frequency for “nigger(s)” on Google in a Designated Market Area (DMA), which is
 strongly predictive of Obama’s vote share (Stephens-Davidowitz, 2014). The racism variable was assigned to all
 counties in a DMA. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                       83
     E.2   Replication using common CBSA Sample

                                                        Table 33: Moral values and county-level voting patterns (CBSA sample)

                                                                                                                                     Dependent variable:
                                                                                                                                        Vote shares
                                                                                                              Presidential election                                                 GOP primaries
                                                                                              Trump                               ∆ [Trump – Ave. GOP]                                 Trump
                                                                             (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)       (11)       (12)
                                                                                ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗           ∗∗        ∗∗∗                   ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
              Rel. importance of universalist vs. communal moral values    -2.93      -1.94      -2.16         -2.00      -0.61       -0.30       -0.43       -0.30     -0.77      -0.55      -0.82      -0.93∗
                                                                            (0.45)     (0.35)     (0.34)        (0.56)     (0.19)     (0.15)       (0.16)    (0.25)      (0.23)     (0.19)     (0.27)    (0.51)
              Log [Median HH income]                                                  4.48∗∗     13.4∗∗∗       12.3∗∗∗               -6.45∗∗∗     -6.44∗∗∗   -8.43∗∗∗              -2.98∗∗∗   -4.58∗∗∗   -5.81∗∗
                                                                                      (2.01)     (2.35)        (3.23)                 (0.83)       (1.01)     (1.41)                (1.10)     (1.73)    (2.67)
              Unemployment rate                                                       -0.45∗∗     -0.13         -0.24                 0.21∗∗∗     0.28∗∗∗    0.30∗∗                0.81∗∗∗    0.70∗∗∗    0.56∗∗
                                                                                      (0.18)     (0.19)        (0.29)                 (0.08)      (0.09)     (0.13)                (0.09)     (0.16)     (0.24)
              Racism index                                                            2.48∗∗∗     1.13         -0.059                 0.82∗∗∗      0.22      0.064                 0.90∗∗∗     0.58       -0.39
                                                                                      (0.50)     (0.95)        (3.22)                 (0.21)      (0.35)     (0.78)                (0.24)     (0.63)     (1.18)
              Log [Population density]                                                -6.61∗∗∗   -7.22∗∗∗      -7.49∗∗∗              -2.49∗∗∗     -3.12∗∗∗   -3.32∗∗∗              -1.70∗∗∗   -2.37∗∗∗   -2.59∗∗∗




84
                                                                                       (0.26)     (0.26)        (0.34)                (0.12)       (0.12)     (0.16)                (0.16)     (0.21)     (0.30)
              Fraction religious                                                      11.3∗∗∗    7.57∗∗∗        4.25                   1.16        0.30       -0.43                -3.59∗∗∗   -3.82∗∗    -7.52∗∗∗
                                                                                      (2.83)     (2.88)        (3.88)                 (0.99)      (0.89)     (1.17)                 (1.36)    (1.93)      (2.75)
              Abs. value of moral values index                                         -0.38      -0.50         -0.47                  0.25       0.024       0.20                  -0.20     -0.072      0.26
                                                                                      (0.57)     (0.52)        (0.83)                 (0.25)      (0.23)     (0.35)                (0.30)     (0.39)     (0.71)
              Latitude                                                                 0.20       0.16          0.64                   0.13        -0.15      0.43                 -0.72∗∗∗    -0.98      -1.19
                                                                                      (0.28)     (0.86)        (1.38)                 (0.11)      (0.38)     (0.61)                 (0.13)    (0.61)     (1.17)
              Longitude                                                               0.016      -0.066         -0.64                  0.14        0.21       0.75                  0.16       0.92      2.09∗∗
                                                                                      (0.18)     (0.66)        (1.06)                 (0.09)      (0.29)     (0.50)                (0.10)     (0.65)     (0.94)
              State FE                                                       Yes        Yes           No         No         Yes        Yes          No         No         Yes        Yes        No         No
              Commuting zone FE                                              No         No            Yes        No         No          No          Yes        No         No         No         Yes        No
              CBSA FE                                                        No         No            No         Yes        No          No          No         Yes        No         No         No         Yes
              Observations                                                  1640       1635       1635          1635       1640        1635        1635       1635       1552       1547       1547       1547
              R2                                                            0.35       0.61       0.83          0.88       0.38        0.63        0.85       0.89       0.83       0.87       0.89       0.92
              Notes. County-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variable in columns (1)–(4) is Trump’s vote share in the 2016 general election. The dependent
             variable in columns (5)–(8) is the difference between Trump’s vote share in the election and the average GOP vote share in presidential elections between 2000 and 2012. The dependent
             variable in (9)–(12) is Trump’s vote share in the GOP primaries.∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
E.3     Universalist and Communal Values Separately

                         Table 34: Moral values and county-level voting patterns

                                                                         Dependent variable:
                                                                               Vote shares
                                                            Presidential election                  GOP primaries
                                                        Trump       ∆ [Trump – Ave. GOP]              Trump
                                                  (1)           (2)      (3)            (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                     ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
       Abs. importance of universalist values   -0.88      -0.74         0.22         0.082         0.15      0.17
                                                 (0.27)     (0.28)      (0.14)        (0.15)       (0.16)    (0.20)
       Abs. importance of communal values       1.91∗∗∗     1.94∗∗∗     0.81∗∗∗       0.72∗∗∗      0.76∗∗∗   0.89∗∗∗
                                                (0.31)      (0.33)      (0.14)        (0.15)       (0.17)    (0.22)
       State FE                                   Yes           No       Yes            No          Yes         No
       Commuting zone FE                          No            Yes       No            Yes          No         Yes
       Observations                              2255       2255        2255           2255        2116      2116
       R2                                        0.36       0.66        0.39           0.69        0.81      0.85
       Notes. County-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variable in
      columns (1)–(2) is Trump’s vote share in the 2016 general election. The dependent variable in columns
      (3)–(4) is the difference between Trump’s vote share in the election and the average GOP vote share in
      presidential elections between 2000 and 2012. The dependent variable in (5)–(6) is Trump’s vote share
      in the GOP primaries.∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.



      Table 35: Moral values and county-level voting patterns: Differences-in-differences estimates

                                                                                        Dependent variable:
                                                                                     GOP vote share in year x
                                                                                       (1)             (2)
                                                                                              ∗∗
        Abs. imp. of universalist moral values (in years [x-1, x+2])                 -0.25           -0.25∗∗
                                                                                     (0.11)          (0.11)
        Abs. imp. of communal moral values (in years [x-1, x+2])                       0.10           0.12
                                                                                      (0.11)         (0.10)
        Log [Median HH income]                                                                       4.35∗∗
                                                                                                     (2.07)
        Unemployment rate                                                                            -0.40∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.07)
        County FE                                                                      Yes             Yes
        Election FE                                                                    Yes             Yes
        Observations                                                                  6200            6200
        R2                                                                            0.96            0.96
        Notes. County-level OLS panel estimates. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered
       at the county level. The dependent variable is the GOP vote share in a given election year,
       stacked across the general elections x ∈ {2008, 2012, 2016}. The independent variable
       is the relative importance of universalist versus communal moral values in [x − 1, x + 2].
       ∗
         p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                           85
E.4   Changes in Turnout as Dependent Variable

                            Table 36: Moral values and county-level turnout

                                                                            Dependent variable:
                                                                   Turnout ∆ [’16 – Ave. (2000–2012)]
                                                                    Pres. election     GOP primaries
                                                                     (1)      (2)      (3)         (4)
                                                                                             ∗∗
       Rel. importance of universalist vs. communal moral values   -0.051    -0.22   -0.20        -0.65∗∗
                                                                   (0.05)   (0.13)   (0.09)       (0.27)
       State FE                                                      Yes      No       Yes          No
       CBSA FE                                                       No       Yes      No          Yes
       Observations                                                 2255     1640     1940        1434
       R2                                                           0.49     0.78     0.66        0.80
       Notes. County-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variable is
      the difference in turnout between 2016 and the average of 2000–2012, for either the general election
      or the GOP primaries. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




E.5   GOP Vote Shares and Moral Values: Controlling for Education




                                                     86
                     Table 37: Moral values and presidential elections 2008-2016: Controlling for education

                                                                                           Dependent variable:
                                                                                   GOP vote share in pres. elections
                                                                            2008                2012                 2016
                                                                      (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
                                                                         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
      Rel. importance of universalist vs. communal moral values     -1.35      -1.16       -1.45      -1.25      -1.63      -1.26∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.22)     (0.22)      (0.23)     (0.23)     (0.24)     (0.23)
      Log [Median HH income]                                        8.66∗∗∗    15.0∗∗∗      8.02∗∗∗   14.7∗∗∗     1.68      13.8∗∗∗
                                                                    (1.46)     (1.65)       (1.56)    (1.77)     (1.59)     (1.67)
      Unemployment rate                                             -0.68∗∗∗   -0.77∗∗∗    -0.87∗∗∗   -0.97∗∗∗   -0.68∗∗∗   -0.86∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.13)     (0.13)      (0.13)     (0.13)     (0.14)     (0.14)
      Racism index                                                  1.63∗∗∗    1.79∗∗∗      1.82∗∗∗   1.99∗∗∗    2.16∗∗∗    2.47∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.35)     (0.35)       (0.38)    (0.39)     (0.40)     (0.40)
      Log [Population density]                                      -3.85∗∗∗   -3.11∗∗∗    -4.23∗∗∗   -3.44∗∗∗   -5.84∗∗∗   -4.41∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.21)     (0.23)      (0.22)     (0.24)     (0.23)     (0.24)




87
      Fraction religious                                            9.78∗∗∗    8.45∗∗∗      9.80∗∗∗   8.39∗∗∗    8.99∗∗∗    6.43∗∗∗
                                                                    (1.99)     (1.92)       (2.05)    (1.98)     (2.08)     (1.87)
      Abs. value of moral values index                                -0.36     -0.38        -0.29     -0.32      -0.14      -0.19
                                                                     (0.35)    (0.34)       (0.37)    (0.36)     (0.39)     (0.36)
      Latitude                                                        0.29     0.39∗∗        0.39∗    0.49∗∗      0.43∗     0.62∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.20)    (0.20)       (0.22)    (0.22)     (0.23)     (0.22)
      Longitude                                                     -0.050      -0.16       -0.035     -0.15     0.079       -0.13
                                                                    (0.14)     (0.14)       (0.15)    (0.15)     (0.16)     (0.16)
      % high school graduate or less                                           29.0∗∗∗                30.9∗∗∗               56.0∗∗∗
                                                                               (3.76)                 (4.00)                (3.83)
      State FE                                                        Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
      Observations                                                   2249       2249         2249      2249       2249       2249
      R2                                                             0.54       0.56         0.55      0.57       0.59       0.64
      Notes. County-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. See columns (2) and (3) of Table 6 for a complete
     list of the economic and geographic covariates. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
F     Moral Foundations Questionnaire
Part 1. When you decide whether something is right or wrong, to what extent are the
following considerations relevant to your thinking? Please rate each statement using
this scale:

    0 not at all relevant (This consideration has nothing to do with my judgments of
       right and wrong)

    1 not very relevant

    2 slightly relevant

    3 somewhat relevant

    4 very relevant

    5 extremely relevant (This is one of the most important factors when I judge right
       and wrong)



    1. Whether or not someone suffered emotionally

    2. Whether or not some people were treated differently than others

    3. Whether or not someone’s action showed love for his or her country

    4. Whether or not someone showed a lack of respect for authority

    5. Whether or not someone violated standards of purity and decency

    6. Whether or not someone was good at math

    7. Whether or not someone cared for someone weak or vulnerable

    8. Whether or not someone acted unfairly

    9. Whether or not someone did something to betray his or her group

 10. Whether or not someone conformed to the traditions of society

 11. Whether or not someone did something disgusting

 12. Whether or not someone was cruel

 13. Whether or not someone was denied his or her rights

                                          88
 14. Whether or not someone showed a lack of loyalty

 15. Whether or not an action caused chaos or disorder

 16. Whether or not someone acted in a way that God would approve of


Part 2. Please read the following sentences and indicate your agreement or disagree-
ment:

   0 Strongly disagree

   1 Moderately disagree

   2 Slightly disagree

   3 Slightly agree

   4 Moderately agree

   5 Strongly agree




 17. Compassion for those who are suffering is the most crucial virtue.

 18. When the government makes laws, the number one principle should be ensuring
     that everyone is treated fairly.

 19. I am proud of my country’s history.

 20. Respect for authority is something all children need to learn.

 21. People should not do things that are disgusting, even if no one is harmed.

 22. It is better to do good than to do bad.

 23. One of the worst things a person could do is hurt a defenseless animal.

 24. Justice is the most important requirement for a society.

 25. People should be loyal to their family members, even when they have done some-
     thing wrong.

 26. Men and women each have different roles to play in society.

 27. I would call some acts wrong on the grounds that they are unnatural.

                                           89
 28. It can never be right to kill a human being.

 29. I think it’s morally wrong that rich children inherit a lot of money while poor
      children inherit nothing.

 30. It is more important to be a team player than to express oneself.

 31. If I were a soldier and disagreed with my commanding officer’s orders, I would
      obey anyway because that is my duty.

 32. Chastity is an important and valuable virtue.


The final scores for each moral foundation are then computed by summing responses
across the following questions:
Harm / care: 1, 7, 12, 17, 23, 28
Fairness / reciprocity: 2, 8, 13, 18, 24, 29
In-group / loyalty: 3, 9, 14, 19, 25, 30
Authority / respect: 4, 10, 15, 20, 26, 31
Purity / sanctity: 5, 11, 16, 21, 27, 32


Items 6 and 22 are filler questions.




                                             90
G     Moral Foundations Dictionary
Care / Harm – Virtue: safe*, peace*, compassion*, empath*, sympath*, care, caring,
protect*, shield, shelter, amity, secur*, benefit*, defen*, guard*, preserve


Care / Harm – Vice: harm*, suffer*, war, wars, warl*, warring, fight*, violen*, hurt*,
kill, kills, killer*, killed, killing, endanger*, cruel*, brutal*, abuse*, damag*, ruin*, rav-
age, detriment*, crush*, attack*, annihilate*, destroy, stomp, abandon*, spurn, impair,
exploit, exploits, exploited, exploiting, wound*


Fairness / Reciprocity – Virtue: fair, fairly, fairness, fair-*, fairmind*, fairplay, equal*,
justice, justness, justifi*, reciproc*, impartial*, egalitar*, rights, equity, evenness, equiv-
alent, unbias*, tolerant, equable, balance*, homologous, unprejudice*, reasonable, con-
stant, honest*


Fairness / Reciprocity – Vice: unfair*, unequal*, bias*, unjust*, injust*, bigot*, dis-
criminat*, disproportion*, inequitable, prejud*, dishonest, unscrupulous, dissociate, pref-
erence, favoritism, segregat*, exclusion, exclud*


Ingroup / Loyalty – Virtue: together, nation*, homeland*, family, families, famil-
ial, group, loyal*, patriot*, communal, commune*, communit*, communis*, comrad*,
cadre, collectiv*, joint, unison, unite*, fellow*, guild, solidarity, devot*, member, cliqu*,
cohort, ally, insider, segregat*


Ingroup / Loyalty – Vice: foreign*, enem*, betray*, treason*, traitor*, treacher*, dis-
loyal*, individual*, apostasy, apostate, deserted, deserter*, deserting, deceiv*, jilt*, im-
poster, miscreant, spy, sequester, renegade, terroris*, immigra*, abandon*


Authority / Respect – Virtue: obey*, obedien*, duty, law, lawful*, legal*, duti*, honor*,
respect, respectful*, respected, respects, order*, father*, mother, motherl*, mothering,
mothers, tradition*, hierarch*, authorit*, permit, permission, status*, rank*, leader*,
class, bourgeoisie, caste*, position, complian*, command, supremacy, control, submi*,
allegian*, serve, abide, defere*, defer, revere*, venerat*, comply, preserve, loyal*


Authority / Respect – Vice: defian*, rebel*, dissent*, subver*, disrespect*, disobe*,
sediti*, agitat*, insubordinat*, illegal*, lawless*, insurgent, mutinous, defy*, dissident,
unfaithful, alienate, defector, heretic*, nonconformist, oppose, protest, refuse, denounce,
remonstrate, riot*, obstruct, betray*, treason*, traitor*, treacher*, disloyal*, apostasy,

                                             91
apostate, deserted, deserter*, deserting


Purity / Sanctity – Virtue: piety, pious, purity, pure*, clean*, steril*, sacred*, chast*,
holy, holiness, saint*, wholesome*, celiba*, abstention, virgin, virgins, virginity, vir-
ginal, austerity, integrity, modesty, abstinen*, abstemiousness, upright, limpid, unadul-
terated, maiden, virtuous, refined, decen*, immaculate, innocent, pristine, church*,
preserve


Purity / Sanctity – Vice: disgust*, deprav*, disease*, unclean*, contagio*, indecen*,
sin, sinful*, sinner*, sins, sinned, sinning, slut*, whore, dirt*, impiety, impious, profan*,
gross, repuls*, sick*, promiscu*, lewd*, adulter*, debauche*, defile*, tramp, prostitut*,
unchaste, intemperate, wanton, profligate, filth*, trashy, obscen*, lax, taint*, stain*,
tarnish*, debase*, desecrat*, wicked*, blemish, exploitat*, pervert, wretched*, ruin*,
exploit, exploits, exploited, exploiting, apostasy, apostate, heretic*




                                            92
H     Most Common Moral Words from MFD

H.1   American Presidency Project Dataset

                Table 38: Most Frequent MFD Words – All Candidates

                  Word        Moral Category       Rel. Freq. (%)
                   (1)              (2)                  (3)
               nation*         Ingroup Virtue           0.415
               leader*        Authority Virtue          0.299
               care             Harm Virtue             0.246
               unite*          Ingroup Virtue           0.207
               secur*           Harm Virtue             0.192
               families        Ingroup Virtue           0.170
               fight*            Harm Vice              0.154
               war               Harm Vice              0.147
               communit*       Ingroup Virtue           0.134
               together        Ingroup Virtue           0.114
               family          Ingroup Virtue           0.113
               law            Authority Virtue          0.110
               Notes. This table reports the 12 most common
              MFD words and word stems used by all candi-
              dates across the 2008-2016 elections in docu-
              ments collected for the text analysis. Column (2)
              reports the moral values associated with the MFD
              keywords and column (3) reports the average rel-
              ative frequency the candidates used the keywords
              across the documents. Only non-stop words in a
              text are considered when calculating relative fre-
              quencies. See Appendix G for a list of all MFD key-
              words.




                                       93
H.2   U.S. Congress Dataset

                  Table 39: Most Frequent MFD Words – All Years

                  Word       Moral Category       Rel. Freq. (%)
                   (1)              (2)                 (3)
               nation*        Ingroup Virtue           0.373
               unite*         Ingroup Virtue           0.280
               law           Authority Virtue          0.200
               order*        Authority Virtue          0.174
               war              Harm Vice              0.148
               secur*          Harm Virtue             0.120
               leader*       Authority Virtue          0.115
               protect*        Harm Virtue             0.113
               defen*          Harm Virtue             0.109
               foreign*        Ingroup Vice            0.100
               care            Harm Virtue             0.095
               benefit*        Harm Virtue             0.095
               member         Ingroup Virtue           0.092
               communit*      Ingroup Virtue           0.078
               authorit*     Authority Virtue          0.077
               Notes. This table reports the 15 most common
              MFD words and word stems used by all congress-
              people across all years in the data. Column (2)
              reports the moral values associated with the MFD
              keywords and column (3) reports the average rel-
              ative frequency the congresspeople used the key-
              words. Only non-stop words are considered when
              calculating relative frequencies. See Appendix G
              for a list of all MFD keywords.




                                       94
   Table 40: Most Frequent MFD Words – 1955 - 1965

    Word        Moral Category      Rel. Freq. (%)
     (1)               (2)                (3)
 nation*         Ingroup Virtue          0.434
 unite*          Ingroup Virtue          0.331
 law            Authority Virtue         0.184
 foreign*         Ingroup Vice           0.161
 order*         Authority Virtue         0.157
 defen*           Harm Virtue            0.130
 leader*        Authority Virtue         0.120
 communis*       Ingroup Virtue          0.107
 rights          Fairness Virtue         0.101
 member          Ingroup Virtue          0.100
 secur*           Harm Virtue            0.098
 war               Harm Vice             0.098
 benefit*         Harm Virtue            0.090
 authorit*      Authority Virtue         0.085
 position       Authority Virtue         0.083
 Notes. This table reports the 15 most common
MFD words and word stems used by all congress-
people between 1955 and 1965. Column (2) re-
ports the moral values associated with the MFD
keywords and column (3) reports the average rel-
ative frequency the congresspeople used the key-
words. Only non-stop words are considered when
calculating relative frequencies. See Appendix G
for a list of all MFD keywords.




                         95
  Table 41: Most Frequent MFD Words – 1995 - 2005

    Word       Moral Category      Rel. Freq. (%)
     (1)              (2)                (3)
 nation*        Ingroup Virtue          0.404
 unite*         Ingroup Virtue          0.218
 secur*          Harm Virtue            0.209
 law           Authority Virtue         0.171
 care            Harm Virtue            0.168
 protect*        Harm Virtue            0.164
 leader*       Authority Virtue         0.162
 communit*      Ingroup Virtue          0.134
 benefit*        Harm Virtue            0.127
 order*        Authority Virtue         0.124
 defen*          Harm Virtue            0.121
 balance*       Fairness Virtue         0.120
 families       Ingroup Virtue          0.108
 war              Harm Vice             0.102
 safe*           Harm Virtue            0.099
 Notes. This table reports the 15 most common
MFD words and word stems used by all congress-
people between 1995 and 2005. Column (2) re-
ports the moral values associated with the MFD
keywords and column (3) reports the average rel-
ative frequency the congresspeople used the key-
words. Only non-stop words are considered when
calculating relative frequencies. See Appendix G
for a list of all MFD keywords.




                        96
   Table 42: Most Frequent MFD Words – After 2010

    Word       Moral Category       Rel. Freq. (%)
     (1)              (2)                 (3)
 nation*        Ingroup Virtue           0.389
 care            Harm Virtue             0.237
 unite*         Ingroup Virtue           0.214
 law           Authority Virtue          0.212
 secur*          Harm Virtue             0.190
 leader*       Authority Virtue          0.187
 protect*        Harm Virtue             0.178
 communit*      Ingroup Virtue           0.161
 balance*       Fairness Virtue          0.139
 order*        Authority Virtue          0.129
 families       Ingroup Virtue           0.128
 defen*          Harm Virtue             0.109
 safe*           Harm Virtue             0.107
 member         Ingroup Virtue           0.099
 benefit*        Harm Virtue             0.099
 Notes. This table reports the 15 most common
MFD words and word stems used by all congress-
people after 2010. Column (2) reports the moral
values associated with the MFD keywords and col-
umn (3) reports the average relative frequency
the congresspeople used the keywords. Only non-
stop words are considered when calculating rela-
tive frequencies. See Appendix G for a list of all
MFD keywords.




                        97
H.3     Changes in Word Use in U.S. Congress Over Time
Below, I present a list of the words with the largest increase or decrease in usage be-
tween the 5-year period around 1950 and the 5-year period around 2010. The change
in frequency is computed as


                        Frequency in 2010        Frequency in 1950
                                                                             
       ∆ = 10, 000 ∗                         −
                     # non-stop words in 2010 # non-stop words in 1950

   I list words with |∆| ≥ 1.


universalist words
care +22.3
balance* +9.7
protect* +8.5
safe* +7.0
secur* +5.2
benefit* +3.8
violen* +2.5
rights +2.0
abuse +1.8
hurt +1.6
justice +1.5
harm* +1.4
killed +1.1


war -13.5
defen* -6.3
justif* -1.9
fair -1.4
reasonable -1.2
sympath* -1.1


Communal words
communit* +11.8
families +10.9
leader +8.8
family +5.8


                                          98
together +5.3
honor +4.5
terroris* +4.2
rank +2.8
class +2.6
homeland* +1.8
serve +1.7
individual* +1.3
father +1.1


unite -19.4
communis* -13.2
foreign -6.7
order -6.5
position -5.1
submi* -4.9
respect -4.7
control -4.3
permit -3.8
joint -3.8
law -2.4
member -2.1
duty -1.8
loyal* -1.3
duti* -1.2




                   99
I     Description of Main Variables

I.1     Supply Side Analysis
Background on U.S. Congress Analyses.         The data can be accessed online at https:
//data.stanford.edu/congress_text. In this paper, I use the processed speech
text, date of speech, and the linked congressperson characteristics (i.e., speaker name,
gender, congressional chamber, congressional state/district, and party affiliation). When
both the bound edition and the daily edition are available for a congressional session, I
follow Gentzkow et al. (2019) and use the bound edition in the main analysis. Gentzkow
et al. (2019) show that results for these sessions are robust to which edition they use.
See Amer (1993) and Gentzkow et al. (2019) for further discussion. To prepare the
speech text for analysis, I take similar steps as described in Gentzkow et al. (2019).
Specifically, for each speech, I (i) separate the text into individual words using all non-
alphanumeric characters as delimiters; and (ii) delete all stop words – i.e., frequent
words that convey very little content; and (iii) convert the words to lowercase. For con-
gresspersons who delivered more than one speech on a given day, I collapsed the word
counts to the day-level.


Relative frequency of universalist versus communal moral terminology.              See Sec-
tion 4.


Flesch reading ease score.      A commonly used measure to assess the readability of a
document. The formula for the Flesch reading ease score (Flesch, 1948) of a document
is
                                    total words              total syllables
                                                                          
           FRES = 206.835 − 1.015                   − 84.6                     .
                                  total sentences             total words
Therefore, a higher score means that a document is easier to read.


Document type.       Whether a document was classified as a campaign speech, official
statement, debate, or fundraising speech by the APP.


I.2     Demand Side Analysis
I.2.1     Research Now Survey

Relative importance of universalist versus communal moral values.            Constructed
from MFQ moral foundations as: care / harm + fairness / reciprocity minus in-group /
loyalty minus authority / respect.


                                           100
Difference in propensity to vote for Trump and average Republican.          First, gener-
ate a binary variable for Trump, Romney, and McCain each. Variable assumes a value
of 0 if people voted for another candidate and 100 if voted for the respective candidate.
Then compute the difference between the Trump variable and the average of the other
two variables.


Difference in propensity to vote for Trump and Romney / McCain.          Generate same
binary variables as described above. Compute difference between Trump and Romney /
McCain.


Difference in propensity to vote for Trump and average Republican (including non-
voters). First, generate a three-step variable for Trump, Romney, and McCain each.
Variable assumes a value of 0 if people voted for another candidate, 50 if they did not
vote at all, and 100 if voted for the respective candidate. Then compute the difference
between the Trump variable and the average of the other two variables.


Difference in turnout between 2016 and earlier elections.        For each election year,
generate a binary indicator that equals 100 if the respondents voted and 0 otherwise.
Then compute the difference between 2016 and the average of 2008 and 2012.


Evaluation of Trump: Loyalty vs. economy.         Based on responses to the following
survey question: “Please use the scale below to indicate which factor is more relevant
for your evaluation of President Trump.
   -5 means that A is much more important than B. 5 means that B is much more
important than A. 0 means that A and B are equally important, or equally unimportant.
You can use the intermediate values to state your opinion in a nuanced way.
   A: Mr. Trump’s economic and social policies, such as his impact on the unemploy-
ment rate. B: The extent to which Mr. Trump shows loyalty to his supporters and does
not betray my community.”


∆ [Local–global] Support taxation.      Based on responses to the following survey ques-
tion: “Imagine that there will be a new tax levered that amounts to 5% on all income.
Please assume that 100% of the money collected for this tax will be directly spent on
increasing the quality of schooling for children. Please imagine that this new tax will
be implemented no matter what. However, imagine that you have a say in HOW it gets
implemented because there are two options.
   Please use the scale below to express your opinion. -5 means that you like A much
more than B. 5 means that you like B much more than A. 0 means that A and B are

                                          101
equally attractive to you, or equally unattractive. You can use the intermediate values
to state your opinion in a nuanced way.
   Option A: The taxes are collected by the local community and the money goes to
the local schools in your school district. Option B: The taxes are collected by the federal
government and the money is distributed equally to all schools in the country.”


∆ [Local–global] Donations.       Based on responses to the following survey question:
“Over the past 12 months, how much money have you donated to each of the following
entities:

   1. Local schools, local libraries, and city-sponsored functions

   2. Local communities (e.g., firefighters, local church) and local cultural groups (e.g.,
      art museums)

   3. Non-profit organizations that work towards a better life for people in America in
      general (e.g., Feeding America)

   4. Non-profit organizations that work towards a better life for people around the
      world (e.g., United Way Worldwide)”

Then, generate variable of interest as q1. + q2. − q3. − q4.


∆ [Local–global] Volunteering. Based on responses to the following survey question:
“Over the past month, how many hours have you volunteered for each of the following
entities:

   1. Local schools, local libraries, and city-sponsored functions

   2. Local communities (e.g., firefighters, local church) and local cultural groups (e.g.,
      art museums)

   3. Non-profit organizations that work towards a better life for people in America in
      general (e.g., Feeding America)

   4. Non-profit organizations that work towards a better life for people around the
      world (e.g., United Way Worldwide)”

Then, generate variable of interest as q1. + q2. − q3. − q4..




                                           102
Money allocation task.      Based on responses to the following survey question: “Imag-
ine that you had $99 at your disposal that you have to split between United Way World-
wide (a non-profit organization that focuses on improving education, income and health
around the world) and the local firefighters in your town. How would you allocate the
money between these two? For both options, 100% of your donation will support the
cause and not go towards administrative costs.

  1. Amount to United Way Worldwide:

  2. Amount to local firefighters:”


Altruism.     This is an experimentally validated survey measure of altruism that is con-
structed as in Falk et al. (2018). Respondents were asked the following two survey
questions:

   • Imagine the following situation: Today you unexpectedly received $1,000. How
      much of this amount would you donate to a good cause?

   • On a scale from 0 to 10, how willing are you to give to good causes without
      expecting anything in return?

   The altruism summary index is computed as average of the z-score of responses to
these two questions.


Political liberalism.   This variable is constructed from 13 survey questions that are
taken from the 2016 pre-election survey wave of the Cooperative Congressional Elec-
tion Study. These questions elicit respondents’ attitudes on four categories: gun control,
environment policies, crime policies, and budget priorities.

  1. On the issue of gun regulation, do you support or oppose each of the following
      proposals?

        • Background checks for all sales, including at gun shows and over the Internet
        • Prohibit state and local governments from publishing the names and ad-
             dresses of all gun owners
        • Ban assault rifles
        • Make it easier for people to obtain concealed-carry permit

  2. Do you support or oppose each of the following proposals?



                                           103
          • Give the Environmental Protection Agency power to regulate carbon dioxide
             emissions
          • Raise required fuel efficiency for the average automobile from 25 mpg to 35
             mpg
          • Require a minimum amount of renewable fuels (wind, solar, and hydroelec-
             tric) in the generation of electricity even if electricity prices increase some-
             what
          • Strengthen enforcement of the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act even if it
             costs US jobs

   3. Do you support or oppose each of the following proposals?

          • Eliminate mandatory minimum sentences for non-violent drug offenders
          • Require police officers to wear body cameras that record all of their activities
             while on duty
          • Increase the number of police on the street by 10 percent, even if it means
             fewer funds for other public services
          • Increase prison sentences for felons who have already committed two or
             more serious or violent crimes

   4. The federal budget deficit is approximately $1 trillion this year. If the Congress
      were to balance the budget it would have to consider cutting defense spending,
       cutting domestic spending (such as Medicare and Social Security), or raising
       taxes to cover the deficit. Please rank the options below from what would you
       most prefer that Congress do to what you would least prefer they do (1 means
       most preferred, 3 least preferred).

          • Cut Defense Spending
          • Cut Domestic Spending
          • Raise Taxes

    For each of these questions, I code “support” as 1, “oppose” as 0 and “Prefer not to
answer” as 0.5.⁴⁰ For each of the broad categories, I then construct a summary statistic
by computing the first principal component of all items in the respective category. I then
compute a summary statistic of political conservatism as first principal component of
these four category-specific principal components.
   ⁴⁰I have verified that almost identical results hold when I drop observations with “Prefer not to an-
swer.”


                                                 104
Income bracket.       Ten-step variable: <10k, 10k-15k, 15k-25k, 25k-35k, 35k-50k, 50k-
75k, 75k-100k, 100k-150k, 150k-200k, >200k.


Educational attainment.       Six-step variable: incomplete high school, high school diploma,
some college but no degree, Associate’s degree, Bachelor’s degree, graduate or profes-
sional degree.


Race.   White, African-American, Hispanic, Asian, American Indian, Other.


City size.     10-step variable: > 1 million, 200k-1m, 50k-200k, 20k-50k and close to
metro, 20k-50k and not close to metro, 3k-20k and close to metro, 3k-30k and not
close to metro, 500-3k and close to metro, 500-3k and not close to metro, <500.


Population density. Computed as average of the z-scores of the city size variable
reported above as well as ZIP code level log population density.


Religiosity.    11-step variable: “On a scale from 0 (not at all) to 10 (very much), how
religious are you?”


Religious denomination.       Catholic, Protestant, Other Christian, Muslim, Jewish, Hindu,
Buddhist, Agnostic, Atheist, Other.


Overall strength of moral concerns. Sum of harm / care, fairness / reciprocity, in-
group / loyalty, and authority / respect.


General trust.     3-step variable: “Generally speaking, would you say that most people
can be trusted, or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people?

  1. Most people can be trusted

  2. Don’t know

  3. Can’t be too careful”


Personal job prospects.      “On a scale from 0 (very bad) to 5 (very good), what do you
think your personal job prospects look like?”




                                            105
Occupation fixed effects. Business owner; clerical or office worker; construction or
mining; fishing, farming and forestry; manger, executive or public official; manufactur-
ing; professional worker: lawyer, doctor etc.; sales worker; service worker; transporta-
tion: driver etc.; other.


I.2.2   County-Level Analysis

Relative importance of universalist versus communal moral values.          Constructed
from the MFQ dataset from www.yourmorals.org. First, compute an individual-level
index as described in the main text. Second, aggregate to the county level by weighting
respondents by 1/n, where n is the number of counties that intersects with the respon-
dent’s ZIP code. Third, exclude all counties with less than five respondents. Fourth,
apply the shrinkage procedure described in the main text.


Vote shares in presidential elections and primaries. Source: Dave Leip’s Atlas of
US Presidential Elections, see http://uselectionatlas.org/.


Turnout.    Computed as total number of votes divided by the population aged 18+
in a given county. Population aged 18+ is linearly interpolated from the American
Community Surveys Data, which provides population estimates for 15+ and 20+.


Unemployment rate, median household income.             Source: American Community
Surveys, average 2011–2015.


Geographic covariates.      Computed as average within 2010 county boundaries.


Population density. Source: American Community Surveys, average 2011–2015.


Fraction religious.    Share of religious adherents. Source: Chetty and Hendren (2016).


Racism index.      This index is based on Google Trends data that are first computed at
the level of 204 Designated Market Areas (DMAs) and then assigned to each county
within a DMA. The index reflects how often people in a given DMA google “nigger”
relative to overall search volume. Source: Stephens-Davidowitz (2014).


Fraction high school graduate or less.      Fraction of the population who are at most
high school graduates, but never attended some college. Taken from American Com-
munity Surveys, average 2011–2015.


                                          106
